[PMID: 25362565]
The adipocytokine apelin is a peptide, Apelin and its receptor are abundantly expressed in the nervous and cardiovascular systems. Previous studies had found apelin-13 reduces brain injuries and postischemic cerebral edema through blocking programmed cell death, Apelin-13 is also able to inhibit glucose deprivation induced cardiomyocyte autophagy in a concentration dependent fashion. To observe the effect of Apelin-13 on the brain injury induced by traumatic brain injury (TBI), and explore the effect of Apelin-13 on autophagy in TBI, We performed The neurological test, and the numbers of TBI-induced neural cell death were also counted by propidium iodide labeling. At last, the autophagy associated proteins LC3, Beclin-1, Bcl-2, p62 were also assessed with western-blotting. Compared with saline vehicle groups, the neural cell death, lesion volume, and neural dysfunction were attenuated by apelin-13 after TBI. In additionally, Apelin-13 also reversed TBI induced downregulation of LC3, Beclin-1, Bcl-2, p62 expression, compared with saline vehicle groups, at 24 and 48 h post TBI. Apelin-13 attenuates TBI induced brain damage by suppressing autophagy. All these results revealed that Apelin-13 suppressed autophagy. The autophagy may be involved in the mechanism of Apelin-13 rescue the subsequent damaged neuron in TBI.

[PMID: 25486928]
Children with sickle cell disease (SCD) have painful vaso-occlusive episodes (VOEs), which often reoccur across the individual's lifespan. Vaso-constrictive and vaso-dilatory molecules have been hypothesized to play a role in VOEs. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent vasoconstrictor that is released during VOEs and is correlated with pain history. Apelin is a vaso-dilatory peptide that also has a modulatory role in pain processing. We hypothesize that the ratio between vaso-dilatory and vaso-constrictive tone in children with SCD may be a marker of pain sensitization and vaso-occlusion. Plasma endothelin and apelin levels were measured in 47 children with SCD. Procedural pain and baseline pain were assessed via child- and caregiver-reports and observational distress. Pain history was assessed using retrospective chart review. Plasma apelin was related to age, with decreased levels in older children. The ratio between apelin and ET-1 was negatively correlated to observational baseline pain. The ratio between apelin and Big ET was negatively correlated to caregiver ratings of baseline pain and positively correlated to history of VOEs, which is possibly due to hydroxyurea treatment. These results suggest that an imbalance in the apelin and endothelin systems may contribute to an increasing number of VOEs and baseline pain in children with SCD.

[PMID: 25380625]
The aim of this study was to determine the levels of regulatory peptides apelin, glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) and visfatin in hypercholesterolemic and hyperhomocysteinemic state and to examine their relation with nitric oxide (NO) metabolism. 32 Male guinea pigs were divided into four groups and each group was fed as follows: (a) commercial chow, (b) cholesterol (chol)-rich diet, (c) methionine (meth)-rich diet, and (d) chol + meth-rich diet. Blood samples were drawn at the end of 10 weeks, and abdominal aorta was dissected for histopathological examination. Serum insulin, GLP-1, apelin, visfatin, and nitrotyrosine concentrations were measured by the manufacturer's kits based on ELISA; asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) and arginine levels were measured by the high performance liquid chromatography. Homocysteine level was measured by the chemiluminescence immunoassay; glucose, total chol and triglyceride levels were measured by the autoanalyzer. The microscopic examination of aorta indicated varying degrees of vascular disturbance in chol- and chol + meth-fed groups. High levels of chol and homocysteine, accompanied with significantly low levels of apelin and GLP-1 were detected in the plasma. Visfatin, ADMA, and nitrotyrosine levels both in chol- and chol + meth-fed groups were significantly higher than those in control animals, whereas arginine and arginine/ADMA ratio were lower. This study indicated that circulating levels of apelin, GLP-1, and visfatin are markedly altered during the development of atherosclerotic changes in close association with chol, homocysteine, NO, and ADMA levels. The measurements of these peptides in serum may help for the diagnosis and follow-up of vascular dysfunction.

[PMID: 25711427]
Obesity is a major health problem worldwide. The prevalence of obesity is increasing in both developed and developing countries. In the UK, for example, 60% of adults are overweight and 25% are obese. Obesity is associated with many pathological complications including respiratory, cardiovascular and endocrine, but it also affects fertility and is associated with many reproductive complications. This has led us and others to investigate links between women with high BMI, pregnancy outcome and uterine function. These studies in turn have led investigators to ask how obesity can have such an impact on reproduction and, as part of this, to consider the role of the adipokines released from adipose tissues. Our focus in this short review is on adipokines and myometrial activity, and for completeness we overview their effects on other smooth muscles. To date four adipokines (leptin, visfatin, apelin and ghrelin) have been investigated and all affect myometrial contractility, but some more potently than others. We consider the possible mechanisms involved in how adipokines may modify uterine contractility, and discuss the potential impact on labor and delivery.

[PMID: 25931124]
Brown adipose tissue expends energy in the form of heat via the mitochondrial uncoupling protein UCP1. Recent studies showed that brown adipose tissue is present in adult humans and may be exploited for its anti-obesity and anti-diabetes actions. Apelin is an adipocyte-derived hormone that plays important roles in energy metabolism. Here, we report that apelin-APJ signaling promotes brown adipocyte differentiation by increasing the expressions of brown adipogenic and thermogenic transcriptional factors via the PI3K/Akt and AMPK signaling pathways. It is also found that apelin relieves the TNFα inhibition on brown adipogenesis. In addition, apelin increases the basal activity of brown adipocytes, as evidenced by the increased PGC1α and UCP1 expressions, mitochondrial biogenesis, and oxygen consumption. Finally, we provide both in vitro and in vivo evidence that apelin is able to increase the brown-like characteristics in white adipocytes. This study, for the first time, reveals the brown adipogenic and browning effects of apelin and suggests a potential therapeutic route to combat obesity and related metabolic disorders.

[PMID: 25965959]
Protection and replenishment of a functional pancreatic β-cell mass (BCM) are key goals of all diabetes therapies. Apelin, a small regulatory peptide, is the endogenous ligand for the apelin receptor (APJ) receptor. The apelin-APJ signaling system is expressed in rodent and human islet cells. Apelin exposure has been shown to inhibit and to stimulate insulin secretion. Our aim was to assess the influence of a selective APJ deletion in pancreatic islet cells on islet homeostasis and glucose tolerance in mice. Cre-LoxP strategy was utilized to mediate islet APJ deletion. APJ deletion in islet cells (APJ(Δislet)) resulted in a significantly reduced islet size, density and BCM. An ip glucose tolerance test showed significantly impaired glucose clearance in APJ(Δislet) mice. APJ(Δislet) mice were not insulin resistant and in vivo glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was reduced modestly. In vitro glucose-stimulated insulin secretion showed a significantly reduced insulin secretion by islets from APJ(Δislet) mice. Glucose clearance in response to ip glucose tolerance test in obese APJ(Δislet) mice fed a chronic high-fat (HF) diet, but not pregnant APJ(Δislet) mice, was impaired significantly. In addition, the obesity-induced adaptive elevations in mean islet size and fractional islet area were reduced significantly in obese APJ(Δislet) mice when compared with wild-type mice. Together, these findings demonstrate a stimulatory role for the islet cell apelin-APJ signaling axis in regulation of pancreatic islet homeostasis and in metabolic induced β-cell hyperplasia. The results indicate the apelin-APJ system can be exploited for replenishment of BCM.

[PMID: 25668242]
Apelin is the endogenous ligand of the APJ receptor, a member of the G protein-coupled receptor family. This system plays an important role in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiovascular functions. To better understand the role of its C-terminal Phe(13) residue on ligand binding, receptor signaling, and hypotension, we report a series of modified analogues in which Phe(13) was substituted by unnatural amino acids. These modifications delivered new compounds exhibiting higher affinity and potency to inhibit cAMP accumulation compared to apelin-13. In particular, analogues Bpa(13) or (α-Me)Phe(13) were 30-fold more potent to inhibit cAMP accumulation than apelin-13. Tyr(OBn)(13) substitution led to a 60-fold improvement in binding affinity and induced stronger and more sustained drop in blood pressure compared to apelin-13. Our study identified new potent analogues of apelin-13, which represent valuable probes to better understand its structure-function relationship.

[PMID: 25491175]
C-terminal fragments of adipokine apelin are able to attenuate myocardial ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury, but whether their effects are manifested during cardioplegic arrest remain obscure. This study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of natural apelin-12 (H-Arg-Pro-Arg-Leu-Ser-His-Lys-Gly-Pro-Met-Pro-Phe-OH, A12) and its novel structural analogs (H-(N(α)Me)Arg-Pro-Arg-Leu-Ser-His-Lys-Gly-Pro-Nle-Pro-Phe-OH, AI, and N(G)-Arg(N(G)NO2)-Pro-Arg-Leu-Ser-His-Lys-Gly-Pro-Nle-Pro-Phe-NH2, AII) as additives to crystalloid cardioplegia and explore benefits of early reperfusion with these peptides. Isolated working rat hearts subjected to normothermic global ischemia and further reperfusion were used. St. Thomas' Hospital cardioplegic solution No.2 (STH2) containing 140 μM A12, AI, or AII was infused for 5 min at 25 °C before ischemia. In separate series, peptide administration was used for 5 min after ischemia. Metabolic state of the hearts was evaluated by myocardial content of high energy phosphates and lactate. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage was assessed in myocardial effluent on early reperfusion. Addition of the peptides to STH2 enhanced functional and metabolic recovery of reperfused hearts compared with those of control (STH2 without additives). Cardioplegia with analog AII was the most effective and accompanied by a reduction of postischemic LDH leakage. Infusion of A12, AI, or AII after ischemia improved the majority indices of cardiac function and metabolic state of the heart by the end of reperfusion. However, the overall protective effect of the peptides was less than when they were added to STH2. Enhancement of apelin bioavailability may minimize myocardial I/R damage during cardiac surgery. Structural analogs of A12 are promising components of clinical cardioplegic solutions.

[PMID: 26491547]
Pericytes are a population of cells that participate in normal vessel architecture and regulate permeability. Apelin, as the endogenous ligand of G protein-coupled receptor APJ, participates in a number of physiological and pathological processes. To date, the effect of apelin on pericyte is not clear. Our study aimed to investigate the potential protection mechanisms of apelin, with regard to primary rat retinal pericytes under hypoxia. Immunofluorescence staining revealed that pericytes colocalized with APJ in the fibrovascular membranes dissected from proliferative diabetic retinopathy patients. In the in vitro studies, we first demonstrated that the expression of apelin/APJ was upregulated in pericytes under hypoxia, and apelin increased pericytes proliferation and migration. Moreover, knockdown of apelin in pericyte was achieved via lentivirus-mediated RNA interference. After the inhibition of apelin, pericytes proliferation was inhibited significantly in hypoxia culture condition. Furthermore, exogenous recombinant apelin effectively prevented hypoxia-induced apoptosis through downregulating active-caspase 3 expression and increasing the ratio of B cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2)/Bcl-2 associated X protein (Bax) in pericytes. These results suggest that apelin suppressed hypoxia-induced pericytes injury, which indicated that apelin could be a potential therapeutic target for retinal angiogenic diseases.

[PMID: 26149233]
Apelin is a novel bioactive peptide as the endogenous ligand for APJ. Apelin and APJ have also been identified in the testis, hypothalamic nuclei such as arcuate, supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei, implicating roles in the control of reproduction. Therefore, the present study was designed to investigate the effects of chronic central infusion of apelin-13 on LH, FSH and testosterone levels and testis morphology. 21 Wistar-Albino male rats received continuous intracerebroventricular infusion via Alzet osmotic mini pumps filled artificial cerebrospinal fluid (vehicle) or apelin-13 at concentrations of 1 or 10 nmol (10 μl/h) for seven days. At the last 90 min of the infusion period, the blood samples were collected at 15 min intervals (0-90 min) for LH and FSH analyses. At the last sampling point, the blood samples were analyzed for testosterone levels. Infusion of high dose apelin-13 significantly suppressed LH release compared with the vehicle values at 30, 60 and 75 min (p<0.05). However, FSH levels did not significantly differ among the groups. Serum testosterone levels in high dose apelin-13 group were statistically lower than the control group (p<0.05). In addition, histological examination showed that infusion of high dose apelin-13 significantly decreased the number of Leydig cells compared with the control and lower dose apelin-13 groups (p<0.05, p<0.01). Our results suggest that apelin-13 may play a role in the central regulation and decreases testosterone release by suppressing LH secretion. Thus, antagonists of the apelin receptor may, therefore, be useful for pharmaceuticals in the treatment of infertility.