[PMID: 9152623]
Pregnancy in a woman with active acromegaly is very rare, because amenorrhea, due to hyperprolactinemia and disturbed pituitary gonadotropin secretion may cause infertility. We report a 28-year-old pregnant woman with untreated acromegaly, who was followed up from early pregnancy to delivery. Her pregnancy was uneventful, and she went into spontaneous labor at 38 weeks and delivered a normal infant. Her serum GH levels were further increased in late pregnancy, followed by decreased in postpartum periods, which may be associated with enlargement of pituitary adenoma during pregnancy. In contrast with serum GH, her serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) levels were dissociated with her serum GH levels during late pregnant and postpartum period. Her serum GH and IGF-1 levels in late pregnancy were different from the levels in pregnant women with acromegaly reported previously.

[PMID: 10649815]
Prolactin is a polypeptide hormone essential for lactation. Its production in the lactotroph cells of the anterior pituitary is regulated primarily by the inhibitory action of hypothalamic dopamine. Hyperprolactinemia is the most common endocrine disorder of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, occurring mostly in women and presenting most commonly with amenorrhea and galactorrhea. Causes of hyperprolactinemia include physiologic, pharmacologic and pathologic factors; pituitary adenoma is a common pathologic cause. Women may present with decreased libido, infertility, oligomenorrhea/amenorrhea and galactorrhea. Men may present with decreased libido, infertility, gynecomastia or impotence. In the absence of an identifiable and treatable underlying cause, hyperprolactinemia is generally treated with dopamine agonist medications.

[PMID: 6788711]
Prolactin secreting adenomas are the most frequently (50%) occurring pituitary adenoma. They occur more commonly in women than in men (4:1). Impairment of gonadal function accounts for the predominant symptoms in both sexes. Forty females and ten males with prolactin secreting adenomas were treated with selective adenoma removal by transsphenoidal surgery. Duration of symptoms varied from two months to 25 years. Twenty percent of the women and 100% of the men had invasive adenomas, a tumor that is difficult or impossible to eradicate. The chances of surgically correcting hyperprolactinemia in the female patient was 75% if the preoperative basal prolactin was 200 ng/ml or less, or 71% if the adenoma was non-invasive. The men were more difficult to treat because they all had invasive adenoma. In 50% of the men, prolactin was normalized by surgery. Early recognition of these patients before the adenomas become invasive is needed.

[PMID: 12477530]
To report a case of a gonadotroph adenoma diagnosed after a dramatic increase in estradiol level and ovarian hyperstimulation in response to a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist. Case report. Outpatient practice and university hospital. A 35-year-old woman who presented with infertility, amenorrhea, and an elevated basal estradiol concentration. Ultrasonography, laparoscopy, endocrinologic assays, magnetic resonance imaging, transsphenoidal surgery, and immunocytochemical staining. Ultrasonography and laparoscopy demonstrated bilaterally enlarged ovaries containing multiple preovulatory follicles, similar in appearance in those women undergoing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with exogenous FSH. The serum estradiol level was moderately elevated, the FSH level was within the normal range, and LH was suppressed. Administration of leuprolide acetate resulted in very elevated estradiol concentrations and even larger ovarian cysts. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a sellar mass. Examination of the tissue excised by transsphenoidal excision of the mass showed a pituitary adenoma that stained strongly for FSH. Regular menses resumed soon after excision of the gonadotroph adenoma, followed by a spontaneous pregnancy. Gonadotroph adenoma should be suspected in a reproductive age woman with oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, infertility, multiple preovulatory follicles, and a persistently elevated serum estradiol concentration. Exacerbation of the ovarian hyperstimulation in response to a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist in this setting also strongly suggests a gonadotroph adenoma but can be avoided by recognizing the presenting features of this condition.

[PMID: 2738821]
A study was undertaken to determine fertility status in a group of adult females who as children had been operated on for perforated appendicitis between 1957 to 1975. The 389 girls operated on for perforated appendicitis were reviewed. Their ages ranged from 10 months to 13 years at the time of appendicectomy. Of these girls, 276 were now 20 to 43 years old, and they were contacted by means of a mail questionnaire, and personal interview wherever necessary. It proved possible to contact 181 women; 102 of them were married and 79 were unmarried. Eight-four of the married women (82%) had one or more children. Nine unmarried women also had one or more children. Eighteen married women who have no children were studied in detail. Five women were on contraceptives, two desired pregnancy but had not conceived, and one patient was separated from her husband. Two patients had conceived and aborted, and two were married to infertile men. Of the remaining six patients who had been investigated for infertility, no demonstrable cause of infertility was found in three. Of the other three patients, one showed evidence of bilateral tubal occlusion secondary to pelvic inflammatory disease, one has had a right ectopic pregnancy followed by two abortions, and the third patient was found to have a pituitary adenoma. Our data show that perforated appendicitis before puberty has little if any role in the aetiology of tubal infertility.

[PMID: 10649814]
Hyperprolactinemia is the most common endocrine disorder of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. While it can occur in men, it occurs more commonly in women. The prevalence of hyperprolactinemia ranges from 0.4% in an unselected normal adult population to as high as 9-17% in women with reproductive disorders. There are many possible causes of hyperprolactinemia, falling into three general categories: physiologic, pharmacologic and pathologic. When specific treatable underlying causes have been eliminated and in cases of severe hyperprolactinemia, the most likely cause is a prolactin (PRL)-secreting pituitary adenoma. Microadenomas should be treated medically, with a dopamine agonist, if there is an indication for therapy (such as amenorrhea, infertility or bothersome galactorrhea). If there is no indication for therapy, microadenomas may be followed conservatively, as growth is uncommon. Macroadenomas may grow larger; medical therapy is recommended initially, with neurosurgical evaluation reserved for specific clinical situations, such as failure of medical therapy and evidence of mass effect despite medical therapy. In the United States, the dopamine agonists indicated for treatment of hyperprolactinemia are bromocriptine and cabergoline. Bromocriptine is usually given once or twice daily, while cabergoline has a long duration of action and is given once or twice weekly. Results of comparative studies indicate that cabergoline is clearly superior to bromocriptine in efficacy (PRL suppression, restoration of gonadal function) and tolerability.

[PMID: 23090264]
Prolactinoma is the most common secreting pituitary adenoma. It is typically diagnosed in women of reproductive age and is common cause of infertility. Currently the treatment of choice is pharmacotherapy with dopamine agonists, whereas surgical treatment is reserved for a selected group of patients. Pituitary-tumor apoplexy is a rare, life-threatening condition associated with significant morbidity and mortality. The authors present the case of a 25-year-old woman with prolactinoma treated with dopamine agonist. In course of such a treatment the patient became pregnant. The bromocriptine was gradually withdrawn. In the 14th week of pregnancy she was admitted for symptoms suggesting pituitary tumor apoplexy. The treatment with bromocriptine was reinitiated. In the 20th week of pregnancy further deterioration of the patient's neurological condition and visual-field abnormalities were observed. The patient was qualified for surgical treatment - selective transsphenoidal adenomectomy. The successful surgery led to improvement of neurological condition. The early postoperative PRL level decreased significantly and hormonal function of the pituitary was preserved. The pregnancy ended in 38th week with a caesarean section. Endocrinological evaluation conducted after the uneventful delivery confirmed normal function of the pituitary. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal tumor re-growth. The patient is kept under constant medical care. In this case study the authors discussed therapeutic management and reviewed literature regarding gestational pituitary-tumor apoplexy with particular emphasis on surgical treatment.

[PMID: 2520800]
Two hyperprolactinemic infertile women, one with and one without a pituitary adenoma, who were resistant to bromocriptine treatment, were treated orally with Hachimijiogan, a Chinese herbal medicine. This treatment reduced the serum prolactin level, resulting in a normal ovulatory cycle and pregnancy, without side effects.

[PMID: 2803131]
Results in 136 hyperprolactinaemic women who presented with infertility, amenorrhoea, menstrual irregularities and/or galactorrhoea are reported. There was radiographic evidence of pituitary microadenoma in 21 (15.4%) patients and 5 (3.7%) had macroadenoma. Four patients were taking antidepressants, 2 antihypertensive drugs and 7 had taken oral contraceptives for a period of 6 months to 5 years. The remaining patients had no obvious cause for elevated prolactin levels. Patients with pituitary adenoma had a significantly higher (p less than 0.001) baseline serum prolactin level (182 +/- 4.6 ng/ml) than those with no adenoma (59.2 +/- 4.2 ng/ml). All patients in the study were treated with bromocriptine (2.5-10 mg) to normalize serum prolactin or to achieve a pregnancy. The patients without an adenoma required a significantly smaller dose of bromocriptine (2.5-5.0 mg) (p less than 0.005) than those with an adenoma. Galactorrhoea disappeared in all 64 patients within 2-4 months of treatment, sixty-six (71%) of the 93 patients who desired pregnancy achieved it within 3 to 8 months of bromocriptine therapy; 32 of these patients received additional treatment with clomiphene and human chorionic gonadotrophins for induction of ovulation. In the remaining 70 patients menstruation became regular and ovulation was evident in 40% of them. There was no significant difference in the pregnancy rate between the patients with or without pituitary adenoma. Similarly, presence of galactorrhoea or a high level of prolactin did not influence the pregnancy rate. No complications were observed during pregnancy related to pituitary adenomas; 8 (12%) pregnancies ended in first trimester abortion. No lethal congenital fetal abnormalities were observed in the patients treated with bromocriptine.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 6868876]
Infertility caused by hyperprolactinemic amenorrhea may be complicated by pituitary adenoma. In a group of 36 women with amenorrhoea-hyperprolactinemia-syndrome were 15 infertility-patients. 10 of them had prolactin levels above 100 ng/ml. In 6 patients a prolactinoma was removed microsurgically. In every case further treatment was necessary to get normal cycles. 8 of these 10 infertility-patients became pregnant.