[PMID: 21815704]
Joining cetuximab, sorafenib, afatinib, intedanib, and crizotinib in phase III development for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are ramucirumab (developed by ImClone, a subsidiary of Lilly), necitumumab (developed by ImClone and Bristol-Myers Squibb), and tivantinib (ARQ 197, developed by ArQule and Daiichi Sankyo). Necitumumab is a second-generation anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody (mAb) similar to cetuximab. Enrollment has been stopped in one of two necitumumab phase III trials because of safety concerns. Ramucirumab is an anti-VEGFR2 mAb targeting the same pathway as bevacizumab. Although the phase II safety data for ramucirumab appear better than the data for necitumumab, fewer phase III data are available. Tivantinib is a highly selective, orally available MET tyrosine kinase inhibitor. MET is overexpressed in 61% of NSCLC cases. Although tivantinib is the last of the three agents discussed here to enter phase III, its phase II results are the most robust.

[PMID: 21679088]
Treatment outcomes in unselected patients with advanced NSCLC remain disappointing with platinum-based chemotherapy. The addition of monoclonal antibodies targeting EGFR to standard first-line therapy is a validated strategy and has been associated with statistically significant survival advantage in advanced NSCLC. Necitumunab is a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody targeting EGFR, having the potential benefit of lower hypersensitivity reaction risk as compared with cetuximab and also equivalent antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. This paper reviews literature on preclinical and early clinical development of necitumumab that is available in PubMed and published abstracts from conferences, as well as ongoing trials as specified by clinicaltrials.gov. Recently, the Phase III clinical trial evaluating the addition of necitumumab to pemetrexed and cisplatin in non-squamous NSCLC was prematurely closed due to concerns about the increased risk of thromboembolic events in the experimental arm. Accrual in the Phase III trial of necitumumab in combination with gemcitabine and cisplatin in squamous NSCLC is ongoing. Results of the ongoing large randomized trials will be instrumental in determining the drug's clinical significance and, with the analysis of potential molecular predictive factors, are expected to bring valuable additions to future therapeutic strategies in NSCLC.

[PMID: 20197484]
This study aimed to determine a maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and recommended dose for disease-directed studies of necitumumab (IMC-11F8), a fully human IgG(1) monoclonal antibody directed at the epidermal growth factor receptor, and to characterize the safety profile, pharmacokinetics, preliminary antitumor activity, and immunogenicity of necitumumab. Patients with advanced solid malignancies were treated with 100 to 1,000 mg (flat dosing) necitumumab followed by a 2-week pharmacokinetics sampling period, before beginning 6-week cycles of therapy. Sixty patients received necitumumab weekly (29 patients) or every other week (31 patients). Two patients receiving 1,000 mg every 2 weeks experienced dose-limiting toxicities (DLT; grade 3 headache), accompanied by grade 3 nausea and vomiting in one patient. Occurring hours after the initial dose, these DLTs established 800 mg as the MTD. Mild dose-related skin toxicity was the most common drug-related toxicity (80%). One patient in each arm experienced grade 3 acneform rash, which responded to oral antibiotics and topical therapy. Toxicity was similar on both schedules. Necitumumab exhibited saturable elimination and nonlinear pharmacokinetics. At 800 mg (both arms), its half-life was approximately 7 days. All patients treated with >or=600 mg necitumumab achieved target trough concentrations (>or=40 microg/mL). Antibodies against necitumumab were not detected. Partial response and stable disease were experienced by 2 and 16 patients, respectively. Well tolerated, necitumumab is associated with preliminary evidence of antitumor activity, and achieves biologically relevant concentrations throughout the dosing period. The recommended dose of necitumumab for further clinical development is 800 mg (flat dose) weekly or every 2 weeks based on the clinical setting.

[PMID: 25701171]
Necitumumab is a second-generation recombinant human immunoglobulin G1 EGFR monoclonal antibody that competitively inhibits ligand binding. We aimed to compare necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin with pemetrexed and cisplatin alone in patients with previously untreated, stage IV, non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We did this randomised, open-label, controlled phase 3 study at 103 sites in 20 countries. Patients aged 18 years or older, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0-2 and adequate organ function, were randomly assigned 1:1 to treatment with a block randomisation scheme (block size of four) via a telephone-based interactive voice-response system or interactive web-response system. Patients received either cisplatin 75 mg/m(2) and pemetrexed 500 mg/m(2) on day 1 of a 3-week cycle for a maximum of six cycles alone, or with necitumumab 800 mg on days 1 and 8. Necitumumab was continued after the end of chemotherapy until disease progression or unacceptable toxic effects. Randomisation was stratified by smoking history, ECOG performance status, disease histology, and geographical region. Patients and study investigators were not masked to group assignment. The primary endpoint was overall survival. Efficacy analyses were by intention to treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00982111. Between Nov 11, 2009, and Feb 2, 2011, we randomly assigned 633 patients to receive either necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin (n=315) or pemetrexed and cisplatin alone (n=318). Enrolment was stopped on Feb 2, 2011, after a recommendation from the independent data monitoring committee. There was no significant difference in overall survival between treatment groups, with a median overall survival of 11·3 months (95% CI 9·5-13·4) in the necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin group versus 11·5 months (10·1-13·1) in the pemetrexed and cisplatin group (hazard ratio 1·01 [95% CI 0·84-1·21]; p=0·96). The incidence of grade 3 or worse adverse events, including deaths, was higher in the necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin group than in the pemetrexed and cisplatin group; in particular, deaths regarded as related to study drug were reported in 15 (5%) of 304 patients in the necitumumab group versus nine (3%) of 312 patients in the pemetrexed and cisplatin group. Serious adverse events were likewise more frequent in the necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin group than in the pemetrexed and cisplatin group (155 [51%] of 304 vs 127 [41%] of 312 patients). Patients in the necitumumab plus pemetrexed and cisplatin group had more grade 3-4 rash (45 [15%] of 304 vs one [<1%] of 312 patients in the pemetrexed and cisplatin alone group), hypomagnesaemia (23 [8%] vs seven [2%] patients), and grade 3 or higher venous thromboembolic events (23 [8%] vs 11 [4%] patients) than did those in the pemetrexed and cisplatin alone group. Our findings show no evidence to suggest that the addition of necitumumab to pemetrexed and cisplatin increases survival of previously untreated patients with stage IV non-squamous NSCLC. Unless future studies identify potentially useful predictive biomarkers, necitumumab is unlikely to provide benefit in this patient population when combined with pemetrexed and cisplatin. Eli Lilly and Company.

[PMID: 25636162]
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in many nonsmall cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Blockade of EGFR by monoclonal antibodies has been studied as a strategy to improve the outcome of first-line chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC. The present review updates the findings from phase III trials. Cetuximab improved survival when combined with first-line chemotherapy and this benefit was limited to patients with high EGFR expression in their tumors. A Southwest Oncology Group study currently prospectively evaluates the predictive biomarkers for cetuximab. In the SQUIRE phase III trial, necitumumab added to cisplatin and gemcitabine increased the survival in patients with advanced squamous cell NSCLC. The INSPIRE trial studied chemotherapy with and without necitumumab in patients with nonsquamous NSCLC but was prematurely halted because of increased thromboembolic events with chemotherapy and necitumumab. EGFR monoclonal antibodies improved the outcome including survival in selected patients with advanced NSCLC. Prospective validation of predictive biomarkers is ongoing.

[PMID: 21806477]
Necitumumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against EGFR, is currently under development as a treatment for advanced NSCLC. Two Phase III randomized trials are ongoing, testing the addition of necitumumab to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. In the same setting, cetuximab produced a statistically significant but clinically modest benefit in the whole study population, and no solid data have been produced about predictive factors of efficacy. Will the difference in structure between the two antibodies be enough to obtain a clinically relevant advantage, making real progress in the treatment of advanced NSCLC? Large Phase III trials in unselected patients risk demonstrating statistically significant results with debatable clinical relevance in the whole population, and the study of predictive factors is often left to subgroup analysis performed after the conduction of the trial. We do not need further 'me-too' drugs, or drugs that produce a small benefit in the unselected population. On the contrary, the oncologic community needs drugs to be used with a proper selection of patients, to obtain larger, relevant benefits in molecularly characterized subgroups. Final results of randomized trials with necitumumab in advanced NSCLC are expected in a couple of years.

[PMID: 21109448]
Blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by monoclonal antibodies is a strategy to improve outcome in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Cetuximab, a chimeric anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody, has been studied in combination with different chemotherapy protocols in both phase II and phase III trials in patients with advanced NSCLC. In the phase III FLEX trial, cetuximab added to cisplatin/vinorelbine resulted in an absolute overall survival benefit of 1.2 months compared to the same chemotherapy alone in patients with advanced EGFR-expressing NSCLC. In the second phase III trial, cetuximab added to carboplatin plus paclitaxed failed to improve progression-free survival but suggested a survival benefit similar to that seen in the FLEX trial. However, the benefit in survival reached statistical significance only in the FLEX trial. A meta-analysis that included patients from four randomized trials confirmed the efficacy of cetuximab when added to chemotherapy. Thus addition of cetuximab to platinum-based chemotherapy represents a new treatment option for patients with advanced NSCLC. Matuzumab and panitumumab have also been evaluated in phase II trials. Necitumumab is currently evaluated in combination with chemotherapy in two randomized phase III trials.

[PMID: 24216225]
Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a common characteristic of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). Cetuximab is a chimeric anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody (mAb) with multiple approved indications in HNSCC, including with radiation therapy (RT) for locoregionally advanced disease, as monotherapy after platinum progression, and with platinum/5-fluorouracil for recurrent or metastatic disease. There remain, however, numerous unanswered questions regarding the optimal use of cetuximab in HNSCC, including patient selection, its mechanisms of action and resistance, the effect of human papillomavirus status on outcomes, its role when combined with induction chemotherapy or adjuvant radiation, and optimal management of skin toxicity and hypersensitivity reactions. In addition, a variety of other anti-EGFR agents (the multitargeted small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors [TKIs] lapatinib, dacomitinib, and afatinib and the anti-EGFR mAbs zalutumumab, nimotuzumab, and panitumumab) are currently under investigation in phase II and III clinical trials in different HNSCC therapeutic settings. The anti-EGFR TKI erlotinib is currently in phase III development for oral cancer prevention. Numerous other drugs are in earlier stages of development for HNSCC treatment, including novel anti-EGFR mAbs (MEHD7945A, necitumumab, and RO5083945), small-molecule TKIs (vandetanib, icotinib, and CUDC-101), EGFR antisense, various add-on therapies to radiation and chemotherapy (bevacizumab, interleukin-12, lenalidomide, alisertib, and VTX-2337), and drugs (temsirolimus, everolimus, OSI-906, dasatinib, and PX-866) intended to overcome resistance to anti-EGFR agents. Overall, a wealth of clinical trial data is expected in the coming years, with the potential to modify significantly the approach to anti-EGFR therapy for HNSCC.

[PMID: 26045340]
Necitumumab is a second-generation, recombinant, human immunoglobulin G1 EGFR antibody. In this study, we aimed to compare treatment with necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin versus gemcitabine and cisplatin alone in patients with previously untreated stage IV squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. We did this open-label, randomised phase 3 study at 184 investigative sites in 26 countries. Patients aged 18 years or older with histologically or cytologically confirmed stage IV squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0-2 and adequate organ function and who had not received previous chemotherapy for their disease were eligible for inclusion. Enrolled patients were randomly assigned centrally 1:1 to a maximum of six 3-week cycles of gemcitabine and cisplastin chemotherapy with or without necitumumab according to a block randomisation scheme (block size of four) by a telephone-based interactive voice response system or interactive web response system. Chemotherapy was gemcitabine 1250 mg/m(2) administered intravenously over 30 min on days 1 and 8 of a 3-week cycle and cisplatin 75 mg/m(2) administered intravenously over 120 min on day 1 of a 3-week cycle. Necitumumab 800 mg, administered intravenously over a minimum of 50 min on days 1 and 8, was continued after the end of chemotherapy until disease progression or intolerable toxic side-effects occurred. Randomisation was stratified by ECOG performance status and geographical region. Neither physicians nor patients were masked to group assignment because of the expected occurrence of acne-like rash--a class effect of EGFR antibodies--that would have unmasked most patients and investigators to treatment. The primary endpoint was overall survival, analysed by intention to treat. We report the final clinical analysis. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00981058. Between Jan 7, 2010, and Feb 22, 2012, we enrolled 1093 patients and randomly assigned them to receive necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin (n=545) or gemcitabine and cisplatin (n=548). Overall survival was significantly longer in the necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin group than in the gemcitabine and cisplatin alone group (median 11·5 months [95% CI 10·4-12·6]) vs 9·9 months [8·9-11·1]; stratified hazard ratio 0·84 [95% CI 0·74-0·96; p=0·01]). In the necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin group, the number of patients with at least one grade 3 or worse adverse event was higher (388 [72%] of 538 patients) than in the gemcitabine and cisplatin group (333 [62%] of 541), as was the incidence of serious adverse events (257 [48%] of 538 patients vs 203 [38%] of 541). More patients in the necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin group had grade 3-4 hypomagnesaemia (47 [9%] of 538 patients in the necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin group vs six [1%] of 541 in the gemcitabine and cisplatin group) and grade 3 rash (20 [4%] vs one [<1%]). Including events related to disease progression, adverse events with an outcome of death were reported for 66 (12%) of 538 patients in the necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin group and 57 (11%) of 541 patients in the gemcitabine and cisplatin group; these were deemed to be related to study drugs in 15 (3%) and ten (2%) patients, respectively. Overall, we found that the safety profile of necitumumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin was acceptable and in line with expectations. Our findings show that the addition of necitumumab to gemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy improves overall survival in patients with advanced squamous non-small-cell lung cancer and represents a new first-line treatment option for this disease. Eli Lilly and Company.

[PMID: 23300028]
Several monoclonal antibodies directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been evaluated in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Cetuximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody, has been studied in combination with first-line chemotherapy in phase II and two phase III trials in patients with advanced NSCLC. The phase III FLEX trial demonstrated an increase in survival for cisplatin/vinorelbine plus cetuximab compared to chemotherapy alone in patients with advanced EGFR-expressing NSCLC. Cetuximab added to carboplatin/paclitaxel failed to improve progression-free survival in the BMS099 phase III trial. However, a meta-analysis of four randomized trials confirmed a significant survival benefit for platinum-based chemotherapy plus cetuximab compared to chemotherapy alone. High EGFR expression of tumor cells was then shown to predict the benefit of cetuximab, whereas KRAS mutations and EGFR fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis were without predictive value. Matuzumab and panitumumab have also been studied in phase II trials. Necitumumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody, is currently evaluated in combination with chemotherapy in two phase III trials in patients with advanced NSCLC. Cetuximab is also studied in combination with chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally advanced NSCLC.