[PMID: 31792921]
In November 2019 givosiran became the second small interfering RNA (siRNA)-based drug to receive US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval, it has been developed for the treatment of acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), a disorder characterized by life-threatening acute neurovisceral attacks. The porphyrias are a group of disorders in which enzymatic deficiencies in heme production lead to toxic accumulation of delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG), which are involved in the neurovisceral attacks. Givosiran acts as a conventional siRNA to trigger RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated gene silencing on delta-ALA synthase 1 (ALAS1), thus returning ALA and PBG metabolites to the physiological level to attenuate further neurotoxicity. Givosiran makes use of a new hepatic-delivery system that conjugates three GalNac (N-acetylgalactosamine) molecules to the siRNA passenger strand. GalNac binds to the liver asialoglycoprotein receptor, favoring the internalization of these GalNac-conjugated siRNAs into the hepatic cells. In a phase I study, subcutaneous monthly administration of givosiran 2.5 mg/kg reduced > 90% of ALA and PBG content. This siRNA is being analyzed in ENVISION (NCT03338816), a phase III, multicenter, placebo-controlled randomized controlled trial. In preliminary results, givosiran achieved clinical endpoints for AIP, reducing urinary ALA levels, and presented a safety profile that enabled further drug development. The clinical performance of givosiran revealed that suppression of ALAS1 by GalNac-decorated siRNAs represents an additional approach for the treatment of patients with AIP that manifests recurrent acute neurovisceral attacks.

[PMID: 32521132]
Up-regulation of hepatic delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase 1 (ALAS1), with resultant accumulation of delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen, is central to the pathogenesis of acute attacks and chronic symptoms in acute hepatic porphyria. Givosiran, an RNA interference therapy, inhibits ALAS1 expression. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned symptomatic patients with acute hepatic porphyria to receive either subcutaneous givosiran (2.5 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo monthly for 6 months. The primary end point was the annualized rate of composite porphyria attacks among patients with acute intermittent porphyria, the most common subtype of acute hepatic porphyria. (Composite porphyria attacks resulted in hospitalization, an urgent health care visit, or intravenous administration of hemin at home.) Key secondary end points were levels of ALA and porphobilinogen and the annualized attack rate among patients with acute hepatic porphyria, along with hemin use and daily worst pain scores in patients with acute intermittent porphyria. A total of 94 patients underwent randomization (48 in the givosiran group and 46 in the placebo group). Among the 89 patients with acute intermittent porphyria, the mean annualized attack rate was 3.2 in the givosiran group and 12.5 in the placebo group, representing a 74% lower rate in the givosiran group (P<0.001); the results were similar among the 94 patients with acute hepatic porphyria. Among the patients with acute intermittent porphyria, givosiran led to lower levels of urinary ALA and porphobilinogen, fewer days of hemin use, and better daily scores for pain than placebo. Key adverse events that were observed more frequently in the givosiran group were elevations in serum aminotransferase levels, changes in serum creatinine levels and the estimated glomerular filtration rate, and injection-site reactions. Among patients with acute intermittent porphyria, those who received givosiran had a significantly lower rate of porphyria attacks and better results for multiple other disease manifestations than those who received placebo. The increased efficacy was accompanied by a higher frequency of hepatic and renal adverse events. (Funded by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ENVISION ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03338816.).

[PMID: 33043761]
Since 1983, hemin has been FDA-approved for acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) attacks. In 2019, FDA approved givosiran for the treatment of adults with acute hepatic porphyria. The objective of this research was to estimate and compare the total cost of AIP-related healthcare for patients treated with hemin or givosiran. A microsimulation cost model was developed to estimate the annual economic impact of hemin versus givosiran treatment for patients with AIP from the U.S. healthcare payer perspective. Hemin treatment costs were calculated from the Hemin Shipment Data in which patients were defined as receiving acute attack treatment or prophylaxis treatment based on shipment patterns. Three separate hemin subpopulations were considered: one attack per year, multiple attacks per year, and hemin prophylaxis. Treatment costs for givosiran (with hemin for acute attacks) were simulated based on Phase III trial efficacy results applied to individual treatment histories in the Hemin Shipment Data. Other healthcare utilization was also considered. Outcomes were annualized and expenditures inflated to 2019. For all patients with AIP, the average annual total cost of care with hemin was 78% lower (difference = $482,113; 95% CI=$373,638-$594,778) than the average annual total cost of care with givosiran. Average annual total cost of care with hemin was between 46% and 92% lower than givosiran for the three hemin subpopulations: one attack per year (difference = $545,219; 95% CI=$436,584-$657,239), multiple attacks per year (difference = $459,366; 95% CI=$350,291-$574,403), and hemin prophylaxis (difference = $311,950; 95% CI=$191,898-$435,893). Cost savings with hemin were robust to one-way and probabilistic sensitivity as well as scenario analyses. Hemin is expected to provide cost savings compared to givosiran for all AIP patients and subpopulations. Lower annual total costs of care with hemin range from $311,950 to $545,219 less depending on whether the patient uses hemin prophylactically or for acute treatment attacks.

[PMID: 32034693]
Givosiran (Givlaari™) is an aminolevulinate synthase 1 (ALAS1)-directed small interfering RNA (siRNA) covalently linked to a ligand to enable specific delivery of the siRNA to hepatocytes. This results in downregulation of ALAS1 mRNA and prevents accumulation of neurotoxic δ-aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen levels that are associated with acute porphyria attacks. Givosiran is being developed by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals for the treatment of acute hepatic porphyria (AHP). In November 2019, givosiran was approved in the USA for the treatment of adults with AHP based on the positive results from the multinational, phase III ENVISION trial. In the EU, givosiran received a positive opinion in January 2020 for the treatment of AHP in adults and adolescents aged 12 years and older. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of givosiran leading to this first approval for the treatment of adults with AHP.

[PMID: 31994716]
Givosiran is a small interfering ribonucleic acid agent that was recently approved in the United States for the treatment of acute hepatic porphyria (AHP). This phase I study evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic profile of subcutaneously (SC) administered givosiran in patients with acute intermittent porphyria, the most common AHP type. Givosiran was rapidly absorbed from the SC injection site with peak plasma concentrations achieved within 0.5-5 hours followed by elimination with a short half-life of 4-10 hours. Plasma exposures of AS(N-1)3' givosiran, an active metabolite with equal potency as givosiran, was 35%-75%. Givosiran treatment resulted in a rapid and dose-dependent reduction in urinary aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG) towards the upper limit of normal (ULN) in AHP patients. Greater and more sustained reductions in ALA and PBG were achieved with once monthly dosing compared with once quarterly dosing. After monthly dosing, trough ALA levels were reduced to below the ULN, approximately 95% reduction from baseline, at both the 2.5 and 5.0 mg/kg doses.

[PMID: 30847674]
Recent advances in pathophysiological and genetic mechanisms of some neuromuscular diseases and a rapid progress in new pharmacological technologies led to an accelerated development of innovative treatments, generating an unexpected therapeutic revolution. In part 1, we report already commercially available drugs, just approved drugs and new therapeutic promises in the treatment of peripheral neuropathies. Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) is a devastating disease due to amyloid accumulation in peripheral nerves, heart and autonomic system. The first specific drug approved for hATTR was tafamidis, a TTR tetramer stabilizer. In 2018, the positive results of two phase 3 trials have been reported leading to start of regulatory approval route for inotersen, an antisense oligonucleotide and patisiran, the first-ever RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic. System biology targeting approach has indicated baclofen, naltrexone and sorbitol in combination (PXT3003) as candidate drugs for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A. This hypothesis was confirmed in experimental models and in phase 2 and 3 clinical trials. Givosiran, another RNAi therapeutic, targeting 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase, has been positively tested in acute intermittent porphyria in phase 1/2 and ongoing phase 3 trials. Although allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation resulted recently a long-term therapy in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE), a new strategy is liver transplantation which is able to revert the severe biochemical and clinical imbalance of the disease. Recently, a gene therapy has been tested in a MNGIE murine model, indicating that it may become a new therapeutic option.

[PMID: 33275677]
The porphyrias are a family of metabolic disorders caused by defects in the activity of one of the enzymes in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the gene encoding hydroxymethylbilane synthase, can lead to hepatocyte overaccumulation and systemic distribution of the proximal porphyrin precursors, 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG). ALA and PBG are toxic to neurons and extrahepatic tissue and cause the neurovisceral clinical manifestations of AIP. Management of AIP includes awareness and avoidance of triggering factors, infusions of hemin for severe acute attacks, and, if indicated for chronic suppressive therapy, maintenance treatment with hemin or givosiran, a small interfering RNA molecule that antagonizes ALA synthase 1 transcripts. Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is most commonly caused by autosomal recessive mutations in the gene encoding ferrochelatase (FECH), the heme pathway terminal enzyme. FECH deficiency leads to erythrocyte overaccumulation and high plasma levels of lipophilic protoporphyrins that photoactivate in the skin, causing burning pain and erythema. Protoporphyrins excreted in the bile can cause gallstones, cholestasis, fibrosis, and ultimately liver failure. Management of EPP includes skin protection and afamelanotide, an α-melanocyte stimulating hormone analog that increases melanin pigment and reduces photoactivation. Liver transplantation may be necessary for severe EPP-induced liver complications. Because AIP and EPP arise from defects in the heme biosynthetic pathway, hematologists are often consulted to evaluate and manage suspected or proven porphyrias. A working knowledge of these disorders increases our confidence and effectiveness as consultants and medical providers.

[PMID: 32592692]
Targeted delivery of oligonucleotides to liver hepatocytes using N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) conjugates that bind to the asialoglycoprotein receptor has become a breakthrough approach in the therapeutic oligonucleotide field. This technology has led to the approval of givosiran for the treatment of acute hepatic porphyria, and there are another seven conjugates in registrational review or phase 3 trials and at least another 21 conjugates at earlier stages of clinical development. This review highlights some of the recent chemical and preclinical advances in this space, leading to a large number of clinical candidates against a diverse range of targets in liver hepatocytes. The review focuses on the use of this delivery system for small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and antisense molecules that cause downregulation of target mRNA and protein. A number of other approaches such as anti-microRNAs and small activating RNAs are starting to exploit the technology, broadening the potential of this approach for therapeutic oligonucleotide intervention.

[PMID: 30726693]
Induction of delta aminolevulinic acid synthase 1 ( ALAS1) gene expression and accumulation of neurotoxic intermediates result in neurovisceral attacks and disease manifestations in patients with acute intermittent porphyria, a rare inherited disease of heme biosynthesis. Givosiran is an investigational RNA interference therapeutic agent that inhibits hepatic ALAS1 synthesis. We conducted a phase 1 trial of givosiran in patients with acute intermittent porphyria. In part A of the trial, patients without recent porphyria attacks (i.e., no attacks in the 6 months before baseline) were randomly assigned to receive a single subcutaneous injection of one of five ascending doses of givosiran (0.035, 0.10, 0.35, 1.0, or 2.5 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo. In part B, patients without recent attacks were randomly assigned to receive once-monthly injections of one of two doses of givosiran (0.35 or 1.0 mg per kilogram) or placebo (total of two injections 28 days apart). In part C, patients who had recurrent attacks were randomly assigned to receive injections of one of two doses of givosiran (2.5 or 5.0 mg per kilogram) or placebo once monthly (total of four injections) or once quarterly (total of two injections) during a 12-week period, starting on day 0. Safety, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and exploratory efficacy outcomes were evaluated. A total of 23 patients in parts A and B and 17 patients in part C underwent randomization. Common adverse events included nasopharyngitis, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Serious adverse events occurred in 6 patients who received givosiran in parts A through C combined. In part C, all 6 patients who were assigned to receive once-monthly injections of givosiran had sustained reductions in ALAS1 messenger RNA (mRNA), delta aminolevulinic acid, and porphobilinogen levels to near normal. These reductions were associated with a 79% lower mean annualized attack rate than that observed with placebo (exploratory efficacy end point). Once-monthly injections of givosiran in patients who had recurrent porphyria attacks resulted in mainly low-grade adverse events, reductions in induced ALAS1 mRNA levels, nearly normalized levels of the neurotoxic intermediates delta aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen, and a lower attack rate than that observed with placebo. (Funded by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02452372 .).

[PMID: 33139979]
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), the third enzyme of the heme synthesis pathway. Symptoms of AIP usually manifest as intermittent acute attacks with occasional neuropsychiatric crises. The management of AIP includes treatment of acute attacks, prevention of attacks, long-term monitoring and treatment of chronic complications. Intravenous injection of heme is the most effective method of treating acute attacks. Carbohydrate loading is used when heme is unavailable or in the event of mild attacks. Symptomatic treatment is also needed during attacks. Prevention of attacks includes eliminating precipitating factors, heme prophylaxis and liver transplantation. New treatment options include givosiran (siRNA) to down-regulate ALA synthase-1 (ALAS1) and the messenger RNA of PBGD (PBGD mRNA) delivered to the liver cells of patients with AIP. Long-term monitoring of chronic complications includes regular liver-kidney function and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) screening.