[PMID: 23239541]
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS) is a rare disorder caused by haploinsufficiency of genes located on the proximal short arm of chromosome 11 (11p11.2p12). Classic features include biparietal foramina, multiple exostoses, profound hypotonia, dysmorphic features, and developmental delay/intellectual disability. Fewer than 40 individuals with PSS have been reported, with variable clinical presentations due in part to disparity in deletion sizes. We report on a boy who presented for initial evaluation at age 13 months because of a history of developmental delay, hypotonia, subtle dysmorphic features, and neurobehavioral abnormalities. SNP microarray analysis identified a 137 kb deletion at 11p11.2, which maps within the classically defined PSS interval. This deletion results in haploinsufficiency for all or portions of six OMIM genes: SLC35C1, CRY2, MAPK8IP1, PEX16, GYLTL1B, and PHF21A. Recently, translocations interrupting PHF21A have been associated with intellectual disability and craniofacial anomalies similar to those seen in PSS. The identification of this small deletion in a child with developmental delay and hypotonia provides further evidence for the genetic basis of developmental disability and identifies a critical region sufficient to cause hypotonia in this syndrome. Additionally, this case illustrates the utility of high resolution genomic approaches in correlating clinical phenotypes with specific genes in contiguous gene deletion syndromes.

[PMID: 15852040]
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome that results from haploinsufficiency of at least two genes within the short arm of chromosome 11[del(11)(p11.2p12)]. The clinical features of PSS can include developmental delay, mental retardation, multiple exostoses, parietal foramina, enlarged anterior fontanel, minor craniofacial anomalies, ophthalmologic anomalies, and genital abnormalities in males. We constructed a natural panel of 11p11.2-p13 deletions using cell lines from 10 affected individuals, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), microsatellite analyses, and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). We then compared the deletion sizes and clinical features between affected individuals. The full spectrum of PSS manifests when deletions are at least 2.1 Mb in size, spanning from D11S1393 to D11S1385/D11S1319 (44.6-46.7 Mb from the 11p terminus) and encompassing EXT2, responsible for multiple exostoses, and ALX4, causing parietal foramina. Yet one subject with parietal foramina whose deletion does not include ALX4 indicates that ALX4 in this subject may be rendered functionally haploinsufficient by a position effect. Based on comparative deletion mapping of eight individuals with the full PSS syndrome including mental retardation and two PSS families with no mental retardation, at least one gene related to mental retardation is likely located between D11S554 and D11S1385/D11S1319, 45.6-46.7 Mb from the 11p terminus.

[PMID: 28571721]
Potocki-Shaffer Syndrome is a rare neurodevelopmental syndrome associated with microdeletion of a region of Chromosome 11p11.2. Genetic evidence has implicated haploinsufficiency of PHF21A, a gene that encodes a histone-binding protein, as the likely cause of intellectual disability and craniofacial abnormalities in Potocki-Shaffer Syndrome. However, the molecular consequences of reduced PHF21A expression remain elusive. In this study, we analyzed by RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) two patient-derived cell lines with heterozygous loss of PHF21A compared to unaffected individuals and identified 1,885 genes that were commonly misregulated. The patient cells displayed down-regulation of key pathways relevant to learning and memory, including Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate (cAMP)-signaling pathway genes. We found that PHF21A is required for full induction of a luciferase reporter carrying cAMP-responsive elements (CRE) following stimulation by the cAMP analog, forskolin. Finally, PHF21A-deficient patient-derived cells exhibited a delayed induction of immediate early genes following forskolin stimulation. These results suggest that an impaired response to cAMP signaling might be involved in the pathology of PHF21A deficiency. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: [SI: Molecules & Cognition].

[PMID: 19222835]
WAGR syndrome (Wilms' tumor, aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities and mental retardation) and Potocki-Shaffer syndrome are rare contiguous gene deletion syndromes caused by deletions of the 11p14-p12 chromosome region.We present a patient with mental retardation, unilateral cataract, bilateral ptosis, genital abnormalities, seizures and a dysmorphic face. Cytogenetic analysis showed a deletion on 11p that was further characterized using FISH and MLPA analyses. The deletion (11p13-p12) located in the area between the deletions associated with the WAGR and Potocki-Shaffer syndromes had a maximum size of 8.5 Mb and encompasses 44 genes. Deletion of WT1 explains the genital abnormalities observed. As PAX6 was intact the cataract observed cannot be explained by a deletion of this gene. Seizures have been described in Potocki-Shaffer syndrome while mental retardation has been described in both WAGR and Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. Characterization of this patient contributes further to elucidate the function of the genes in the 11p14-p12 chromosome region.

[PMID: 28127865]
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving 11p11.2p12 and characterized by multiple exostoses, biparietal foramina, genitourinary anomalies in males, central nervous system abnormalities, intellectual disability, and craniofacial abnormalities. Current literature implicates haploinsufficiency of three genes (ALX4, EXT2, and PHF21A) in causing some of the cardinal features of PSS. We report a patient with multiple exostoses, biparietal foramina, and history of mild developmental delay. Cognitive and behavioral testing supported formal diagnoses of anxiety, verbal dyspraxia, articulation disorder, and coordination disorder, without intellectual disability. His facial features, though distinctive, were not typical of those observed in PSS. As the chromosomal deletion does not encompass PHF21A, this case lends further support that haploinsufficiency of PHF21A contributes to the intellectual disability and craniofacial abnormalities in PSS and that there are other genes in the region which likely contribute to the behavioral phenotype in this syndrome. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 15666301]
We report a family with inherited Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. The phenotypically normal mother has an interstitial deletion of 11(p11.12p11.2) with neocentric marker chromosome formation. The marker chromosome contains the deleted material on 11p11.2 and is likely a ring. The patient inherited a maternal deleted chromosome 11 but not the marker chromosome, thus resulting in an unbalanced karyotype along with the phenotype of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. The deleted region in our case-11p11.12p11.2-is a newly reported site of constitutional neocentromere formation. This is also the first report describing deletion of 11p11.12-p11.2 and neocentromere formation resulting in inherited Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.

[PMID: 20140962]
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is a rare contiguous gene deletion syndrome due to haploinsufficiency of the 11p11.2p12 region and is characterized by craniofacial abnormalities, developmental delay, intellectual disability, multiple exostoses, and biparietal foramina. In this study, six patients with the Potocki-Shaffer syndrome were identified and evaluated using a multidisciplinary protocol that included assessments by a geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, orthopedist, nephrologist, audiologist, and neuropsychologist. Diagnostic studies included skeletal survey, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, renal ultrasound, complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid studies, and urinalysis. Using array comparative genomic hybridization, we further characterized the deletion in five of these patients. The results of these evaluations were combined with a comprehensive review of reported cases. Our data highlight the characteristic facial features, biparietal foramina, moderate-to-severe developmental delay and intellectual disability, myopia and strabismus, and multiple exostoses seen with this disorder. We also identify for the first time an association of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome with sensorineural hearing loss and autistic behaviors. Finally, we provide recommendations for the health maintenance of patients with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.

[PMID: 26333423]
In Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), the full phenotypic spectrum is manifested when deletions are at least 2.1 Mb in size at 11p11.2. The PSS-associated genes EXT2 and ALX4, together with PHF21A, all map to this region flanked by markers D11S1393 and D11S1319. Being proximal to EXT2 and ALX4, a 1.1 Mb region containing 12 annotated genes had been identified by deletion mapping to explain PSS phenotypes except multiple exostoses and parietal foramina. Here, we report a male patient with partial PSS phenotypes including global developmental delay, craniofacial anomalies, minor limb anomalies, and micropenis. Using microarray, qPCR, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analyses, we refined the candidate gene region, which harbors five genes, by excluding two genes, SLC35C1 and CRY2, which resulted in a corroborating role of PHF21A in developmental delay and craniofacial anomalies. This microdeletion contains the least number of genes at 11p11.2 reported to date. Additionally, we also discuss the phenotypes observed in our patient with respect to those of published cases of microdeletions across the Potocki-Shaffer interval.

[PMID: 22822387]
We describe the case of an adult patient affected by multiple exostoses, severe mental retardation, epilepsy and facial dysmorphisms with a deletion of ∼2.3 Mb on chromosome 11p11.21, correlated to Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS). PSS is a rare contiguous gene deletion syndrome, mainly characterized by multiple exostoses and bilateral parietal foramina. Mental retardation and craniofacial dysmorphisms have often been reported, too. Although the patient showed many signs of PSS since early childhood, the diagnosis was suggested only when we examined her at adult age. This case highlights how frequently rare diseases remain undiagnosed till adulthood and is an excellent example of the need for a timely and correct diagnosis.

[PMID: 25653495]
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS, OMIM #601224) is a rare contiguous gene deletion syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of genes located on the 11p11.2p12. Affected individuals have a number of characteristic features including multiple exostoses, biparietal foramina, abnormalities of genitourinary system, hypotonia, developmental delay, and intellectual disability. We report here on the first Korean case of an 8-yr-old boy with PSS diagnosed by high resolution microarray. Initial evaluation was done at age 6 months because of a history of developmental delay, hypotonia, and dysmorphic face. Coronal craniosynostosis and enlarged parietal foramina were found on skull radiographs. At age 6 yr, he had severe global developmental delay. Multiple exostoses of long bones were detected during a radiological check-up. Based on the clinical and radiological features, PSS was highly suspected. Subsequently, chromosomal microarray analysis identified an 8.6 Mb deletion at 11p11.2 [arr 11p12p11.2 (Chr11:39,204,770-47,791,278)×1]. The patient continued rehabilitation therapy for profound developmental delay. The progression of multiple exostosis has being monitored. This case confirms and extends data on the genetic basis of PSS. In clinical and radiologic aspect, a patient with multiple exostoses accompanying with syndromic features, including craniofacial abnormalities and mental retardation, the diagnosis of PSS should be considered.