[PMID: 34461271]
B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA) has become a key target for antibody-drug conjugates, bispecific antibodies, chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapies, and other immunotherapies in multiple myeloma. Some of these agents such as belantamab mafodotin and idecabtagene vicleucel have already received regulatory approval in the United States. Although BCMA has generally been considered to be expressed almost exclusively in plasma cells with a low likelihood of on-target off-tumor toxicity, there has been a range of unusual neurotoxicity observed across the spectrum of BCMA immunotherapies. In certain cases, these unusual neurotoxicity presentations have led to patient death or withdrawal of agents from further development. Our review summarizes the literature in this field and highlights the possibility of on-target toxicities due to neural expression of BCMA. We draw attention to the need for further investigation of these toxicities. This risk becomes increasingly important as BCMA targeted therapies are brought to earlier lines of treatment.

[PMID: 34256668]
This study estimated the comparative efficacy of ciltacabtagene autoleucel (cilta-cel) versus the approved idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel) dose range of 300-460 × 10<sup>6</sup> CAR-positive T-cells for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM) who were previously treated with a proteasome inhibitor, an immunomodulatory drug, and an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody (i.e. triple-class exposed) using matching-adjusted indirect treatment comparisons (MAICs). MAICs were performed with individual patient data for cilta-cel (CARTITUDE-1; NCT03548207) and published summary-level data for ide-cel (KarMMa; NCT03361748). Treated patients from CARTITUDE-1 who satisfied the eligibility criteria for KarMMa were included in the analyses. The MAIC adjusted for unbalanced baseline covariates of prognostic significance identified in the literature and by clinical expertise. Comparative efficacy was estimated for overall response rate (ORR), complete response or better (≥CR) rate, duration of response (DoR), progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS). Cilta-cel was associated with statistically significantly improved ORR (odds ratio [OR]: 94.93 [95% confidence interval [CI]: 21.86, 412.25; <i>p</i> < .0001]; relative risk [RR]: 1.34), ≥CR rate (OR: 5.49 [95% CI: 2.47, 12.21; <i>p</i> < .0001]; RR: 2.21), DoR (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.50 [95% CI: 0.29, 0.87; <i>p =</i> .0137]), and PFS (HR: 0.37 [95% CI: 0.22, 0.62; <i>p</i> = .0002]) when compared with ide-cel. For OS, the results were in favor of cilta-cel and clinically meaningful but with a CI overlapping one (HR: 0.55 [95% CI: 0.29, 1.05; <i>p</i> = .0702]). These analyses demonstrate improved efficacy with cilta-cel versus ide-cel for all outcomes, highlighting its therapeutic potential in patients with triple-class exposed RRMM.

[PMID: 33896344]
Idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel, bb2121), a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy, has been investigated in patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM) who have received an immunomodulatory drug, proteasome inhibitor, and anti-CD38 antibody in the single-arm phase 2 KarMMa clinical trial. Two therapies with distinct mechanisms of action - selinexor plus dexamethasone (Sd) and belantamab mafodotin (BM) - are currently approved in the United States for heavily pretreated patients, including those who are triple-class refractory. To compare ide-cel versus Sd and ide-cel versus BM, matching-adjusted indirect comparisons were performed. Ide-cel extended progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) versus both Sd and BM (hazard ratio (HR); 95% confidence interval (CI)). PFS: ide-cel versus Sd, 0.46; 0.28-0.75; ide-cel versus BM, 0.45; 0.27-0.77. OS: ide-cel versus Sd, 0.23; 0.13-0.42; ide-cel versus BM, 0.35; 0.14-0.87. These results suggest ide-cel offers clinically meaningful improvements over currently approved regimens for patients with heavily pretreated RRMM.

[PMID: 34527606]
Whereas the treatment of MM was dependent solely on alkylating agents and corticosteroids during the prior three decades, the landscape of therapeutic measures to treat the disease began to expand enormously early in the current century. The introduction of new classes of small-molecule drugs, such as proteasome blockers (bortezomib and carfilzomib), immunomodulators (lenalidomide and pomalidomide), nuclear export inhibitors (selinexor), and histone deacetylase blockers (panobinostat), as well as the application of autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT), resulted in a seismic shift in how the disease is treated. The picture changed dramatically once again starting with the 2015 FDA approval of two monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) - the anti-CD38 daratumumab and the anti-SLAMF7 elotuzumab. Daratumumab, in particular, has had a great impact on MM therapy and today is often included in various regimens to treat the disease, both in newly diagnosed cases and in the relapse/refractory setting. Recently, other immunotherapies have been added to the arsenal of drugs available to fight this malignancy. These include isatuximab (also anti-CD38) and, in the past year, the antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) belantamab mafodotin and the chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell product idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel). While the accumulated benefits of these newer agents have resulted in a doubling of the disease's five-year survival rate to more than 5 years and improved quality of life, the disease remains incurable. Almost without exception patients experience relapse and/or become refractory to the drugs used, making the search for innovative therapies all the more essential. This review covers the current scope of anti-myeloma immunotherapeutic agents, both those in clinical use and on the horizon, including naked mAbs, ADCs, bi- and multi-targeted mAbs, and CAR T-cells. Emphasis is placed on the benefits of each along with the challenges that need to be overcome if MM is to be considered curable in the future.

[PMID: 34625232]
Important advances in the treatment landscape of multiple myeloma (MM) had been seen over the past two decades leading to improved overall survival but despite the progress multiple myeloma is still considered incurable and the prognosis of the pentarefractory patients have been poor. The development of immunotherapy and in particular adoptive cell therapy with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells have dramatically improved the outcomes of heavily pretreated relapsed/refractory MM patients. The bulk of CAR T-cell constructs currently in clinical development target the B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA) and to date only idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel) is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for commercial use in adult patients with relapsed or refractory MM based on the promising clinical responses and positive safety record shown in the pivotal KarMMa study. This review focus on the development of CAR T-cell therapy for multiple myeloma as well as a brief review of the mechanisms of resistance, toxicity and new approaches under development.

[PMID: 33626253]
Idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel, also called bb2121), a B-cell maturation antigen-directed chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy, has shown clinical activity with expected CAR T-cell toxic effects in patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma. In this phase 2 study, we sought to confirm the efficacy and safety of ide-cel in patients with relapsed and refractory myeloma. Patients with disease after at least three previous regimens including a proteasome inhibitor, an immunomodulatory agent, and an anti-CD38 antibody were enrolled. Patients received ide-cel target doses of 150 × 10<sup>6</sup> to 450 × 10<sup>6</sup> CAR-positive (CAR+) T cells. The primary end point was an overall response (partial response or better); a key secondary end point was a complete response or better (comprising complete and stringent complete responses). Of 140 patients enrolled, 128 received ide-cel. At a median follow-up of 13.3 months, 94 of 128 patients (73%) had a response, and 42 of 128 (33%) had a complete response or better. Minimal residual disease (MRD)-negative status (<10<sup>-5</sup> nucleated cells) was confirmed in 33 patients, representing 26% of all 128 patients who were treated and 79% of the 42 patients who had a complete response or better. The median progression-free survival was 8.8 months (95% confidence interval, 5.6 to 11.6). Common toxic effects among the 128 treated patients included neutropenia in 117 patients (91%), anemia in 89 (70%), and thrombocytopenia in 81 (63%). Cytokine release syndrome was reported in 107 patients (84%), including 7 (5%) who had events of grade 3 or higher. Neurotoxic effects developed in 23 patients (18%) and were of grade 3 in 4 patients (3%); no neurotoxic effects higher than grade 3 occurred. Cellular kinetic analysis confirmed CAR+ T cells in 29 of 49 patients (59%) at 6 months and 4 of 11 patients (36%) at 12 months after infusion. Ide-cel induced responses in a majority of heavily pretreated patients with refractory and relapsed myeloma; MRD-negative status was achieved in 26% of treated patients. Almost all patients had grade 3 or 4 toxic effects, most commonly hematologic toxic effects and cytokine release syndrome. (Funded by bluebird bio and Celgene, a Bristol-Myers Squibb company; KarMMa ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03361748.).

[PMID: 33598857]
Registrational trials for ciltacabtagene autoleucel [cilta-cel]) and idecabtagene vicleucel [ide-cel] chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapies were single-arm studies conducted with relapse refractory multiple myeloma (MM) patients who were triple-class-exposed (TCE) or triple-class-refractory (TCR). It is critical for researchers conducting comparative effectiveness research (CER) to carefully consider the most appropriate data sources and comparable patient populations. The aim of this study was to identify potential data sources and populations for comparing to single-arm CAR-T trials CARTITUDE-1 (cilta-cel) and KarMMa (ide-cel). A 2-part global systematic literature search produced a review of (1) clinical trials of National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guideline preferred regimens in previously treated MM, and (2) real-world data cohorts of TCE or TCR populations, published between 1/1/2015 and 12/10/2020, with sample sizes of > 50 patients and reporting survival-related outcomes. Implications on CER and accepted best practices are discussed. Nine clinical trials of NCCN preferred regimens were identified along with five real-world data-based publications. No clinical trials evaluated patients with TCE or TCR MM. Among the real-world data-based publications, two evaluated patients exclusively with TCR MM, two analyzed a mixed population of patients with TCE or TCR MM, and one publication assessed patients exclusively with TCE MM. Real-world data treatment patterns were heterogeneous. Current NCCN preferred regimens were not specifically studied in TCE or TCR MM patients, although some studies do include a proportion of these types of patients. Therefore, appropriate matching of populations using either real-world data or patient level clinical trial data is critical to putting trials of novel CAR-Ts (i.e., CARTITUDE-1 or KarMMa) into appropriate comparative context.

[PMID: 34854741]
Idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel), a novel chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy targeting B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA), has recently gained approval by the US FDA for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM) after multicenter trials have demonstrated unprecedented results in this difficult-to-treat subgroup of patients. As the first CAR T-cell product approved for myeloma, ide-cel is poised to become a practice-changing treatment option. This first-in-class therapeutic offers hope for more durable remissions, as well as better quality of life, following a single infusion in a group of patients that previously had little hope. This paper reviews the ide-cel product in terms of design, pharmacology, efficacy and toxicity as described in studies reported to date.

[PMID: 34104374]
The development of several treatment options over the last 2 decades has led to a notable improvement in the survival of patients with multiple myeloma. Despite these advances, the disease remains incurable for most patients. Moreover, standard combinations of alkylating agents, immunomodulatory drugs, proteasome inhibitors, and monoclonal antibodies targeting CD38 and corticoids are exhausted relatively fast in a proportion of high-risk patients. Such high-risk patients account for over 20% of cases and currently represent a major unmet medical need. The challenge of drug resistance requires the development of highly active new agents with a radically different mechanism of action. Several immunotherapeutic modalities, including antibody-drug conjugates and T-cell engagers, appear to be promising choices for patients who develop resistance to standard combinations. Chimeric antigen-receptor-modified T cells (CAR-Ts) targeting B-cell maturation antigen have demonstrated encouraging efficacy and an acceptable safety profile compared with alternative options. Multiple CAR-Ts are in early stages of clinical development, but the first phase III trials with CAR-Ts are ongoing for two of them. After the recent publication of the results of a phase II trial confirming a notable efficacy and acceptable safety profile, idecabtagene vicleucel is the first CAR-T to gain regulatory US Food and Drug Administration approval to treat refractory multiple myeloma patients who have already been exposed to antibodies against CD38, proteasome inhibitors, and immunomodulatory agents and who are refractory to the last therapy. Here, we will discuss the preclinical and clinical development of idecabtagene vicleucel and its future role in the changing treatment landscape of relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma.

[PMID: 34145225]
Patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM) who are triple-class exposed (to an immunomodulatory agent, proteasome inhibitor, and anti-CD38 antibody) have limited treatment options and there is no standard of care. Idecabtagene vicleucel (ide-cel, bb2121), a BCMA-directed CAR T-cell therapy, demonstrated efficacy in triple-class exposed RRMM patients in the KarMMa trial (NCT03361748). In this retrospective study (KarMMa-RW), patient-level data from triple-class exposed RRMM patients were merged into a single data model and compared with KarMMa using trimmed stabilized inverse probability of treatment weighting. Endpoints included overall response rate (ORR; primary), rate of very good partial response or better (≥VGPR), progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS). Of 1949 real-world triple-class exposed RRMM patients, 190 received subsequent (index) line of therapy and met KarMMa eligibility criteria (Eligible RRMM cohort). With a median follow-up of 13.3 months in KarMMa and 10.2 months in Eligible RRMM, ORR, and ≥VGPR were significantly improved in KarMMa versus Eligible RRMM (ORR, 76.4% vs 32.2%; ≥VGPR, 57.9% vs 13.7%; both P < 0.0001) as were PFS (11.6 vs 3.5 months; P = 0.0004) and OS (20.2 vs 14.7 months; P = 0.0006). This study demonstrated that ide-cel significantly improved responses and survival compared with currently available therapies in triple-class exposed RRMM.