[PMID: 23446684]
To assess the 1-year safety profile of the dopaminergic stabilizer pridopidine in patients with Huntington disease. Patients received pridopidine 45 mg/day for 4 weeks then pridopidine 90 mg/day for 22 weeks in this 6-month open-label extension (OLE) of the 6-month MermaiHD randomized controlled trial (RCT). Any adverse events (AEs) were recorded. Patients were categorized by their RCT treatment group (placebo, pridopidine 45 mg/day, pridopidine 90 mg/day). Of the 386 patients who completed the RCT, 353 entered the OLE and 305 (86.4%) completed. In 1 year, similar percentages of patients from each group reported ≥1 AE (placebo, 79.6% [n = 90/113]; 45 mg/day, 80.8% [n = 101/125]; 90 mg/day, 82.6% [n = 95/115]) and ≥1 serious AE (8.0% [n = 9/113], 12.8% [n = 16/125], and 8.7% [n = 10/115], respectively). The AE profile across both studies was similar; falls and worsening of chorea were most commonly reported. During the OLE, more patients previously receiving pridopidine reported ≥1 AE (67.9% [n = 163/240]) than those who had received placebo (56.6% [n = 64/113]). Early in the RCT, small increases in heart rate were reported in patients receiving pridopidine. During 1 year, no clinically meaningful changes in laboratory parameters or EKG-related safety concerns were identified. Pridopidine (≤90 mg/day) has an acceptable safety profile and is well-tolerated for 1 year. This study provides Class IV evidence that pridopidine (≤90 mg/day) is generally safe and well-tolerated in patients with Huntington disease for up to 1 year.

[PMID: 21586914]
Huntington disease is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder resulting in loss of motor, cognitive, and behavioral functions and is characterized by a distinctive pattern of cerebral metabolic abnormalities. Pridopidine (ACR16) belongs to a novel class of central nervous system compounds in development for the treatment of Huntington disease. The objective of the study was to investigate the metabolic changes in patients with Huntington disease before and after pridopidine treatment. [(18)F]Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomographic imaging was used to measure the regional cerebral metabolic rate of glucose at baseline and after 14 days of open-label pridopidine treatment in 8 patients with Huntington disease. Clinical assessments were performed using the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale. Statistical parametric mapping analysis showed increased metabolic activity in several brain regions such as the precuneus and the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus after treatment. In addition, after pridopidine treatment, the correlation between the clinical status and the cerebral metabolic activity was strengthened. Our findings suggest that pridopidine induces metabolic changes in brain regions implicated as important for mediating compensatory mechanisms in Huntington disease. In addition, the finding of a strong relationship between clinical severity and metabolic activity after treatment also suggests that pridopidine treatment targets a Huntington disease-related metabolic activity pattern.

[PMID: 20667452]
Pridopidine (ACR16) belongs to a new pharmacological class of agents affecting the central nervous system called dopaminergic stabilizers. Dopaminergic stabilizers act primarily at dopamine type 2 (D(2)) receptors and display state-dependent behavioural effects. This article aims to give an overview of the preclinical neurochemical and behavioural in vivo pharmacological properties of pridopidine. Pridopidine was given s.c. to male Sprague-Dawley rats (locomotor, microdialysis and tissue neurochemistry) and i.p. to Swiss male mice (tail suspension test). Pridopidine dose-dependently increased striatal tissue levels of the dopamine metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanin (ED(50)=81 micromol/kg), and prefrontal cortex dialysate levels of dopamine and noradrenaline as measured by high performance liquid chromatography. The agent reduced hyperlocomotion (d-amphetamine: ED(50)=54 micromol/kg; MK-801: ED(50)=40 micromol/kg), but preserved spontaneous locomotor activity, confirming state-dependent behavioural effects. In addition, pridopidine significantly reduced immobility time in the tail suspension test. We conclude that pridopidine state-dependently stabilizes psychomotor activity by the dual actions of functional dopamine D(2) receptor antagonism and strengthening of cortical glutamate functions in various settings of perturbed neurotransmission. The putative restoration of function in cortico-subcortical circuitry by pridopidine is likely to make it useful for ameliorating several neurological and psychiatric disorders, including Huntington's disease.

[PMID: 20616707]
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the dopaminergic stabilizer pridopidine (ACR16) in patients with Huntington's disease (HD). In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 4-week trial, patients with HD received pridopidine (50 mg/d, n = 28) or placebo (n = 30). The primary outcome measure was the change from baseline in weighted cognitive score, assessed by cognitive tests (Symbol Digit Modalities, verbal fluency, and Stroop tests). Secondary outcome measures included changes in the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire, Reitan Trail-Making Test A, and Clinical Global Impression of Change. Safety assessments were also performed. There was no significant difference between pridopidine and placebo in the change from baseline of the weighted cognitive score. However, secondary measures such as affective symptoms showed trends toward improvement, and there was significant improvement in voluntary motor symptoms compared with placebo (P < 0.05). Pridopidine was well tolerated, with a safety profile similar to placebo. Pridopidine shows promise as a treatment for some of the symptoms of HD. In this small-scale study, the most notable effect was improvement in voluntary motor symptoms. Larger, longer-term trials are warranted.

[PMID: 22948856]
Pridopidine is being developed for the treatment of impaired motor function associated with Huntington's disease and belongs to a new class of compounds known as dopidines, which act as dopaminergic stabilizers. In vitro studies have shown that pridopidine is a substrate for the P450 cytochrome 2D6 enzyme (CYP2D6), and clinical data show that the half-life of pridopidine is different following single dosing versus at steady state. To further investigate the pharmacokinetic profile of pridopidine and to establish whether dose adjustment is needed in poor CYP2D6 metabolizers, a single-centre, open-label, multiple-dose study in healthy volunteers was performed. In total, 24 extensive CYP2D6 metabolizers (EMs) and 12 poor CYP2D6 metabolizers (PMs) were enrolled. Both groups received 45 mg pridopidine twice daily (b.i.d.). Plasma samples were taken during the first day of b.i.d. dosing (Day 1) and at steady state, following 14 days of b.i.d. dosing. At Day 1, total exposure in PMs was almost three times higher than those in EMs (AUC0-∞ = 11,192 and 3,782 h·ng/mL, respectively; PM/EM ratio = 2.96; p < 0.001). However, at steady state, PMs and EMs had comparable exposure due to a reduction in pridopidine elimination in EMs over time. Thus, at steady-state peak (C max) and total (AUC0-24) exposures were only 1.24 and 1.29 times higher, respectively, in PMs than EMs. These results support that pridopidine is a CYP2D6 auto-inhibitor. Pridopidine was well tolerated in both EMs and PMs. The slightly higher exposure level in PMs at steady state does not indicate a need for dose adjustment or genotyping for CYP2D6 metabolizer status.

[PMID: 22071279]
Huntington's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, characterised by motor, cognitive, and behavioural deficits. Pridopidine belongs to a new class of compounds known as dopaminergic stabilisers, and results from a small phase 2 study in patients with Huntington's disease suggested that this drug might improve voluntary motor function. We aimed to assess further the effects of pridopidine in patients with Huntington's disease. We undertook a 6 month, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to assess the efficacy of pridopidine in the treatment of motor deficits in patients with Huntington's disease. Our primary endpoint was change in the modified motor score (mMS; derived from the unified Huntington's disease rating scale) at 26 weeks. We recruited patients with Huntington's disease from 32 European centres; patients were aged 30 years or older and had an mMS of 10 points or greater at baseline. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive placebo, 45 mg per day pridopidine, or 90 mg per day pridopidine by use of centralised computer-generated codes. Patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment. We also assessed the safety and tolerability profile of pridopidine. For our primary analysis, all patients were eligible for inclusion in our full analysis set, in which we used the last observation carried forward method for missing values. We used an analysis of covariance model and the Bonferroni method to adjust for multiple comparisons. We used a prespecified per-protocol population as our sensitivity analysis. The α level was 0·025 for our primary analysis and 0·05 overall. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00665223. At 26 weeks, in our full analysis set the difference in mean mMS was -0·99 points (97·5% CI -2·08 to 0·10, p=0·042) in patients who received 90 mg per day pridopidine (n=145) versus those who received placebo (n=144), and -0·36 points (-1·44 to 0·72, p=0·456) in those who received 45 mg per day pridopidine (n=148) versus those who received placebo. At the 90 mg per day dose, in our per-protocol population (n=114), the reduction in the mMS was of -1·29 points (-2·47 to -0·12; p=0·014) compared with placebo (n=120). We did not identify any changes in non-motor endpoints at either dose. Pridopidine was well tolerated and had an adverse event profile similar to that of placebo. This study did not provide evidence of efficacy as measured by the mMS, but a potential effect of pridopidine on the motor phenotype of Huntington's disease merits further investigation. Pridopidine up to 90 mg per day was well tolerated in patients with Huntington's disease. NeuroSearch A/S.

[PMID: 22560595]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive motor, cognitive and psychiatric deficits, associated with predominant loss of striatal neurons and caused by a polyglutamine expansion in the huntingtin protein. There is so far neither cure nor approved disease-slowing therapy for HD, though recent clinical studies have shown a beneficial long-term effect of pridopidine in patients with HD. The nature of this effect, purely symptomatic or, in addition, neuroprotective, is difficult to elucidate in clinical trials. Pridopidine and (-)-OSU6162 are members of a new family of compounds referred to as dopaminergic stabilizers, which normalize abnormal dopamine neurotransmission. We investigated the effects of (-)-OSU6162 on huntingtin knocked-in striatal neurons in culture. Control neurons had normal full-length huntingtin with 7 glutamines while "mutant" neurons had large expansions (Q=111). We studied the dose-effect curves of (-)-OSU6162 on mitochondrial activity, LDH levels, necrosis and apoptosis in untreated Q7 and Q111 cells. In addition, we investigated the effects of (-)-OSU6162 on Q7 and Q111 neurons challenged with different neurotoxins such as sodium glutamate, H(2)O(2), rotenone and 3-nitropropionic acid (3NP). As we found prevention of toxicity of some of these neurotoxins, we investigated the putative neuroprotective mechanisms of action of (-)-OSU6162 measuring the effects of this dopaminergic stabilizer on expression and release of BDNF, the ratios of Bcl2/Bax proteins and of p-ERK/ERK, the levels of chaperones and GSH, and the effects of (-)-OSU6162 on dopamine uptake and release. We found that (-)-OSU6162, 3-150 μM, produces a dose dependent increase of mitochondrial activity and a reduction of cell death. (-)-OSU6162 does not change glutamate toxicity, but it partially prevents that of H(2)O(2), rotenone and 3-nitropropionic acid. (-)-OSU6162 increases the intracellular levels of BDNF and Bcl2/Bax and decreases those of p-ERK/ERK and CHIP in Q111 cells. (-)-OSU6162 increased (3)H-dopamine uptake and amphetamine-induced (3)H-dopamine release in E13 mouse mid brain neurons. Our studies demonstrate that (-)-OSU6162 improves survival and mitochondrial function in striatal Q111 neurons and the resistance of these cells to several striatal neurotoxins, suggesting that (-)-OSU6162 and related compounds should be tested for neuroprotection in animal models and, eventually, in patients with HD.

[PMID: 23450660]
We examined the effects of 3 dosages of pridopidine, a dopamine-stabilizing compound, on motor function and other features of Huntington's disease, with additional evaluation of its safety and tolerability. This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in outpatient neurology clinics at 27 sites in the United States and Canada. Two hundred twenty-seven subjects enrolled from October 24, 2009, to May 10, 2010. The intervention was pridopidine, either 20 (n=56), 45 (n=55), or 90 (n=58) mg daily for 12 weeks or matching placebo (n=58). The primary outcome measure was the change from baseline to week 12 in the Modified Motor Score, a subset of the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale Total Motor Score. Measures of safety and tolerability included adverse events and trial completion on the assigned dosage. After 12 weeks, the treatment effect (relative to placebo, where negative values indicate improvement) of pridopidine 90 mg/day on the Modified Motor Score was -1.2 points (95% confidence interval [CI], -2.5 to 0.1 points; P = .08). The effect on the Total Motor Score was -2.8 points (95% CI, -5.4 to -0.1 points; nominal P = .04). No significant effects were seen in secondary outcome measures with any of the active dosages. Pridopidine was generally well tolerated. Although the primary analysis did not demonstrate a statistically significant treatment effect, the overall results suggest that pridopidine may improve motor function in Huntington's disease. The 90 mg/day dosage appears worthy of further study. Pridopidine was well tolerated.

[PMID: 23468085]
The dopaminergic stabilizer pridopidine demonstrates state-dependent effects on locomotor activity, counteracting both hypo- and hyperactivity in rats. Pridopidine has been shown to display both functional dopamine D2 receptor antagonist properties and increase in biomarkers associated with NMDA-mediated glutamate transmission in the frontal cortex. To further characterise the effects of pridopidine on prefrontal cortex (PFC) neurons, a series of in vivo electrophysiological studies were performed in urethane-anaesthetised rats. Pridopidine, administered at doses from 10 to 60 mg/kg (i.v.), dose dependently increased pyramidal cell firing in the majority of the neurons tested. Pridopidine induced a significant increase of 162 % in mean firing activity of PFC neurons, versus initial basal firing activity as the cumulative dose of 30 mg/kg, i.v., was administered. This enhancement of activity was due to increased firing frequency of already spontaneously active neurons, rather than an increase in population activity. The increase was partially reversed or prevented by a sub-threshold dose of the dopamine D1 receptor antagonist SCH23390 (0.5 mg/kg, i.v.). Microiontophoretic application of pridopidine had only moderate activating effects. The selective dopamine D1 receptor agonist A-68930 also had limited effects when administered by microiontophoretic application, but exerted a dose dependent (0.2-3 mg/kg, i.v.) activation of firing in the majority of neurons tested (10/16). However, inhibition of firing by systemic administration of A-68930 was also observed in a subgroup of neurons (6/16). Both activation and inhibition of firing induced by systemic administration of A-68930 were reversed by the systemic administration of SCH23390. The present data suggests that pridopidine enhances pyramidal cell firing via an indirect dopamine D1 receptor-mediated mechanism. These effects of pridopidine may serve to strengthen the cortico-striatal communication and to improve motor control in Huntington's disease for which pridopidine is currently in development.

[PMID: 20373247]
The CHDI Fifth Annual HD Therapeutics Conference, held in Palm Springs, CA, included topics covering new therapeutic developments in the field of Huntington's disease (HD). This conference report highlights presentations on biomarkers in HD; emerging topics in drug targeting, such as the lysosomal degradation pathway and target prediction by network-based modeling; understanding phenotype and neuronal circuit dysfunction in animal models; regulation of huntingtin protein expression and function; RNAi and antisense technology to deplete the mutant huntingtin protein; and small-molecule drugs that are progressing quickly through the clinic. Investigational drugs discussed include ALN-HTT (Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc/Medtronic Inc), EPI-743 (Edison Pharmaceuticals Inc), LNK-754 (Link Medicine Corp) and pridopidine (NeuroSearch A/S).