[PMID: 25636632]
Falls due to hypoglycaemia in the elderly is usually a complication of diabetic treatment. In the absence of diabetes, hypoglycaemia may be due to insulin or insulin-like producing tumours. The Doege-Potter syndrome is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome, characterised by non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia (NICTH) secondary to a solitary fibrous tumour that secretes insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 2. Definitive treatment of hypoglycaemia due to NICTH is by tumour resection. Our patient was a 78-year-old woman admitted after a fall with a facial injury and a history of significant weight loss. Her blood sugar was persistently low despite intravenous dextrose infusion. CT of the thorax revealed a large heterogeneous mass measuring 11.6×16.3×15.6 cm in the right hemithorax. A biopsy of the mass was reported as a solitary fibrous tumour. Biochemical investigations revealed low insulin, C-peptide, IGF-1 and a high IGF-2:IGF-1 ratio, consistent with NICTH. The patient underwent tumour resection and the hypoglycaemia normalised completely immediately after surgery.

[PMID: 27376978]
Doege-Potter syndrome is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by tumor-associated hypoglycemia secondary to a solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura. We present a case of an 84-year-old man, who presented with acute mental confusion and therapy-resistant hypoglycemia. Diagnostic imaging revealed a large sharply defined pleural tumor based on the left diaphragm, after surgical resection the diagnosis was made of a malignant solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura and restoration of the glucose homeostasis was observed.

[PMID: 23302323]
Doege-Potter syndrome is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by non-islet cell tumor hypoglycemia secondary to a solitary fibrous tumor. This tumor causes hypoglycemia by the secretion of a prohormone form of insulin-like growth factor II. We describe the diagnosis and management of Doege-Potter syndrome and the use of transarterial chemoembolization in a patient with a malignant extrapleural solitary fibrous tumor. Our patient was a 64-year-old Caucasian woman who initially presented with urinary incontinence and was found to have a 14.5×9.0×9.0cm retroperitoneal solitary fibrous tumor compressing her bladder. Her tumor was surgically resected but recurred with multiple hepatic metastatic lesions. The hepatic metastases progressed despite systemic chemotherapy and treatment with doxorubicin transarterial chemoembolization. Her course was complicated by the development of recurrent fasting hypoglycemia, most likely secondary to Doege-Potter syndrome. Her hypoglycemia was managed with corticosteroid therapy and frequent scheduled nutrient intake overnight. The rarity of hepatic solitary fibrous tumors and consequent lack of controlled trials make this report significant in that it describes the diagnostic approach to Doege-Potter syndrome, describes our experience with the use of doxorubicin transarterial chemoembolization, and presents management options for tumor-associated hypoglycemia in the case of extensive disease not amenable to surgical resection.

[PMID: 28784156]
Solitary fibrous tumors of the pleura (SFTPs) are relatively rare tumors that originate from mesenchymal cells of submesothelial tissue of the pleura. Most patients with SFTPs are asymptomatic; however, pleuritic chest pain, cough, and dyspnea can develop. If hypoglycemia is associated with a solitary fibrous tumor, it is referred to as the Doege-Potter syndrome. A 70-year-old man had visited our hospital with a chief complaint of dyspnea, and he was diagnosed as having a solitary fibrous tumor. A few years later, he developed hypoglycemia, and he underwent excision of the mass. Occasionally, SFTPs induce several paraneoplastic events, such as hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. We described here a patient with an SFTP with Doege-Potter syndrome who was successfully treated with complete resection. Although lesions can be histologically benign, they can clinically present with malignant features.

[PMID: 27932370]
Solitary fibrous tumour of the pleura (SFTP) is a rare primary tumour of the pleura associated with 4% of cases with a paraneoplastic hypoglycaemia, termed Doege-Potter syndrome (DPS). We report a case of DPS presenting with severe coma in a 90-year-old woman. The cause was a malignant SFTP treated with surgical resection, from which the patient made a full recovery with prevention of recurrent hypoglycaemia. Surgical resection of the SFTP presenting with symptomatic hypoglycaemia should be considered even in elderly patients.

[PMID: 28523334]
Doege-Potter syndrome is a rare condition consisting of a mesenchymal tumor, either benign or malignant, accompanied by severe hypoglycemia. The syndrome was first described independently by two American physicians, Karl Walter Doege (1867-1932) and Roy Pilling Potter (1879-1968), in 1930, but it was not before 1988 that it was associated with non-islet cell tumor production of insulin growth factor (IGF) that induces hypoglycemia as a paraneoplastic syndrome. We present the case of a 61-year-old woman with severe hypoglycemia that induced seizures. On the general check-up, a massive tumor occupying the lower part of left hemi-thorax was discovered. Initially, corticosteroids, glucose i.v. and high carbohydrate diet managed to prevent the severe blood glucose drop. Surgery exposed a massive well-defined pleural tumor. After surgical removal, blood glucose stabilized. Histological examination confirmed the fibrous tumor that proved to be malignant on immunochemistry. The authors discuss other cases reported in the literature of this rare condition and its pathogenic mechanisms, the presented case being the first reported in Romania. The clinician should be aware of the possible existence of a pleural tumor in a patient presenting an unexplained hypoglycemia because the surgical removal of the tumor can solve the clinical manifestations.

[PMID: 28228892]
We report a rare case of metastatic malignant solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) that presented with hypoglycemia because of insulin growth factor-2 production. Initial workup included computed tomography imaging that revealed a large, partially necrotic liver mass, a hypervascular pancreatic head lesion, and 2 renal lesions. Following hepatic resection, pancreatic head resection and nephrectomy, all these lesions demonstrated pathological findings that were consistent with SFT. The patient also had a history of an intracranial mass that had been previously resected and treated with gamma knife therapy at an outside institution, which was found to also be SFT. Six months after initial pancreatic head resection, the patient developed a new lesion involving the pancreatic tail that was found to represent recurrent metastatic SFT. This case emphasizes the highly aggressive nature of extrapleural SFT, while rare, and the role of imaging in follow-up for disease recurrence.

[PMID: 28109372]
We describe a patient with Doege-Potter syndrome (solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura presenting with hypoglycemia) and illustrate several important lessons learned from the case. Seven years after the initial diagnosis, the tumor showed significant growth and developed a high-grade undifferentiated component. Solitary fibrous tumors do grow and cannot be deemed benign. Resection should be considered in all patients who are candidates for operation upon diagnosis. Our case also serves as a reminder of this rare syndrome, inasmuch as early recognition of the association of hypoglycemia with these tumors may have allowed for earlier diagnosis and avoidance of extensive tests in our patient.

[PMID: 22206790]
Syndrome Doege-Potter is a paraneoplastic syndrome in which hypoglycemia is the result of tumors producing insulin growth factor-like (IGF-II) it is most often solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura (TFSP). These are rare and may be discovered incidentally, during non-specific respiratory symptoms or during hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia occurs in tumors of large volume and it disappears after surgery, which is the treatment of choice for a permanent cure in most cases. We present a case of Doege-Potter syndrome whose interest is to consider the TFSP as a cause of hypoglycemia in patients with pleural tumors.

[PMID: 28410845]
Doege-Potter syndrome is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by non-islet cell tumor hypoglycemia secondary to a solitary fibrous tumor. These tumors are rare and usually asymptomatic. The syndrome of hypoglycemia is seen in less than 5% of the cases, and the associated tumors are large with a high mitotic rate. The cause of hypoglycemia is related to insulin-like growth factors produced by these tumors called "big" IGF-2. Several biological tests can demonstrate the increase of "big" IGF-2 plasma levels confirming the diagnosis of non-islet cell tumor induced hypoglycemia. The diagnosis is suggested by imaging but diagnostic confirmation is provided by the surgery, which remains the treatment of choice. Resection in many cases is the cure leading to hypoglycemia resolution. Recurrences and malignant transformations are possible which imposes a long-term monitoring. We report a case with relapsed malignant pleural fibrous tumor for which the pathophysiological mechanism of hypoglycemia could be documented as a paraneoplastic syndrome.