[PMID: 24055153]
The classical X shape of mitotic human chromosomes is the consequence of two distinct waves of cohesin removal. First, during prophase and prometaphase, the bulk of cohesin is driven from chromosome arms by the cohesin antagonist WAPL. This arm-specific cohesin removal is referred to as the prophase pathway [1-4]. The subsequent cleavage of the remaining centromeric cohesin by Separase is known to be the trigger for anaphase onset [5-7]. Remarkably the biological purpose of the prophase pathway is unknown. We find that this pathway is essential for two key mitotic processes. First, it is important to focus Aurora B at centromeres to allow efficient correction of erroneous microtubule-kinetochore attachments. In addition, it is required to facilitate the timely decatenation of sister chromatids. As a consequence, WAPL-depleted cells undergo anaphase with segregation errors, including both lagging chromosomes and catenanes, resulting in micronuclei and DNA damage. Stable WAPL depletion arrests cells in a p53-dependent manner but causes p53-deficient cells to become highly aneuploid. Our data show that the WAPL-dependent prophase pathway is essential for proper chromosome segregation and is crucial to maintain genomic integrity.

[PMID: 27797072]
During the cell cycle, duplicated sister chromatids become physically connected during S phase through a process called sister-chromatid cohesion. Cohesion is terminated during the metaphase-to-anaphase transition to trigger sister-chromatid segregation. The establishment and dissolution of cohesion are highly regulated by the cohesin complex and its multitude of regulators. In particular, the cohesin regulator Wapl promotes the release of cohesin from chromosomes during both interphase and mitosis. Here, we describe in vitro protein binding assays between Wapl and a cohesin subcomplex, and cellular assays in human cells that probe the functions of Wapl in cohesin release.

[PMID: 17141150]
Sister chromatids are held together by the cohesin complex from the time they are made until cell division. In recent articles published in Cell and Current Biology, the characterization of Wapl, a newly identified cohesin-interacting protein, suggests that a dynamic interaction between the cohesin complex and chromatin is important for normal regulation of sister chromatid cohesion.

[PMID: 29447171]
The cohesin complex topologically encircles chromosomes and mediates sister chromatid cohesion to ensure accurate chromosome segregation upon cell division. Cohesin also participates in DNA repair and gene transcription. The Nipped-B-Mau2 protein complex loads cohesin onto chromosomes and the Pds5-Wapl complex removes cohesin. Pds5 is also essential for sister chromatid cohesion, indicating that it has functions beyond cohesin removal. The Brca2 DNA repair protein interacts with Pds5, but the roles of this complex beyond DNA repair are unknown. Here we show that Brca2 opposes Pds5 function in sister chromatid cohesion by assaying precocious sister chromatid separation in metaphase spreads of cultured cells depleted for these proteins. By genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation we find that Pds5 facilitates SA cohesin subunit association with DNA replication origins and that Brca2 inhibits SA binding, mirroring their effects on sister chromatid cohesion. Cohesin binding is maximal at replication origins and extends outward to occupy active genes and regulatory sequences. Pds5 and Wapl, but not Brca2, limit the distance that cohesin extends from origins, thereby determining which active genes, enhancers and silencers bind cohesin. Using RNA-seq we find that Brca2, Pds5 and Wapl influence the expression of most genes sensitive to Nipped-B and cohesin, largely in the same direction. These findings demonstrate that Brca2 regulates sister chromatid cohesion and gene expression in addition to its canonical role in DNA repair and expand the known functions of accessory proteins in cohesin's diverse functions.

[PMID: 29217591]
Mammalian genomes are spatially organized into compartments, topologically associating domains (TADs), and loops to facilitate gene regulation and other chromosomal functions. How compartments, TADs, and loops are generated is unknown. It has been proposed that cohesin forms TADs and loops by extruding chromatin loops until it encounters CTCF, but direct evidence for this hypothesis is missing. Here, we show that cohesin suppresses compartments but is required for TADs and loops, that CTCF defines their boundaries, and that the cohesin unloading factor WAPL and its PDS5 binding partners control the length of loops. In the absence of WAPL and PDS5 proteins, cohesin forms extended loops, presumably by passing CTCF sites, accumulates in axial chromosomal positions (vermicelli), and condenses chromosomes. Unexpectedly, PDS5 proteins are also required for boundary function. These results show that cohesin has an essential genome-wide function in mediating long-range chromatin interactions and support the hypothesis that cohesin creates these by loop extrusion, until it is delayed by CTCF in a manner dependent on PDS5 proteins, or until it is released from DNA by WAPL.

[PMID: 28424523]
Mammalian genomes are spatially organized by CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin into chromatin loops and topologically associated domains, which have important roles in gene regulation and recombination. By binding to specific sequences, CTCF defines contact points for cohesin-mediated long-range chromosomal cis-interactions. Cohesin is also present at these sites, but has been proposed to be loaded onto DNA elsewhere and to extrude chromatin loops until it encounters CTCF bound to DNA. How cohesin is recruited to CTCF sites, according to this or other models, is unknown. Here we show that the distribution of cohesin in the mouse genome depends on transcription, CTCF and the cohesin release factor Wings apart-like (Wapl). In CTCF-depleted fibroblasts, cohesin cannot be properly recruited to CTCF sites but instead accumulates at transcription start sites of active genes, where the cohesin-loading complex is located. In the absence of both CTCF and Wapl, cohesin accumulates in up to 70 kilobase-long regions at 3'-ends of active genes, in particular if these converge on each other. Changing gene expression modulates the position of these 'cohesin islands'. These findings indicate that transcription can relocate mammalian cohesin over long distances on DNA, as previously reported for yeast cohesin, that this translocation contributes to positioning cohesin at CTCF sites, and that active genes can be freed from cohesin either by transcription-mediated translocation or by Wapl-mediated release.

[PMID: 17112726]
The linkage between duplicated chromosomes (sister chromatids) is established during S phase by the action of cohesin, a multisubunit complex conserved from yeast to humans. Most cohesin dissociates from chromosome arms when the cell enters mitotic prophase, leading to the formation of metaphase chromosomes with two cytologically discernible chromatids. This process is known as sister-chromatid resolution. Although two mitotic kinases have been implicated in this process, it remains unknown exactly how the cohesin-mediated linkage is destabilized at a mechanistic level. The wings apart-like (Wapl) protein was originally identified as a gene product that potentially regulates heterochromatin organization in Drosophila melanogaster. We show that the human ortholog of Wapl is a cohesin-binding protein that facilitates cohesin's timely release from chromosome arms during prophase. Depletion of Wapl from HeLa cells causes transient accumulation of prometaphase-like cells with chromosomes that display poorly resolved sister chromatids with a high level of cohesin. Reduction of cohesin relieves the Wapl-depletion phenotype, and depletion of Wapl rescues premature sister separation observed in Sgo1-depleted or Esco2-depleted cells. Conversely, overexpression of Wapl causes premature separation of sister chromatids. Wapl physically associates with cohesin in HeLa-cell nuclear extracts. Remarkably, in vitro reconstitution experiments demonstrate that Wapl forms a stoichiometric, ternary complex with two regulatory subunits of cohesin, implicating its noncatalytic function in inactivating cohesin's ability to interact with chromatin. Wapl is a new regulator of sister chromatid resolution and promotes release of cohesin from chromosomes by directly interacting with its regulatory subunits.

[PMID: 23034634]
Wapl protein regulates binding of the cohesin complex to chromosomes during interphase and helps remove cohesin from chromosomes at mitosis. We isolated a dominant mutation in wapl (wapl(AG)) in a screen for mutations that counteract silencing mediated by an engrailed Polycomb-group response element. wapl(AG) hemizygotes die as pharate adults and have an extra sex combs phenotype characteristic of males with mutations in Polycomb-group (PcG) genes. The wapl gene encodes two proteins, a long form and a short form. wapl(AG) introduces a stop codon at amino acid 271 of the long form and produces a truncated protein. The expression of a transgene encoding the truncated Wapl-AG protein causes an extra-sex-comb phenotype similar to that seen in the wapl(AG) mutant. Mutations in the cohesin-associated genes Nipped-B and pds5 suppress and enhance wapl(AG) phenotypes, respectively. A Pds5-Wapl complex (releasin) removes cohesin from DNA, while Nipped-B loads cohesin. This suggests that Wapl-AG might exert its effects through changes in cohesin binding. Consistent with this model, Wapl-AG was found to increase the stability of cohesin binding to polytene chromosomes. Our data suggest that increasing cohesin stability interferes with PcG silencing at genes that are co-regulated by cohesin and PcG proteins.

[PMID: 17113138]
Cohesin establishes sister-chromatid cohesion from S phase until mitosis or meiosis. To allow chromosome segregation, cohesion has to be dissolved. In vertebrate cells, this process is mediated in part by the protease separase, which destroys a small amount of cohesin, but most cohesin is removed from chromosomes without proteolysis. How this is achieved is poorly understood. Here, we show that the interaction between cohesin and chromatin is controlled by Wapl, a protein implicated in heterochromatin formation and tumorigenesis. Wapl is associated with cohesin throughout the cell cycle, and its depletion blocks cohesin dissociation from chromosomes during the early stages of mitosis and prevents the resolution of sister chromatids until anaphase, which occurs after a delay. Wapl depletion also increases the residence time of cohesin on chromatin in interphase. Our data indicate that Wapl is required to unlock cohesin from a particular state in which it is stably bound to chromatin.

[PMID: 28475897]
The spatial organization of chromosomes influences many nuclear processes including gene expression. The cohesin complex shapes the 3D genome by looping together CTCF sites along chromosomes. We show here that chromatin loop size can be increased and that the duration with which cohesin embraces DNA determines the degree to which loops are enlarged. Cohesin's DNA release factor WAPL restricts this loop extension and also prevents looping between incorrectly oriented CTCF sites. We reveal that the SCC2/SCC4 complex promotes the extension of chromatin loops and the formation of topologically associated domains (TADs). Our data support the model that cohesin structures chromosomes through the processive enlargement of loops and that TADs reflect polyclonal collections of loops in the making. Finally, we find that whereas cohesin promotes chromosomal looping, it rather limits nuclear compartmentalization. We conclude that the balanced activity of SCC2/SCC4 and WAPL enables cohesin to correctly structure chromosomes.