[PMID: 28337457]
Health care workers (HCW) are particularly at risk of acquiring tuberculosis (TB), even in countries with low TB incidence. Therefore, TB screening in HCW is a useful prevention strategy in countries with both low and high TB incidence. Tuberculin skin test (TST) is widely used although it suffers of low specificity; on the contrary, the in vitro enzyme immunoassay tests (IGRA) show superior specificity and sensitivity but are more expensive. The present study reports the results of a three-year TB surveillance among HCW in a large teaching hospital in Rome, using TST (by standard Mantoux technique) and IGRA (by QuantiFERON-TB) as first- and second-level screening tests, respectively. Out of 2290 HCW enrolled, 141 (6.1%) had a positive TST; among them, 99 (70.2%) underwent the IGRA and 16 tested positive (16.1%). The frequency of HCW tested positive for TB seems not far from other experiences in low incidence countries. Our results confirm the higher specificity of IGRA, but, due to its higher cost, TST can be considered a good first level screening test, whose positive results should be further confirmed by IGRA before the patients undergo X-ray diagnosis and/or chemotherapy.

[PMID: 12238571]
In order to determine the prevalence of latent infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis in drug users and to provide centres for drug users with a practical tool for tuberculosis screening, 237 drug users were subjected to the Monotest and, for reference purposes, to the Mantoux test. The overall prevalence of subjects with a tuberculin skin reaction size > or = 5 mm in the Mantoux test was 25.7%; utilizing a cut-off of > or = 10 mm, the prevalence was 11.4%. Irrespective of cut-off, the Monotest showed a sensitivity of > 90% and a specificity of > 80%. At a prevalence of 25.7%, and with cut-offs of > or = 5 or > or = 10 mm, the positive predictive value was 83% or 62.2%, respectively. Irrespective of cut-off, the negative predictive value was > 97%. In conclusion, the Monotest proved satisfactory as a tool for epidemiological screening in a population with a high prevalence for latent tuberculosis, namely drug users.

[PMID: 27187878]
Diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) is difficult, since symptoms are often very unspecific or lacking. However active, prompt and accurate diagnosis is the key element in the public health response to tuberculosis and the cornerstone of tuberculosis control. Different diagnostic methods for an assured diagnosis of TB are necessary. Chest radiography is a useful keystone to identify tuberculosis, but diagnosis of tuberculosis cannot be established by radiography alone. CT scanning is used in patients without pathological chest radiography but clinically suspected active TB and to differentiate TB from other diseases. Radiological appearance is primarily determined by the immune status of patients and caverns and disseminated disease foci are often observed. Laboratory diagnostic methods include microscopic identification of acid-fast mycobacteria from any body fluid (especially sputum), as well as isolation and characterisation of mycobacteria in culture. It is then possible to type the pathogens by the shape of their colony, their growth behavior and their biochemical characteristics. These methods are regarded as the gold standard in diagnosis of active TB. In patients who are highly suspected of having TB, but whose sputum specimens tested negative for mycobacteria, a nucleic acid amplification test is additionally performed. Moreover, sensitivity testing with first and second line antitubercular drugs is applied as standard. Laboratory diagnostic testing of cellular immunity against pathogenic mycobacteria employs the tuberculin skin test (TST, Mantoux tuberculin test) or the more specific interferon γ test to determine γ interferon released by T lymphocytes stimulated in vitro. The new ELISA and ELISPOT procedures exhibit higher test specificity and less cross reactivity to NTM (non-tuberculosis mycobacteria), are independent of BCG-vaccination status and correlate better with the degree of exposure than does the TST.

[PMID: 16307510]
Tuberculosis is responsible for more then 2 million deaths worldwide each year and vies with HIV as the world's most fatal infectious disease. In many developing countries, attempts to control the spread of infection rely solely on identification and treatment of those with active disease, ignoring subclinical infection. However, in developed countries, large efforts are also expended to identify and give prophylactic drugs to people with latent tuberculosis infection. Until recently, the 100-year-old tuberculin skin test (Mantoux) has been the only available diagnostic test for latent tuberculosis infection, despite its many well-known limitations. Advances in scientific knowledge have led to the development of tests for tuberculosis that measure the production of interferon-gamma by T-cells stimulated in vitro with Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific antigens. These interferon-gamma tests are highly specific and unaffected by prior Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination or immune reactivity to most atypical mycobacteria. They are more sensitive than the tuberculin skin test in detecting people with active tuberculosis, and their results correlate more closely with M. tuberculosis exposure risk factors than the tuberculin skin test in people likely to have latent tuberculosis infection. Science has caught up with one of the oldest diagnostic tests still in use worldwide, and the adoption of new, tuberculosis-specific interferon-gamma-based tests should move us one step closer to better control of this insidious pathogen.

[PMID: 27529924]
In Russia, an intradermal Diaskintest® drug has been designed, which is a recombinant tuberculosis allergen based on M. tuberculosis-- specific proteins: ESAT-6 and CFP-10 produced by a genetically modified Escherichia coli culture. Diaskintest® test and Mantoux test with 2TE PPD-L were concurrently carried out in 300 children and adolescents with tuberculosis and followed up in risk groups at a tuberculosis dispensary to determine the sensitivity of the new skin test in active tuberculosis infection. Diaskintest® showed a high sensitivity not only in active tuberculosis, but also in occult, the so-called latent, tuberculosis infection. This is suggested by the following evidence. The high percentage (83.8%) of positive responses to Diaskintest® is noted in children and adolescents with tuberculosis, receiving an intensive course of chemotherapy. Negative tests were observed only in minor forms at the resolution stage. In the children who had completed treatment, positive tests were seen in 78.3%, moreover in those with prior tuberculosis of intrathoracic lymph nodes; negative tests were observed not earlier than 18 months after start of treatment. The highest sensitivity of Diaskintest® was shown in children with early primary tuberculosis infection and through family contact with bacteria-excreting subjects (91.7%). These children may be judged with the highest assurance to have latent tuberculosis infection, the population of which is in an active state at the moment of the study. The children with early primary tuberculosis infection, but in no family contact with bacteria-excreting individuals, showed a lower percentage of positive responses to Diaskintest® both before (37.5%) and after (10%) treatment, which suggests that there must be a lower bacterial burden in the child. A high percentage of positive responses to Diaskintest® (76.2%) were found in subjects with hyperergic reactions to tuberculin. These were in only 16.7% in the group of patients receiving preventive therapy. In children and adolescents with a persistent positive Mantoux test (for more than 3 years), the response to Diaskintest® was negative in most cases since in early infection when mycobacteria propagated, the reaction to the drug was positive, but as 3 years pass the probability of the infection transition to the persistence stage is high--at that time the response to Diaskintest® becomes negative. Diaskintest® induces no delayed hypersensitivity associated with BCG vaccination, suggesting its high specificity. There were no positive reactions in patients with nonspecific lung diseases.

[PMID: 17663901]
To demonstrate the importance of preventive measures when a case of tuberculosis is detected, identify the causes that favored a tuberculosis outbreak in a school and determine the efficiency of obtaining induced sputum samples. Descriptive, study. The Santa Maria de la Providencia school, located in the municipality of Alcala de Henares in Spain. On April 11, 2005, a case of bacilliform pulmonary tuberculosis was notified in a teacher. Study of contacts in the collective was performed as a programmed intervention. Mantoux skin test and, if positive, chest radiograph were performed in contacts. Treatment of latent or active tuberculosis was recommended according to the result. School exposures were identified and underwent the Mantoux skin test (142 students in years 1, 2, 3, and 4 of compulsory secondary education and 22 teachers). The Mantoux test was positive in 68 students (48 %) and seven teachers (32 %). In seven students with results compatible with active tuberculosis disease, sputum induction was performed and treatment was started. A further two students, identified as contacts, were studied in another center and also started treatment for active tuberculosis disease. Due to the high risk of contagion, study of contacts was extended to the remaining students in compulsory secondary education. In this second phase, 134 students received the Mantoux skin test and seven were Mantoux positive (5.2 %). In all these students, active tuberculosis disease was ruled out. Latent tuberculosis treatment was recommended in all Mantoux-positive contacts.

[PMID: 11089393]
Detection of latent tuberculosis infection is an important step in the control of tuberculosis. The tuberculin skin test is the only proven method for identifying tuberculosis infection in patients who do not have tuberculosis disease. The prevalence of tuberculosis infection among hospitalized patients in a pneumological department of an inner-city hospital was evaluated, using the intradermal tuberculin skin test (Mantoux technique). Interpretation of the Mantoux test was based on the size of induration in millimeters and the individual risk profile of the patients, according to the guidelines of the American Thoracic Society and the Centers for Disease Control, revised in 1989. Of 697 tested patients, 252 showed test results consistent with tuberculosis infection (36.2%). 55 of these 697 patients had active tuberculosis disease or a prior history of tuberculosis (7.9%). A positive tuberculin skin test was found in 197 of 642 patients (30.7%) with a diagnosis different from tuberculosis (COPD, pneumonia, cancer and others). In our study, the sensitivity of the tuberculin skin test for active tuberculosis infection was 95%. The present study revealed a high prevalence of tuberculosis infection among hospitalized patients in a pneumological department. Further studies are needed to assess the usefulness of routine tuberculin skin testing in hospitalized populations.

[PMID: 28276801]
Minors with a stated age <18 years unaccompanied by a responsible adult form an increasing part of refugees to Europe. They are older than other asylum-seeking children and many come from countries with a high tuberculosis (TB) incidence. During the 2015 refugee crisis, 35,369 of 162,877 refugees (22%) seeking asylum in Sweden were unaccompanied minors, which gave us the opportunity to study their burden of TB infection and disease. Of the unaccompanied minors seeking asylum in Sweden during 2015, 2936 (8.3%) were allocated to northern Stockholm. Of these, 2422 were from countries with an incidence of TB exceeding 100/10<sup>5</sup>, and were screened for TB infection with a Mantoux tuberculin skin test or a QuantiFERON-TB Gold®. Those from countries with a lower TB incidence were screened only if they had other risk factors for TB exposure. Of those screened, 349 had a positive test and were referred to the northern paediatric TB clinic at Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital. Of these, 16 had TB disease and 278 latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI), while we considered 53 uninfected. In addition, eight sought medical attention with symptomatic TB outside the screening system. Cohort rates were 6.8% of LTBI and 0.5% of TB in minors from Afghanistan and 26-32% of LTBI and 3.4-3.5% of TB among those from Eritrea, Ethiopia or Somalia. We conclude that TB infection and disease is common among asylum-seeking unaccompanied minors, especially among those from the Horn of Africa.

[PMID: 25401733]
The nationwide prevalence of latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) in Italian patients with psoriasis has never been investigated. To estimate the nationwide prevalence of LTBI in Italian patients with psoriasis who are candidates for systemic treatment. Data were obtained from the Psocare Registry on those patients (n = 4946) with age > 18 years, systemic treatment at entry specified and tuberculin skin test (TST) performed according to the Mantoux method. LTBI diagnosis was based on a positive TST result in the absence of any clinical, radiological or microbiological evidence of active tuberculosis. Latent tuberculosis infection was diagnosed in 8·3% of patients with psoriasis (409 of 4946). The prevalence of LTBI was lower in patients on biologics than in those on conventional systemic treatments, ranging from 4·3% (19 of 444) of patients on adalimumab to 31% (eight of 26) of those on psoralen-ultraviolet A (P < 0·05). Independent factors associated with LTBI were male sex [odds ratio (OR) 1·30, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1·04-1·62; P = 0·02], age over 55 years (OR 2·93, 95% CI 2·18-3·93; P < 0·001) and being entered into a conventional treatment (OR 3·83, 95% CI 3·10-4·74; P < 0·001). Positive history of tuberculosis was seen in 1% of patients (n = 49). The nationwide prevalence of LTBI in Italian patients with psoriasis candidate to systemic treatment is high, and screening is recommended prior to biological treatment.

[PMID: 21822042]
Patients receiving tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors for the treatment of rheumatic diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis) are at high risk of developing tuberculosis during treatment. This article gives the recommendations for the prevention and management of tuberculosis in patients with rheumatic diseases before initiating therapy with tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors. They are adapted considering the high prevalence of tuberculosis, high drug resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and extensive bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination against tuberculosis in Lithuania. In order to reduce the risk of tuberculosis, the screening should be done before starting antitumor necrosis factor alpha therapy. This includes complete medical history and posterior-anterior, lateral chest radiography. Tuberculin skin test using the Mantoux method with 5 tuberculin units and interferon-gamma release assay should be performed in patients without posttuberculous radiological lesions. If Ghon's complex or untreated posttuberculous lesions are present, or if the results the Mantoux test or interferon-gamma release assay are positive, the patient should be treated for latent tuberculosis. For the treatment of latent tuberculosis, isoniazid and rifampicin are given for 3 months, and the introduction of antitumor necrosis factor alpha therapy is delayed at least for one month. In cases of suspected active Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, tuberculosis should be confirmed microbiologically or morphologically, and adequate antituberculosis treatment should be initiated.