[PMID: 9389696]
A French kindred with autosomal dominant hereditary renal amyloidosis was found to have a novel mutation in the fibrinogen Aalpha-chain gene. In this kindred, renal disease appeared early in life and led to terminal renal failure at an early age. Renal transplantation resulted in rapid destruction of the allograft by amyloid deposition within 2 years. Amyloid fibril protein isolated from a transplanted kidney was found to contain a novel, hybrid peptide of 49 residues whose N-terminal 23 amino acids were identical to residues 499 to 521 of normal fibrinogen Aalpha-chain. The remainder of the peptide (26 residues) represented a completely new sequence for mammalian proteins. DNA sequencing documented that the new sequence was the result of a single nucleotide deletion at position 4897 of the fibrinogen Aalpha-chain gene that gives a frame-shift at codon 522 and premature termination at codon 548. The contributions toward fibrillogenesis of the two portions of the amyloid fibril protein, ie, N-terminal fibrinogen sequence and C-terminal novel sequence, are presently unknown. However, the early onset and rapid reoccurrence of amyloid in renal transplants is unlike the clinical course with other amyloid proteins having single amino acid substitutions that give hereditary renal amyloidosis. Liver transplantation to stop synthesis of this abnormal hepatic derived protein should be considered early in the course of the disease.

[PMID: 19073821]
Mutations in the fibrinogen A alpha-chain gene are the most common cause of hereditary renal amyloidosis in the United Kingdom. Previous reports of fibrinogen A alpha-chain amyloidosis have been in isolated kindreds, usually in the context of a novel amyloidogenic mutation. Here, we describe 71 patients with fibrinogen amyloidosis, who were prospectively studied at the UK National Amyloidosis Centre. Median age at presentation was 58 yr, and renal involvement led to diagnosis in all cases. Even after a median follow-up of 4 yr, clinically significant extra-renal disease was rare. Renal histology was characteristic: striking glomerular enlargement with almost complete obliteration of the normal architecture by amyloid deposition and little or no vascular or interstitial amyloid. We discovered four amyloidogenic mutations in fibrinogen (P552H, E540V, T538K, and T525fs). A family history of renal disease was frequently absent. Median time from presentation to ESRD was 4.6 yr, and the estimated median patient survival from presentation was 15.2 yr. Among 44 patients who reached ESRD, median survival was 9.3 yr. Twelve renal transplants survived for a median of 6.0 (0-12.2) yr. Seven grafts had failed after median follow up from transplantation of 5.8 yr, including three from recurrent amyloid after 5.8, 6.0, and 7.4 yr; three grafts failed immediately for surgical reasons and one failed from transplant glomerulopathy after 5.8 yr with no histological evidence of amyloid. At censor, the longest surviving graft was 12.2 yr. In summary, fibrinogen amyloidosis is predominantly a renal disease characterized by variable penetrance, distinctive histological appearance, proteinuria, and progressive renal impairment. Survival is markedly better than observed with systemic AL amyloidosis, and outcomes with renal replacement therapy are comparable to those for age-matched individuals with nondiabetic renal disease.

[PMID: 19013120]
The predominant cause of hereditary renal amyloidosis is a mutation of the fibrinogen Aalpha chain (AFib), the most common being the E526V mutation. The evolution towards terminal renal insufficiency is constant and raises the question of renal transplantation and the risk of recurrence. We describe the case of a Portuguese woman with the E526V mutation without any renal or hepatic history in her family which developed a nephrotic syndrome at the age of 35, followed by stage 5 renal insufficiency. Because of the risk of recurrence of amyloidosis on its transplant, we carried out a combined transplantation liver-kidney despite the absence of clinical or biological hepatic abnormalities. Four years later, the result is excellent and there is no sign of the disease on the new organs. This successful experience as well as the five other published cases of combined liver-kidney transplantation in Aalpha fibrinogen chain amyloidosis, demonstrates the feasibility and efficacy of this treatment in AFib amyloidosis.

[PMID: 8097946]
Three members of a family who died with renal amyloidosis were found to share a single nucleotide substitution in the fibrinogen alpha-chain gene. The predicted arginine to leucine mutation (Arg554Leu) was proven by amino acid sequence analysis of amyloid fibril protein isolated from postmortem kidney of an affected individual. Direct genomic DNA sequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis demonstrated that all three affected individuals had the guanine to thymine 4993 transversion. This is the first demonstration of hereditary amyloidosis associated with a variant fibrinogen alpha-chain. Variants of circulating fibrinogen may be the cause of a number of systemic amyloidoses with primarily renal involvement.

[PMID: 26299174]
Hereditary renal amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant condition with considerable overlap with other amyloidosis types. Differential diagnosis is complicated, but is relevant for prognosis and treatment. We describe a patient with nephrotic syndrome and progressive renal failure, who had a mother with renal amiloidosis. Renal biopsy revealed amyloid deposits in glomerular space, with absence of light chains and protein AA. We suspected amyloidosis with fibrinogen A alpha chain deposits, which is the most frequent cause of hereditary amyloidosis in Europe, with a glomerular preferential affectation. However, the genetic study showed a novel mutation in apolipoprotein AI. On reviewing the biopsy of the patient's mother similar glomerular deposits were found, but there were significant deposits in the renal medulla as well, which is typical in APO AI amyloidosis. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Apo AI amyloidosis is characterized by slowly progressive renal disease and end-stage renal disease occurs aproximately 3 to 15 years from initial diagnosis. Renal transplantation offers an acceptable graft survival and in these patients with hepatorenal involvement simultaneous liver and kidney transplantation could be considered.

[PMID: 15523923]
A middle age Portuguese woman was investigated for renal amyloidosis. She presented with progressive renal failure, proteinuria, hypertension, and sensory symptoms in the feet. Clinical and neurophysiological evaluation disclosed sensory-autonomic neuropathy. Cardiovascular tests and 123-MIBG investigation showed parasympathetic dysfunction and decrease of myocardial innervation, in accordance with small fiber neuropathy, as usually observed in amyloidosis. Immunohistochemical studies revealed AFib amyloidosis and genetic studies the amino acid exchange Glu526Val of the fibrinogen Aalpha-chain mutation, which was also present in one of her sons. The mutant gene in this patient was associated with the same haplotype as all other reported cases of Glu526Val mutations. This is the first reported AFibamyloidosis in Portugal, and the first case of AFib in which sensory and autonomic nerve fiber dysfunction is described, indicating that small nerve fiber lesion can occur in the fibrinogen Aalpha chain mutation. This can be important for prognosis, in particular when liver transplantation is considered for treatment.

[PMID: 29142973]
Fibrinogen A alpha chain amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant disease associated with mutations in the fibrinogen A alpha chain (<i>FGA</i>) gene, and it is the most common cause of hereditary renal amyloidosis in the UK. Patients typically present with kidney impairment and progress to end-stage renal disease over a median time of 4.6 years. Six patients presented with proteinuria, hypertension, and/or lower limb edema and underwent detailed clinical and laboratory investigations. A novel <i>FGA</i> gene mutation was identified in each case: 2 frameshift mutations F521Sfs*27 and G519Efs*30 and 4 single base substitutions G555F, E526K, E524K, R554H. In 5 subjects, extensive amyloid deposits were found solely within the glomeruli, which stained specifically with antibodies to fibrinogen A alpha chain, and in one of these cases, we found coexistent fibrinogen A alpha chain amyloidosis and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody disease. One patient was diagnosed with light-chain amyloidosis after a bone marrow examination revealed a small clonal plasma cell population, and laser microdissection of the amyloid deposits followed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry identified kappa light chain as the fibril protein. We report 6 novel mutations in the <i>FGA</i> gene: 5 were associated with renal fibrinogen A alpha chain amyloidosis and 1 was found to be incidental to light-chain amyloid deposits discovered in a patient with a plasma cell dyscrasia. Clinical awareness and suspicion of hereditary amyloidosis corroborated by genetic analysis and adequate typing using combined immunohistochemistry and laser microdissection and mass spectrometry is valuable to avoid misdiagnosis, especially when a family history of amyloidosis is absent.

[PMID: 23551149]
Hereditary amyloidosis with predominant renal disease can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding the fibrinogen Aα-chain (AFib). Here, we describe the clinical course of AFib amyloidosis associated with the rare R554L mutation, and the significance of extrarenal amyloid deposits and their possible influence on cardiovascular morbidity. We report on 101 members of a family after having conducted patient interviews, chart review, genetic testing, renal biopsies and assessment for extrarenal amyloid deposition. Ten family members had chronic kidney disease with late-onset gross proteinuria and a variable course of declining renal function, starting in the fourth decade of life. In two affected living members, we identified the AFib R554L mutation. Renal biopsies from two affected members revealed almost complete obliteration of the mesangial glomerular architecture, although kidney function was only moderately impaired. There was neither evidence of extrarenal amyloidosis nor accelerated atherosclerosis. Renal amyloidosis associated with the R554L AFib variant dominated the clinical picture in this family, which was similar to that associated with the much more prevalent E526V mutation. Although it has been hypothesized that vascular deposits of fibrinogen amyloid may be associated with accelerated atherosclerosis, there was no suggestion of this in this particular kindred.

[PMID: 25331409]
Mutations in the fibrinogen Aα-chain genes are the most common cause of hereditary renal amyloidosis. The renal histologic appearance in the patient is characteristic and shows striking glomerular enlargement with almost complete obliteration of the normal glomerular architecture by extensive amyloid deposition. In contrast, the vessels and renal tubular interstitium of such patient contains almost no amyloid at all. Here, we described a patient with hereditary fibrinogen amyloidosis, who presented with proteinuria, hypertension and renal failure. He was shown to be heterozygous for the relevant mutation encoding the E526V fibrinogen variant.

[PMID: 8113408]
Two families with hereditary renal amyloidosis were found to have a novel mutation in the fibrinogen A alpha chain gene. This form of amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by proteinuria, hypertension, and subsequent azotemia. DNAs of patients with amyloidosis were screened for a polymorphism in fibrinogen A alpha chain gene by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, and affected individuals from two kindreds were found to have a mutation. Both of these kindreds are American of Irish descent presenting with non-neuropathic, nephropathic amyloidosis in the fifth to the seventh decade of life. DNA sequencing showed a point mutation in the fibrinogen A alpha chain gene that is responsible for substitution of valine for glutamic acid at position 526. By restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, 7 affected individuals and 14 asymptomatic individuals in these two kindreds were positive for the fibrinogen A alpha chain Val 526 gene. Fibrinogen was isolated from plasma of a heterozygous gene carrier and shown to contain approximately 50% variant fibrinogen. Discovery of this new mutation confirms the association between fibrinogen A alpha chain variant and hereditary renal amyloidosis and establishes a new biochemical subtype of amyloidosis.