[PMID: 34096649]
Primary (familial/hereditary) and secondary (non-familial/hereditary) hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) are hyperinflammatory and hypercytokinemic syndromes. Secondary HLH includes infection- (eg viral/bacterial/fungal/parasitic) and non-infection- (eg collagen disease or malignancy) related diseases. Viral HLH is the major type among all age groups. Secondary viral HLH and primary HLH must be differentiated carefully because primary HLH can be associated with viral infection(s), and the outcome is dismal without a timely diagnosis and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-related HLH (EBV-HLH) is the most common type of viral HLH in childhood. For non-EBV-HLH, appropriate treatment of viral infection, followed by immunomodulatory agent(s) such as corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin or cyclosporine A, is usually successful; however, recent SARS-CoV-2-related HLH may become life-threatening. EBV-HLH may occur heterogeneously associated with the primary infection, with chronic active EBV infection or with underlying primary HLH. Although immunomodulatory agent(s) are effective in the majority of EBV-HLH cases, management differs from that of non-EBV-HLH because severe and refractory cases may require etoposide-containing HLH-1994/2004 regimens or other experimental agents. The novel agent, emapalumab (an anti-IFN-γ monoclonal antibody) can be used to treat EBV-HLH cases to avoid the risk of secondary malignancy due to etoposide. Finally, HSCT is required for refractory EBV-HLH cases and can also be curative in some other cases.

[PMID: 31537529]
Emapalumab is a fully human immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody directed against interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which in November 2018 received the first global approval for the treatment of pediatric and adult patients with primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) with refractory, recurrent, or progressive disease or intolerance to HLH therapy. This review will highlight the pathophysiology of primary HLH, the therapeutic rationale for use of IFN-γ-targeting therapy, and potential limitations to its broader use in the treatment of HLH.

[PMID: 33686916]
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a rare life-threatening hyperinflammatory syndrome. Standard treatment is based on immunosuppressive, cytotoxic drugs and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in primary HLH. Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) plays a key pathogenic role. Emapalumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against IFN-γ, is the first target therapy approved for primary HLH with refractory, recurrent or progressive disease or intolerance to conventional therapy. We reviewed the pharmacological characteristics, safety, efficacy and clinical uses of emapalumab. We summarized the results of current standard treatment based on chemo-immunosuppressive protocols and outlined the alternative options available. Emapalumab is an effective treatment for HLH with a good safety profile. Its efficacy was demonstrated in a phase II/III study on primary HLH pediatric patients with refractory, relapsing HLH or intolerance to first-line treatment. The use of emapalumab allowed most patients to proceed to HSCT, with a high estimated probability of survival 12 months after transplantation. The outcomes in patients who underwent transplantation compare favorably with those reported previously with either myeloablative or reduced-intensity conditioning regimens. The potential role of emapalumab in the treatment of secondary HLH and as a prevention of graft failure after HSCT deserves to be further assessed.

[PMID: 32374962]
Primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a rare syndrome characterized by immune dysregulation and hyperinflammation. It typically manifests in infancy and is associated with high mortality. We investigated the efficacy and safety of emapalumab (a human anti-interferon-γ antibody), administered with dexamethasone, in an open-label, single-group, phase 2-3 study involving patients who had received conventional therapy before enrollment (previously treated patients) and previously untreated patients who were 18 years of age or younger and had primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. The patients could enter a long-term follow-up study until 1 year after allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation or until 1 year after the last dose of emapalumab, if transplantation was not performed. The planned 8-week treatment period could be shortened or extended if needed according to the timing of transplantation. The primary efficacy end point was the overall response, which was assessed in the previously treated patients according to objective clinical and laboratory criteria. At the cutoff date of July 20, 2017, a total of 34 patients (27 previously treated patients and 7 previously untreated patients) had received emapalumab; 26 patients completed the study. A total of 63% of the previously treated patients and 65% of the patients who received an emapalumab infusion had a response; these percentages were significantly higher than the prespecified null hypothesis of 40% (P = 0.02 and P = 0.005, respectively). In the previously treated group, 70% of the patients were able to proceed to transplantation, as were 65% of the patients who received emapalumab. At the last observation, 74% of the previously treated patients and 71% of the patients who received emapalumab were alive. Emapalumab was not associated with any organ toxicity. Severe infections developed in 10 patients during emapalumab treatment. Emapalumab was discontinued in 1 patient because of disseminated histoplasmosis. Emapalumab was an efficacious targeted therapy for patients with primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. (Funded by NovImmune and the European Commission; NI-0501-04 and NI-0501-05 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01818492 and NCT02069899.).

[PMID: 32648854]
Emapalumab-Igsz (Gamifant) is a human monoclonal antibody directed against interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and the first Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved therapy for primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). HLH is a disorder characterized by hypercytokinemia in the setting of unbridled immune activation, and emapalumab represents the first therapeutic developed to address the underlying pathophysiology of HLH. Emapalumab is approved for treatment of primary HLH that is refractory, recurrent, progressing or intolerant to current HLH treatments in both adult and pediatric patients. FDA approval was based on the results of a phase II/III clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of emapalumab in 34 pediatric patients with primary HLH, 27 of whom were refractory to current therapies. Additional studies of emapalumab are currently ongoing in adults and other pediatric populations. Here, we will review the pharmacology, safety and efficacy of emapalumab for the treatment of HLH.

[PMID: 33484058]
Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) plays a key role in the pathophysiology of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), and available evidence also points to a role in other conditions, including aplastic anemia (AA) and graft failure following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Recently, the therapeutic potential of IFN-γ inhibition has been documented; emapalumab, an anti-IFN-γ monoclonal antibody, has been approved in the United States for treatment of primary HLH that is refractory, recurrent or progressive, or in patients with intolerance to conventional therapy. Moreover, ruxolitinib, an inhibitor of JAK/STAT intracellular signaling, is currently being investigated for treating HLH. In AA, IFN-γ inhibits hematopoiesis by disrupting the interaction between thrombopoietin and its receptor, c-MPL. Eltrombopag, a small-molecule agonist of c-MPL, acts at a different binding site to IFN-γ and is thus able to circumvent its inhibitory effects. Ongoing trials will elucidate the role of IFN-γ neutralization in secondary HLH and future studies could explore this strategy in controlling hyperinflammation due to CAR T cells.

[PMID: 32447592]
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a syndrome of excessive immune system activation driven mainly by high levels of interferon gamma. The clinical presentation of HLH can have considerable overlap with other inflammatory conditions. We present a cohort of patients with therapy refractory HLH referred to our center who were found to have a simultaneous presentation of complement-mediated thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). Twenty-three patients had therapy refractory HLH (13 primary, 4 EVB-HLH, 6 HLH without known trigger). Sixteen (69.6%) met high-risk TMA criteria. Renal failure requiring renal replacement therapy, severe hypertension, serositis, and gastrointestinal bleeding were documented only in patients with HLH who had concomitant complement-mediated TMA. Patients with HLH and without TMA required ventilator support mainly due to CNS symptoms, while those with HLH and TMA had respiratory failure predominantly associated with pulmonary hypertension, a known presentation of pulmonary TMA. Ten patients received eculizumab for complement-mediated TMA management while being treated for HLH. All patients who received the complement blocker eculizumab in addition to the interferon gamma blocker emapalumab had complete resolution of their TMA and survived. Our observations suggest co-activation of both interferon and complement pathways as a potential culprit in the evolution of thrombotic microangiopathy in patients with inflammatory disorders like refractory HLH and may offer novel therapeutic approaches for these critically ill patients. TMA should be considered in children with HLH and multi-organ failure, as an early institution of a brief course of complement blocking therapy in addition to HLH-targeted therapy may improve clinical outcomes in these patients.

[PMID: 33424859]
Primary Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (pHLH) is a rare, life-threatening, hyperinflammatory disorder, characterized by uncontrolled activation of the immune system. Mutations affecting several genes coding for proteins involved in the cytotoxicity machinery of both natural killer (NK) and T cells have been found to be responsible for the development of pHLH. So far, front-line treatment, established on the results of large international trials, is based on the use of glucocorticoids, etoposide ± cyclosporine, followed by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), the sole curative treatment for the genetic forms of the disease. However, despite major efforts to improve the outcome of pHLH, many patients still experience unfavorable outcomes, as well as severe toxicities; moreover, treatment-refractory or relapsing disease is a major challenge for pediatricians/hematologists. In this article, we review the epidemiology, etiology and pathophysiology of pHLH, with a particular focus on different cytokines at the origin of the disease. The central role of interferon-γ (IFNγ) in the development and maintenance of hyperinflammation is analyzed. The value of emapalumab, a novel IFNγ-neutralizing monoclonal antibody is discussed. Available data support the use of emapalumab for treatment of pHLH patients with refractory, recurrent or progressive disease, or intolerance to conventional therapy, recently, leading to FDA approval of the drug for these indications. Additional data are needed to define the role of emapalumab in front-line treatment or in combination with other drugs.

[PMID: 30623346]
Emapalumab-Izsg (hereafter referred to as emapalumab) [Gamifant<sup>®</sup>] is a monoclonal antibody directed against interferon gamma that is available as an intravenous infusion. Emapalumab is being developed by Novimmune and Swedish Orphan Biovitrum for the treatment of haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). In November 2018, emapalumab received its first global approval in the USA, for the treatment of paediatric (newborn and older) and adult patients with primary HLH, who have refractory, recurrent or progressive disease or intolerance to conventional HLH therapy. Emapalumab is under regulatory review in the EU for the treatment of primary HLH. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of emapalumab leading to this first global approval for HLH in the USA.

[PMID: 32817285]
Emapalumab, a fully human anti-IFNγ monoclonal antibody, has been approved in the US as second-line treatment of primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) patients and has shown promise in patients with graft failure (GF) requiring a second allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The blockade of IFNγ activity may increase the risk of severe infections, including fatal mycobacteriosis. We report a case of secondary HLH-related GF in the context of HLA-haploidentical HSCT successfully treated with emapalumab in the presence of concomitant life-threatening infections, including disseminated tuberculosis (TB). A 4 years old girl with Adenosine Deaminase-Severe Combined Immunodeficiency complicated by disseminated TB came to our attention for ex-vivo hematopoietic stem cell-gene therapy. After engraftment failure of gene corrected cells, she received two HLA-haploidentical T-cell depleted HSCT from the father, both failed due to GF related to concomitant multiple infections and secondary HLH. Emapalumab administration allowed to control HLH, as well as to prevent GF after a third haplo-HSCT from the mother. Remarkably, all infections improved with antimicrobial medications and disseminated TB did not show any reactivation. This seminal case supports emapalumab use for treatment of secondary HLH and prevention of GF in patients undergoing haplo-HSCT even in the presence of multiple infections, including TB.