[PMID: 27167138]
Bimagrumab (BYM338) is a novel fully human monoclonal antibody that exerts strong promyogenic effects on skeletal muscle by blocking activin type II receptors (ActRII). We investigated whether such blockade of ActRII by bimagrumab manifests any detrimental effect on outcomes of bone healing in a rat fibula osteotomy model. Animals (n = 150) were divided into 11 groups and received weekly treatment with either bimagrumab (10 or 100 mg/kg) or vehicle. Progression and outcomes of bone healing were assessed by lateral radiographs in vivo as well as by peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT), 4-point bending test, and microscopic examination of the excised fibula at Day 29 or later. The radiographic progression of bone healing showed no significant differences between treatment groups in any comparative setting. In 3-month-old animals, pQCT revealed slightly reduced immature callus size and bone mineral content in bimagrumab-treated animals compared with vehicle-treated animals at Day 29 (p < 0.05). There were, however, no differences in mature callus size, bone mineral density, or biomechanical competency. The aforementioned effects on immature callus size were not present when the treatment was initiated 4 weeks post osteotomy or when treating 6-month-old animals. In summary, these findings suggest that there is no major impact of ActRII blockade on overall fracture healing, and delayed treatment initiation can bypass the small and transient effect of the therapy on immature callus formation observed in younger animals. Verification of these findings in humans is the subject of an ongoing clinical trial on elderly hip fracture patients.

[PMID: 25381300]
To study activin signaling and its blockade in sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) through translational studies and a randomized controlled trial. We measured transforming growth factor β signaling by SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in muscle biopsies of 50 patients with neuromuscular disease (17 with sIBM). We tested inhibition of activin receptors IIA and IIB (ActRII) in 14 patients with sIBM using one dose of bimagrumab (n = 11) or placebo (n = 3). The primary outcome was the change in right thigh muscle volume by MRI at 8 weeks. Lean body mass, strength, and function were secondary outcomes. Twelve of the patients (10 bimagrumab, 2 placebo) participated in a subsequent 16-week observation phase. Muscle SMAD2/3 phosphorylation was higher in sIBM than in other muscle diseases studied (p = 0.003). Eight weeks after dosing, the bimagrumab-treated patients increased thigh muscle volume (right leg +6.5% compared with placebo, p = 0.024; left leg +7.6%, p = 0.009) and lean body mass (+5.7% compared with placebo, p = 0.014). Subsequently, bimagrumab-treated patients had improved 6-minute walking distance, which peaked at 16 weeks (+14.6%, p = 0.008) compared with placebo. There were no serious adverse events; the main adverse events with bimagrumab were mild acne and transient involuntary muscle contractions. Transforming growth factor β superfamily signaling, at least through ActRII, is implicated in the pathophysiology of sIBM. Inhibition of ActRII increased muscle mass and function in this pilot trial, offering a potential novel treatment of sIBM. This study provides Class I evidence that for patients with inclusion body myositis, bimagrumab increases thigh muscle volume at 8 weeks.

[PMID: 24298022]
The myostatin/activin type II receptor (ActRII) pathway has been identified to be critical in regulating skeletal muscle size. Several other ligands, including GDF11 and the activins, signal through this pathway, suggesting that the ActRII receptors are major regulatory nodes in the regulation of muscle mass. We have developed a novel, human anti-ActRII antibody (bimagrumab, or BYM338) to prevent binding of ligands to the receptors and thus inhibit downstream signaling. BYM338 enhances differentiation of primary human skeletal myoblasts and counteracts the inhibition of differentiation induced by myostatin or activin A. BYM338 prevents myostatin- or activin A-induced atrophy through inhibition of Smad2/3 phosphorylation, thus sparing the myosin heavy chain from degradation. BYM338 dramatically increases skeletal muscle mass in mice, beyond sole inhibition of myostatin, detected by comparing the antibody with a myostatin inhibitor. A mouse version of the antibody induces enhanced muscle hypertrophy in myostatin mutant mice, further confirming a beneficial effect on muscle growth beyond myostatin inhibition alone through blockade of ActRII ligands. BYM338 protects muscles from glucocorticoid-induced atrophy and weakness via prevention of muscle and tetanic force losses. These data highlight the compelling therapeutic potential of BYM338 for the treatment of skeletal muscle atrophy and weakness in multiple settings.

[PMID: 29226558]
Inhibitors of the ActRII signaling pathways represent promising therapeutics for the treatment of muscular diseases, but also pose risks as performance-enhancing agents in sports. Bimagrumab is a human anti-ActRII antibody which was found to increase muscle mass and function by blocking ActRII signaling. As it has considerable potential for being misused as doping agent in sports, the aim of this study was to develop a mass spectrometric detection assay for doping control serum samples. Within this study, a detection method for Bimagrumab in human serum was developed, which combines ammonium sulfate precipitation and affinity purification with proteolytic digestion and LC-HRMS. To facilitate the unambiguous identification of the diagnostic peptides, an orthogonal IM separation was additionally performed. The assay was successfully validated and the analysis of clinical samples demonstrated its fitness for purpose for an application in routine doping control analysis. Although no myostatin inhibitors have obtained clinical approval yet, the proactive development of detection methods for emerging doping agents represents a key aspect of preventive doping research. The presented approach will expand the range of available tests for novel protein therapeutics and can readily be modified to include further target analytes.

[PMID: 31761834]
A global, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study was conducted to confirm that BYM338 (bimagrumab), an anti-activin type II receptor antibody, improves motor function in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis after 52 weeks' treatment consisting of intravenous administration every 4 weeks at doses of 10, 3, and 1 mg/kg. In a Japanese sub-population (20 patients in total, 5 per dose group), no significant differences in the change from baseline of the 6-minute walking distance at Week 52 (primary endpoint) were observed between the placebo group and each BYM338 dose group. Furthermore, the lean body mass as an indicator of skeletal muscle mass increased in all BYM338 groups compared with the placebo group and the effects were dose-dependent. Overall, the Japanese sub-population showed similar trends as observed in the entire population (251 patients in total).

[PMID: 26506009]
Bone is a biomechanical tissue shaped by forces from muscles and gravitation. Simultaneous bone and muscle decay and dysfunction (osteosarcopenia or sarco-osteoporosis) is seen in ageing, numerous clinical situations including after stroke or paralysis, in neuromuscular dystrophies, glucocorticoid excess, or in association with vitamin D, growth hormone/insulin like growth factor or sex steroid deficiency, as well as in spaceflight. Physical exercise may be beneficial in these situations, but further work is still needed to translate acceptable and effective biomechanical interventions like vibration therapy from animal models to humans. Novel antiresorptive and anabolic therapies are emerging for osteoporosis as well as drugs for sarcopenia, cancer cachexia or muscle wasting disorders, including antibodies against myostatin or activin receptor type IIA and IIB (e.g. bimagrumab). Ideally, increasing muscle mass would increase muscle strength and restore bone loss from disuse. However, the classical view that muscle is unidirectionally dominant over bone via mechanical loading is overly simplistic. Indeed, recent studies indicate a role for neuronal regulation of not only muscle but also bone metabolism, bone signaling pathways like receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) implicated in muscle biology, myokines affecting bone and possible bone-to-muscle communication. Moreover, pharmacological strategies inducing isolated myocyte hypertrophy may not translate into increased muscle power because tendons, connective tissue, neurons and energy metabolism need to adapt as well. We aim here to critically review key musculoskeletal molecular pathways involved in mechanoregulation and their effect on the bone-muscle unit as a whole, as well as preclinical and emerging clinical evidence regarding the effects of sarcopenia therapies on osteoporosis and vice versa.

[PMID: 29566437]
Bimagrumab is a human monoclonal antibody inhibitor of activin type II receptors (ActRII), with anabolic action on skeletal muscle mass by blocking binding of myostatin and other negative regulators of muscle growth. Bimagrumab is under evaluation for muscle wasting and associated functional loss in hip fracture and sarcopenia, and in obesity. Bimagrumab also blocks other endogenous ActRII ligands, such as activins, which act on the neurohormonal axes, pituitary, gonads and adrenal glands. To evaluate the effect of bimagrumab on the pituitary-gonadal and pituitary-adrenal axes in humans. Healthy men and women, aged 55 to 75 years, received bimagrumab intravenously 10 mg/kg or placebo on Day 1 and Day 29. Pituitary-gonadal and pituitary-adrenal functions were evaluated with basal hormone measurement and standard gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation tests at baseline, Week 8 and at the end of study (EOS)-Week 20. At Week 8, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels were reduced by 42.16 IU/L (P < .001) and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels were increased by 2.5 IU/L (P = .08) over placebo in response to bimagrumab in women but not in men. Effects that were reversible after bimagrumab was cleared. Gonadal and adrenal androgen levels were not affected by exposure to bimagrumab. Bimagrumab alters the function of pituitary gonadotroph cells, consistent with blockade of activin on local ActRII. This effect is reversible with clearance of bimagrumab. Bimagrumab did not impact gonadal and adrenal androgen secretion.

[PMID: 27462398]
Cachexia affects the majority of patients with advanced cancer and is associated with reduced treatment tolerance, response to therapy, quality of life, and life expectancy. Cachectic patients with advanced cancer often receive anti-cancer therapies against their specific cancer type as a standard of care, and whether specific ActRII inhibition is efficacious when combined with anti-cancer agents has not been elucidated yet. In this study, we evaluated interactions between ActRII blockade and anti-cancer agents in CT-26 mouse colon cancer-induced cachexia model. CDD866 (murinized version of bimagrumab) is a neutralizing antibody against the activin receptor type II (ActRII) preventing binding of ligands such as myostatin and activin A, which are involved in cancer cachexia. CDD866 was evaluated in association with cisplatin as a standard cytotoxic agent or with everolimus, a molecular-targeted agent against mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). In the early studies, the treatment effect on cachexia was investigated, and in the additional studies, the treatment effect on progression of cancer and the associated cachexia was evaluated using body weight loss or tumor volume as interruption criteria. Cisplatin accelerated body weight loss and tended to exacerbate skeletal muscle loss in cachectic animals, likely due to some toxicity of this anti-cancer agent. Administration of CDD866 alone or in combination with cisplatin protected from skeletal muscle weight loss compared to animals receiving only cisplatin, corroborating that ActRII inhibition remains fully efficacious under cisplatin treatment. In contrast, everolimus treatment alone significantly protected the tumor-bearing mice against skeletal muscle weight loss caused by CT-26 tumor. CDD866 not only remains efficacious in the presence of everolimus but also showed a non-significant trend for an additive effect on reversing skeletal muscle weight loss. Importantly, both combination therapies slowed down time-to-progression. Anti-ActRII blockade is an effective intervention against cancer cachexia providing benefit even in the presence of anti-cancer therapies. Co-treatment comprising chemotherapies and ActRII inhibitors might constitute a promising new approach to alleviate chemotherapy- and cancer-related wasting conditions and extend survival rates in cachectic cancer patients.

[PMID: 28905498]
Patients experiencing disuse atrophy report acute loss of skeletal muscle mass which subsequently leads to loss of strength and physical capacity. In such patients, especially the elderly, complete recovery remains a challenge even with improved nutrition and resistance exercise. This study aimed to explore the clinical potential of bimagrumab, a human monoclonal antibody targeting the activin type II receptor, for the recovery of skeletal muscle volume from disuse atrophy using an experimental model of lower extremity immobilization. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, healthy young men (n = 24; mean age, 24.1 years) were placed in a full-length cast of one of the lower extremities for 2 weeks to induce disuse atrophy. After cast removal, subjects were randomized to receive a single intravenous (i.v.) dose of either bimagrumab 30 mg/kg (n = 15) or placebo (n = 9) and were followed for 12 weeks. Changes in thigh muscle volume (TMV) and inter-muscular adipose tissue (IMAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SCAT) of the thigh, maximum voluntary knee extension strength, and safety were assessed throughout the 12 week study. Casting resulted in an average TMV loss of -4.8% and comparable increases in IMAT and SCAT volumes. Bimagrumab 30 mg/kg i.v. resulted in a rapid increase in TMV at 2 weeks following cast removal and a +5.1% increase above pre-cast levels at 12 weeks. In comparison, TMV returned to pre-cast level at 12 weeks (-0.1%) in the placebo group. The increased adiposity of the casted leg was sustained in the placebo group and decreased substantially in the bimagrumab group at Week 12 (IMAT: -6.6%, SCAT: -3.5%). Knee extension strength decreased by ~25% in the casted leg for all subjects and returned to pre-cast levels within 6 weeks after cast removal in both treatment arms. Bimagrumab was well tolerated with no serious or severe adverse events reported during the study. A single dose of bimagrumab 30 mg/kg i.v. safely accelerated the recovery of TMV and reversal of accumulated IMAT following 2 weeks in a joint-immobilizing cast.

[PMID: 30095981]
Bimagrumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that blocks the activin type II receptors, preventing the activity of myostatin and other negative skeletal muscle regulators. To assess the effects of bimagrumab on skeletal muscle mass and function in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and reduced skeletal muscle mass. Sixty-seven patients with COPD (mean FEV<sub>1</sub>, 1.05 L [41.6% predicted]; aged 40-80 yr; body mass index < 20 kg/m<sup>2</sup> or appendicular skeletal muscle mass index ≤ 7.25 [men] and ≤ 5.67 [women] kg/m<sup>2</sup>), received two doses of either bimagrumab 30 mg/kg intravenously (n = 33) or placebo (n = 34) (Weeks 0 and 8) over 24 weeks. We assessed changes in thigh muscle volume (cubic centimeters) as the primary endpoint along with 6-minute-walk distance (meters), safety, and tolerability. Fifty-five (82.1%) patients completed the study. Thigh muscle volume increased by Week 4 and remained increased at Week 24 in bimagrumab-treated patients, whereas no changes were observed with placebo (Week 4: +5.9% [SD, 3.4%] vs. 0.0% [3.3%], P < 0.001; Week 8: +7.0% [3.7%] vs. -0.7% [2.8%], P < 0.001; Week 16: +7.8% [5.1%] vs. -0.9% [4.5%], P < 0.001; Week 24: +5.0% [4.9%] vs. -1.3% [4.3%], P < 0.001). Over 24 weeks, 6-minute-walk distance did not increase significantly in either group. Adverse events in the bimagrumab group included muscle-related symptoms, diarrhea, and acne, most of which were mild in severity. Blocking the action of negative muscle regulators through the activin type II receptors with bimagrumab treatment safely increased skeletal muscle mass but did not improve functional capacity in patients with COPD and low muscle mass. Clinical trial registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01669174).