[PMID: 7848104]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VEM) appears to be endemic disease, affecting native population in Yakutia (Yakut, Even, Evenk). The infectious nature of VEM is very likely, but not yet established with certainty. The mortality rate caused by VEM from 1950 to 1990 was 17.4 per 10000 of native population. The maximum morbidity can be seen in Viliui and Central zones of Yakutia. Women were affected one and a half times more than men. VEM is characterized by multiple micronecrotic foci with marked inflammatory reactions and gliosis in the brain tissue. The vascular component in VEM is manifested by vasculitis, plasmarhagies, obliteration of the capillary lumen with development of capillarofibrosis, progressive reduction of the microcirculatory bed, the deformation of walls in major vessels with atrophy of their muscular layer, in some cases--by hyaline thrombi. The data presented give no grounds to consider the vascular component as secondary, relating only to the brain atrophy.

[PMID: 20010208]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis is a disorder that starts, in most cases, as an acute meningoencephalitis. Survivors of the acute phase develop a slowly progressing neurologic syndrome characterized by dementia, dysarthria, and spasticity. An epidemic of this disease has been spreading throughout the Yakut Republic of the Russian Federation. Although clinical, neuropathologic, and epidemiologic data suggest infectious etiology, multiple attempts at pathogen isolation have been unsuccessful. Detailed clinical, pathologic, laboratory, and epidemiologic studies have identified 414 patients with definite Viliuisk encephalomyelitis in 15 of 33 administrative regions of the Yakut Republic between 1940 and 1999. All data are documented in a Registry. The average annual Viliuisk encephalomyelitis incidence rate at the height of the epidemic reached 8.8 per 100,000 population and affected predominantly young adults. The initial outbreak occurred in a remote isolated area of the middle reaches of Viliui River; the disease spread to adjacent areas and further in the direction of more densely populated regions. The results suggest that intensified human migration from endemic villages led to the emergence of this disease in new communities. Recent social and demographic changes have presumably contributed to a subsequent decline in disease incidence. Based on the largest known set of diagnostically verified Viliuisk encephalomyelitis cases, we demonstrate how a previously little-known disease that was endemic in a small indigenous population subsequently reached densely populated areas and produced an epidemic involving hundreds of persons.

[PMID: 19618339]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE) is a unique disease occurring in the Yakut (Sakha) population of Eastern Siberia. VE is always fatal, with some patients dying during the acute encephalitic phase of illness; those surviving the acute phase develop progressive dementia, rigidity and spastic quadriparesis as part of a more prolonged pan-encephalitic syndrome. The disease is characterized neuropathologically by multiple widespread micronecrotic foci with marked inflammatory reactions and subsequent gliosis throughout the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum and brain stem. The acute febrile onset with cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis and increased protein and neuropathology showing inflammatory reactions suggest that VE is an infectious disease, but the causative agent has not been identified. Initially detected in a small mixed Yakut-Evenk population of the mid-Viliui region, the disease subsequently spread south to densely populated areas around the capital city of Yakutsk. The occurrence of secondary VE cases in households and the introduction of the disease by migrants into new populations indicate that the disease is horizontally transmitted in a setting of a long intra-household contact. Although there has been a recent decline in the number of cases, increasing travel may result in further spread of this fatal disease to susceptible individuals in other regions of the world.

[PMID: 1393513]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE), a progressive neurological disorder with a fatal outcome usually in several months to 6 yrs after disease onset, is seen only among the Iakut people of Siberia. The acute meningoencephalitic phase of the disease is followed by progressive dementia, rigidity and spastic tetraparesis. The disease is characterized by multiple micronecrotic foci with marked inflammatory reactions and gliosis in the grey matter. The acute febrile onset, with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis and increased protein in the CSF, the epidemiology and the inflammatory neuropathology suggest the disease is infectious. Studies on household spread indicate an incubation time of up to several years. Viliuisk encephalomyelitis was restricted to an ethically distinct group of Iakut people of the Middle Viliui region, but in recent decades, with migration from this region, it has been spreading into previously unaffected Iakut populations. The occurrence of multiple VE cases in households and introduction of the disease by migrants into new populations indicate horizontal transmission in a setting of long intimate contact.

[PMID: 15182325]
Since the discovery of Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE) in 1887, scientists have tried to understand the natural history and aetiology of this endemic neurological disorder among the native Sakha population of Central Siberia. Familial aggregation and segregation analysis suggested a genetic influence on VE incidence. However, recent studies have implicated an unknown virus, possibly from the alpha herpesvirus family, as a possible cause for this disease. As VE is a neurological disease characterized by the inflammatory reactions systematically observed in the spinocerebellar fluid and in the brain tissue of deceased patients, we examined 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across seven inflammation-related candidate gene regions, including chemokine receptors type 2 and 5 (CCR2/CCR5), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-6, IL-10, stromal cell-derived factor (SDF) and chemokine regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed and presumably secreted (RANTES). Our main objective was to analyse the degree of genetic association between VE and candidate genes that have been previously implicated in other inflammatory diseases. Samples were collected from 83 affected families comprising 88 verified VE cases, 156 family members, and an additional 69 unrelated, unaffected inhabitants of the same geographical area. This collection included substantially all of the cases that are currently on the VE Registry. The experimental design included both case-control and transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT)-based familial association analyses. None of 17 SNPs analysed was significantly associated with VE occurrence. Exclusion of these eight genes based on the lack of association has important implications for identifying the disease agent, as well as prescribing therapy and understanding Viliuisk encephalomyelitis.

[PMID: 18379734]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE) is an endemic neurological disease in Northeastern Siberia and generally believed to be a chronic encephalomyelitis of unknown origin. We investigated 17 patients with a clinical diagnosis of VE within the Viliuiski region of Sakha (Yakutian) Republic to explore the core clinical syndrome of chronic VE and subsequently whether VE is caused by Borrelia burgdorferi infection. We found a chronic myelopathy as the core of the syndrome, often following an acute phase with a meningo-radiculo-neuropathy, suggestive of chronic neuroborreliosis. A search for inflammatory parameters in a larger cohort in blood (39 VE patients and 41 controls) and CSF samples (10 VE patients and 7 controls) excluded an ongoing chronic infection, but revealed evidence for an immunological scar or a chronic inflammatory ("autoimmune") response in the CSF. In addition, we detected signs of a previous exposure to Borrelia burgdorferi antigens in a subset of chronic VE patients with positive serological results using ELISA/immunoblot in 54/10% and 22/0% of VE patients and controls, respectively (p values of 0.003/0.034; Fisher's exact test). However, CSF analyses did not show a link between exposure or at least immunological reaction against Borrelia and the risk of suffering from VE. Our data provide the first evidence of the presence of Borrelia burgdorferi or similar pathogens in Northeastern Siberia, but do not support a causative role of these pathogens in the aetiopathogenesis of VE.

[PMID: 9223130]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE) is an unique neurological disease occurring in the Iakut (Sakha) people of Siberia. Evolution of the disease follows one of three broad clinical forms: subacute, slowly progressive or chronic. Death occurs within 3 to 6 months in subacute cases and within 6 years in the slowly progressive cases. Chronic cases lack a subacute phase but show a slowly progressive dementia associated with bradykinesia, dysarthria and spastic paraparesis that stabilizes late in the disease process. In subacute and slowly progressive cases, focal necrotizing encephalomyelitis is seen at necropsy. Chronic cases show multifocal areas of lysis with a gliotic margin, predominantly within grey matter, lacking associated chronic inflammatory changes seen in the other forms of the disease. Epidemiological studies are consistent with a disease of low-grade communicability, but laboratory studies have so far failed to reveal an infectious organism. The spectrum of neuropathological changes are reviewed in this examination of 11 cases. Although the aetiology of VE remains obscure, further studies are warranted since it may represent a novel disease process.

[PMID: 2894813]
Human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I), the etiological agent of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, also appears to be the cause of tropical spastic paraparesis, a chronic myelopathy reported in several different regions of the world. The prevalence of antibodies to HTLV-I in patients with chronic neurodegenerative disorders other than tropical spastic paraparesis and in patients with some muscle inflammatory disorders has been investigated. IgG antibodies to HTLV-I were measured in the sera and/or cerebrospinal fluid from 82 Guamanian patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia, 164 Guamanian normal controls, 10 patients with kuru from the Eastern Highlands of Papua New Guinea, 4 patients with Viliuisk encephalomyelitis from the Iakut region of eastern Siberia, 45 Italian patients with multiple sclerosis, and 56 patients with polymyositis (49 from the United States and 7 from Jamaica). As determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Western immunoblot, and gelatin particle agglutination techniques, serological evidence of HTLV-I infection was found in 1 patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 1 control subject from Guam, and in 1 patient from the United States and all 7 Jamaican patients with polymyositis. Except for the high seropositivity rate among the group of Jamaican patients with polymyositis, our data indicate that HTLV-I is an unlikely causative agent in the spectrum of the neurological diseases examined. The seropositivity of the 7 Jamaican patients with polymyositis requires further study.

[PMID: 18252102]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis is an acute, often fatal, meningoencephalitis that tends to develop into a prolonged chronically progressive panencephalitis. Clinical, neuropathologic, and epidemiologic data argue for an infectious cause, although multiple attempts at pathogen isolation have been unsuccessful. To assess mechanisms of disease transmission and spread, we studied 6 multiplex families. Secondary cases occurred among genetically related and unrelated persons in a setting of prolonged intrahousehold contact with a patient manifesting the disease. Transmission to unrelated persons was documented in a densely populated region around the city of Yakutsk in which Viliuisk encephalomyelitis had not been previously known. Initially identified in a small Yakut-Evenk population on the Viliui River of eastern Siberia, the disease subsequently spread through human contacts to new geographic areas, thus characterizing Viliuisk encephalomyelitis as an emerging infectious disease.

[PMID: 24586232]
Viliuisk encephalomyelitis (VE) is an endemic neurological disease in Northeast Siberia and generally considered to be a chronic encephalomyelitis of unknown origin actually spreading in the Sakha (Yakutian) Republic. In search for the pathophysiology and causative agent of VE, we performed a cross-sectional study on clinical, serological and neuroimaging data on chronic VE patients during two medical expeditions to three villages within the Viliuiski river basin in the Republic of Sakha in 2000 and to the capital Yakutsk in 2006. The severity of the core clinical picture with predominant sensory ataxia, gait apraxia, lower limb spasticity, cognitive impairment and bladder dysfunction correlated with the degree of MRI findings showing enlargement of inner ventricular spaces as in communicating hydrocephalus. Laboratory studies revealed transient eosinophilia during the preceding acute meningitis-like phase, but no ongoing inflammatory process in the CSF. We found immune reactions against Toxocara canis in the majority of chronic VE patients but rarely in controls (P = 0.025; Fisher's exact test). Histological analysis of subacute to subchronic VE brain samples showed eosinophilic infiltrations with no signs of persistent Toxocara canis infection. Our data showed that pressure by the communicating hydrocephalus as a mechanical factor is the major pathogenic mechanism in chronic VE, most likely triggered by eosinophilic meningitis. There are no signs for an ongoing inflammatory process in chronic VE. The past eosinophilic reaction in VE might be caused by Toxocara ssp. infection and might therefore represent the first hint for an initial cause leading to the development of chronic VE. Our data provide a framework for future studies and potential therapeutic interventions for this enigmatic epidemic neurological disease potentially spreading in Sakha Republic.