[PMID: 20402963]
The organic cation transporter (OCT) 3 is widely expressed in various organs in humans, and involved in the disposition of many exogenous and endogenous compounds. Several lines of evidence have suggested that OCT3 expressed in the brain plays an important role in the regulation of neurotransmission. Relative to wild-type (WT) animals, Oct3 knockout (KO) mice have displayed altered behavioral and neurochemical responses to psychostimulants such as amphetamine (AMPH) and methamphetamine. In the present study, both in vitro and in vivo approaches were utilized to explore potential mechanisms underlying the disparate neuropharmacological effects observed following AMPH exposure in Oct3 KO mice. In vitro uptake studies conducted in OCT3 transfected cells indicated that dextroamphetamine (d-AMPH) is not a substrate of OCT3. However, OCT3 was determined to be a high-capacity and low-affinity transporter for the neurotransmitters dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), and serotonin (5-HT). Inhibition studies demonstrated that d-AMPH exerts relatively weak inhibitory effects on the OCT3-mediated uptake of DA, NE, 5-HT, and the model OCT3 substrate 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium iodide. The IC(50) values were determined to be 41.5 +/- 7.5 and 24.1 +/- 7.0 microM for inhibiting DA and 5-HT uptake, respectively, while 50% inhibition of NE and 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium iodide uptake was not achieved by even the highest concentration of d-AMPH applied (100 microM). Furthermore, the disposition of d-AMPH in various tissues including the brain, liver, heart, kidney, muscle, intestine, spleen, testis, uterus, and plasma were determined in both male and female Oct3 KO and WT mice. No significant difference was observed between either genotypes or sex in all tested organs and tissues. Our findings suggest that OCT3 is not a prominent factor influencing the disposition of d-AMPH. Additionally, based upon the inhibitory potency observed in vitro, d-AMPH is unlikely to inhibit the uptake of monoamines mediated by OCT3 in the brain. Differentiated neuropharmacological effects of AMPHs noted between Oct3 KO and WT mice appear to be due to the absence of Oct3 mediated uptake of neurotransmitters in the KO mice.

[PMID: 19033200]
Mood disorders cause much suffering and are the single greatest cause of lost productivity worldwide. Although multiple medications, along with behavioral therapies, have proven effective for some individuals, millions of people lack an effective therapeutic option. A common serotonin (5-HT) transporter (5-HTT/SERT, SLC6A4) polymorphism is believed to confer lower 5-HTT expression in vivo and elevates risk for multiple mood disorders including anxiety, alcoholism, and major depression. Importantly, this variant is also associated with reduced responsiveness to selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor antidepressants. We hypothesized that a reduced antidepressant response in individuals with a constitutive reduction in 5-HTT expression could arise because of the compensatory expression of other genes that inactivate 5-HT in the brain. A functionally upregulated alternate transporter for 5-HT may prevent extracellular 5-HT from rising to levels sufficiently high enough to trigger the adaptive neurochemical events necessary for therapeutic benefit. Here we demonstrate that expression of the organic cation transporter type 3 (OCT3, SLC22A3), which also transports 5-HT, is upregulated in the brains of mice with constitutively reduced 5-HTT expression. Moreover, the OCT blocker decynium-22 diminishes 5-HT clearance and exerts antidepressant-like effects in these mice but not in WT animals. OCT3 may be an important transporter mediating serotonergic signaling when 5-HTT expression or function is compromised.

[PMID: 19280114]
The organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3; synonymous: extraneuronal monoamine transporter, EMT, Slc22a3) encodes an isoform of the organic cation transporters and is expressed widely across the whole brain. OCTs are a family of high-capacity, bidirectional, multispecific transporters of organic cations. These also include serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine making OCTs attractive candidates for a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders including anxiety disorders. OCT3 has been implicated in termination of monoaminergic signalling in the central nervous system. Interestingly, OCT3 mRNA is however also significantly up-regulated in the hippocampus of serotonin transporter knockout mice where it might serve as an alternative reuptake mechanism for serotonin. The examination of the behavioural phenotype of OCT3 knockout mice thus is paramount to assess the role of OCT3. We have therefore subjected mice lacking the OCT3 gene to a comprehensive behavioural test battery. While cognitive functioning in the Morris water maze test and aggression levels measured with the resident-intruder paradigm were in the same range as the respective control animals, OCT3 knockout animals showed a tendency of increased activity and were significantly less anxious in the elevated plus-maze test and the open field test as compared to their respective wild-type controls arguing for a role of OCT3 in the regulation of fear and anxiety, probably by modulating the serotonergic tone in limbic circuitries.

[PMID: 19025979]
Organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3) is a high-capacity, low-affinity transporter that mediates bidirectional, sodium-independent transport of dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, serotonin, and histamine. OCT3-mediated transport is directly inhibited by corticosterone, suggesting a potential role for the transporter in mediating some of the effects of stress and glucocorticoids on monoaminergic neurotransmission. To elucidate the importance of OCT3 in clearance of extracellular monoamines in the brain, we used immunohistochemical techniques to describe the distribution of OCT3-like-immunoreactive (OCT3-ir) cells throughout the rostrocaudal extent of adult male rat brains. OCT3-ir cell bodies were widely distributed throughout the brain, with the highest densities observed in the superior and inferior colliculi, islands of Calleja, subiculum, lateral septum, lateral and dorsomedial hypothalamic nuclei, and granule cell layers of the main and accessory olfactory bulbs, the cerebellum, and the retrosplenial granular cortex. OCT3-ir cells and/or fibers were also observed in circumventricular organs, and OCT3-ir ependymal cells were observed in the linings of all cerebral ventricles. The widespread distribution of OCT3-ir cell bodies, including regions receiving dense monoaminergic projections, suggests an important role for this transporter in regulating extracellular concentrations of monoamines in the rat brain and is consistent with the hypothesis that corticosterone-induced inhibition of OCT3-mediated transport may contribute to effects of acute stress or corticosterone on monoaminergic neurotransmission.

[PMID: 21636115]
Murine basophils can contribute to the T(H)2 polarization of the immune response by providing rapidly large amounts of IL-4, which suggests that pharmacologic downregulation of this cytokine might provide a strategy to attenuate pathologies associated with excessive production. We examined a number of physiological and pharmacologic ligands of the organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3), a membrane carrier of biogenic amines, for their inhibitory effect on IL-4 production by basophils, selecting the most efficient compounds for in vivo evaluation in basophil-dependent experimental models. IL-4 production by basophils isolated ex vivo or from bone marrow cultures was assessed in response to various stimuli with or without biogenic monoamines or pharmacologic analogs. Selected compounds were administered in vivo to examine their effect on levels of circulating IgE generated during a basophil-dependent T(H)2 response and on basophil activation in mice receiving IL-33. We found a drastic decrease in IL-4 production by stimulated basophils on exposure to serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) that is taken up by basophils through the specific high-affinity transporters serotonin transporter and the polyspecific, high-capacity organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3; or Slc22a3) but inhibits their function exclusively through the latter. This downregulation is likewise observed in vivo in response to 5-HT and other OCT3 ligands, as well as in human basophils sorted from PMBCs of nonatopic donors. We provide evidence for a new means of downregulating IL-4 production by basophils, both in vitro and in vivo, through OCT3 targeted by 5-HT and pharmacologic ligands.

[PMID: 24618127]
The effect of blockade of either 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)/serotonin transporter (SERT) with citalopram or the organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3)/plasma membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT) with decynium-22 (D-22) on spontaneous and evoked release of 5-HT in the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) was investigated in rat brainstem slices treated with gabazine. 5-HT release was measured indirectly by changes in the frequency and amplitude of glutamatergic miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) [in the presence of tetrodotoxin (TTX)] and evoked EPSCs. Blockade of 5-HT3 receptors with granisetron reduced, whereas the 5-HT3 agonist phenylbiguanide increased, the frequency of mEPSCs. 5-HT decreased mEPSC frequency at low concentrations and increased frequency at high concentrations. This inhibition was blocked by the 5-HT1A antagonist N-[2-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-2-pyridinylcyclohexanecarboxamide (WAY-100635), which was ineffective on its own, whereas the excitation was reversed by granisetron. The addition of citalopram or D-22 caused inhibition, which was prevented by 5-HT1A blockade. Thus, in the NTS, the spontaneous release of 5-HT is able to activate 5-HT3 receptors, but not 5-HT1A receptors, as the release in their vicinity is removed by uptake. The ineffectiveness of corticosterone suggests that the low-affinity, high-capacity transporter is PMAT, not OCT3. For evoked 5-HT release, only D-22 caused an increase in the amplitude of EPSCs, with a decrease in the paired pulse ratio, and increased the number of spontaneous EPSCs after 20-Hz stimulation. Thus, for the evoked release of 5-HT, the low-affinity, high-capacity transporter PMAT, but not 5-HT transporter (5-HTT)/SERT, is important in the regulation of changes in 5-HT extracellular concentration.

[PMID: 24246570]
Organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2) and 3 (OCT3) are low-affinity, high-capacity transporters (uptake-2) expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and other major organs. Proven to be essential components in the CNS functions, OCT2 and OCT3 are suggested as potential targets of antidepressant therapeutics recently. Berberine, an active constituent derived from many medicinal plants, such as Coptis chinensis, has been reported to possess antidepressant-like action in the tail suspension test and forced swim test with elevated serotonin/norepinephrine/dopamine (5-HT/NE/DA) level in mouse brain; however the mechanism has not been elucidated. In consideration of the relation between OCT2/3 and antidepressant action, and the characteristic of berberine as an organic cation, we investigated the potential involvement of OCT2 and OCT3 in the antidepressant-like action of berberine in the present study. The results in mouse brain synaptosomes demonstrated that uptake-2 inhibition might play a notable role in enhanced serotonergic and noradrenergic effects induced by berberine. The inhibitory study in transfected MDCK cells displayed that berberine is a potent inhibitor of human OCT2 and OCT3, and its IC50 values for inhibition of transporter-mediated 5-HT/NE uptake are between 0.1 and 1μM. In addition, berberine was identified as a substrate of hOCT2 and hOCT3. In conclusion, berberine is a substrate and an inhibitor of hOCT2 and hOCT3, and its inhibition on OCT2- and OCT3-mediated 5-HT and NE uptake may contribute to the enhanced monoamine neurotransmission in mouse brain. It was deduced that the inhibition of OCT2 and OCT3 probably be implicated in the mechanism of antidepressant-like action.

[PMID: 23982114]
The organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3) is a widely expressed transporter for endogenous and exogenous organic cations. Of particular interest is OCT3 expression and function in the brain, where it plays a role in serotonin clearance and influences mood and behavior. Protein kinase signaling mediates rapid modulation of cerebral processes, but little is known about acute regulation of OCT3 by protein kinases. Therefore, we cloned mouse OCT3 (mOCT3) and generated a human embryonic kidney cell line stably expressing the transporter to study transport characteristics, acute regulation by protein kinases, and interaction with psychotropic drugs. Uptake measurement was performed using the fluorescent cation 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium iodide (ASP(+), 1 μM) as a substrate. The translational value of these findings was determined by comparing results obtained with cloned mouse and human OCT3. mOCT3-mediated transport is membrane potential dependent and pH independent. ASP(+) uptake by mOCT3 and human OCT3 (hOCT3) was efficiently inhibited by 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium, tetrapentylammonium (TPA(+)), corticosterone, serotonin, and histamine and by the drugs ketamine, fluoxetine, and diazepam. The half maximal inhibitory concentrations of mOCT3 and hOCT3 for TPA(+), serotonin, diazepam, and ketamine are significantly different. Diazepam is a non-transported inhibitor. Furthermore, the activities of mOCT3 and hOCT3 are acutely regulated by the p56 (lck) tyrosine kinase by decreasing their V max. Studies with freshly isolated renal proximal tubules from mOCT1/2(-/-) mice, in which mOCT3 is the only OCT present, confirmed this regulation pathway. Only the activity of hOCT3 is regulated by calmodulin. These findings suggest that even though many transport properties of mOCT3 and hOCT3 are similar, there are also species-specific aspects of OCT3 function.

[PMID: 12584728]
The serotonin (5HT) transporter (5HTT) regulates serotonergic neurotransmission by mediating the reuptake of 5HT from the synaptic cleft. Although lacking the high affinity and selectivity of the 5HTT, the brain expresses a large number of other transporters, including the polyspecific organic cation transporters (OCTs). OCT1 and OCT3, members of the potential-sensitive organic cation transporter gene family, physiologically transport a wide spectrum of organic cations. In addition, both transporters mediate low-affinity 5HT transport and, therefore, may participate in the clearance of excessive 5HT. Because concentrations of extracellular 5HT are increased in the brain of 5HTT-deficient mice, they are a model for investigating the role of OCTs in 5HT system homeostasis. Here, we analyzed OCT1 and OCT3 gene expression in the brain of 5HTT knockout mice by semiquantitative competitive polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization. We demonstrate that, in 5HTT-deficient mice, OCT3 mRNA concentrations were significantly increased in the hippocampus, but not in other brain regions, including cortex, striatum, cerebellum, and brainstem. In contrast, no difference in OCT1 expression was detected between 5HTT knockout and control mice. Up-regulation of OCT3 expression and enhanced low-affinity 5HT uptake may limit the adverse effects of elevated extracellular 5HT and may play a critical role in maintaining 5HT-dependent functions of the hippocampus in the absence of 5HTT.

[PMID: 19371745]
The dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH) plays an important role in coordinating physiological and behavioral responses to stress-related stimuli. In vertebrates, DMH serotonin (5-HT) concentrations increase rapidly in response to acute stressors or corticosterone (CORT). Recent studies suggest that CORT inhibits postsynaptic clearance of 5-HT from the extracellular fluid in the DMH by blocking organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3), a polyspecific CORT-sensitive transport protein. Because OCTs are low-affinity, high-capacity transporters, we hypothesized that CORT effects on extracellular 5-HT are most pronounced in the presence of elevated 5-HT release. We predicted that local application of CORT into the DMH would potentiate the effects of d-fenfluramine, a 5-HT-releasing agent, on extracellular 5-HT. These experiments were conducted using in vivo microdialysis in freely-moving male Sprague-Dawley rats implanted with a microdialysis probe into the medial hypothalamus (MH), which includes the DMH. In Experiment 1, rats simultaneously received intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of 1 mg/kg D-fenfluramine or saline and either 200 ng/mL CORT or dilute ethanol (EtOH) vehicle delivered to the MH by reverse-dialysis for 40 min. In Experiment 2, 5 microM D-fenfluramine and either 200 ng/mL CORT or EtOH vehicle were concurrently delivered to the MH for 40 min using reverse-dialysis. CORT potentiated the increases in extracellular 5-HT concentrations induced by either i.p. or intra-MH administration of D-fenfluramine. Furthermore, CORT and D-fenfluramine interacted to alter home cage behaviors. Our results support the hypothesis that CORT inhibition of OCT3-mediated 5-HT clearance from the extracellular fluid contributes to stress-induced increases in extracellular 5-HT and 5-HT signaling.