[PMID: 22560084]
The mutational status and configuration of immunoglobulin heavy variable (IGHV) gene rearrangements was analyzed in 85 Serbian patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We found that 55.3% of cases belonged to mutated and 44.7% to unmutated CLL, progressive disease predominating in the unmutated subset. IGHV gene use resembled that obtained for Mediterranean countries, except for underrepresentation of the IGHV4 subgroup in our cohort. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) results from the clonal expansion of mature B lymphocytes and is characterized by extreme clinical heterogeneity. One of the most reliable prognostic markers in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the mutational status of immunoglobulin heavy variable (IGHV) genes, which defines 2 subsets, mutated CLL (M-CLL) and unmutated CLL (U-CLL), with different clinical courses. Biased IGHV gene use between M-CLL and U-CLL clones, as well as population differences in the IGHV gene repertoire have been reported. In this study, mutational status and configuration of IGHV-IGHD-IGHJ rearrangements in 85 Serbian patients were analyzed using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and sequencing methodology. We found that 55.3% of cases belonged to M-CLL and 44.7% belonged to U-CLL, with progressive disease predominating in the unmutated subset. Most frequently expressed was the IGHV3 subgroup (55.7%), followed by IGHV1 (27.3%), IGHV4 (12.5%), IGHV5 (2.3%), IGHV2 (1.1%), and IGHV6 (1.1%). The distribution of IGHD subgroups was as follows: IGHD3, 39.1%; IGHD2, 21.8%; IGHD6, 12.6%; IGHD1, 10.3%; IGHD4, 8%; IGHD5, 6.9%; and IGHD7, 1.1%. The most frequent IGHJ gene was IGHJ4 (48.9%), followed by IGHJ6 (28.4%), IGHJ3 (11.4%), and IGHJ5 (11.4%). In 15.3% of cases, heavy complementarity-determining region 3 (VH CDR3) amino acid sequences could be assigned to previously defined stereotyped clusters. Our study showed a strong correlation between IGHV gene mutational status and clinical course of CLL. IGHV gene use was comparable to that obtained for Mediterranean countries, with the exception of the IGHV4 subgroup, which was underrepresented in our cohort.

[PMID: 16083281]
Relative protein expression levels were compared in leukemic B cells from two patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) having either mutated (M-CLL) or unmutated (UM-CLL) immunoglobulin variable heavy chain genes (IgV(H)). Cells were separated into cytosol and membrane protein fractions then labeled with acid-cleavable ICAT reagents (cICAT). Labeled proteins were digested with trypsin then subjected to SCX and affinity chromatography followed by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis on a linear ion trap mass spectrometer. A total of 9 proteins from the cytosol fraction and 4 from the membrane fraction showed a 3-fold or greater difference between M-CLL and UM-CLL and a subset of these were examined by Western blot where results concurred with cICAT abundance ratios. The abundance of one of the proteins in particular, the mitochondrial membrane protein cytochrome c oxidase subunit COX G was examined in 6 M-CLL and 6 UM-CLL patients using western blot and results showed significantly greater levels (P < 0.001) in M-CLL patients vs UM-CLL patients. These results demonstrate that stable isotope labeling and mass spectrometry can complement 2D gel electrophoresis and gene microarray technologies for identifying putative and perhaps unique prognostic markers in CLL.

[PMID: 23468975]
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is typically regarded as an indolent B-cell malignancy. However, there is wide variability with regards to need for therapy, time to progressive disease, and treatment response. This clinical variability is due, in part, to biological heterogeneity between individual patients' leukemias. While much has been learned about this biological variation using genomic approaches, it is unclear whether such efforts have sufficiently evaluated biological and clinical heterogeneity in CLL. To study the extent of genomic variability in CLL and the biological and clinical attributes of genomic classification in CLL, we evaluated 893 unique CLL samples from fifteen publicly available gene expression profiling datasets. We used unsupervised approaches to divide the data into subgroups, evaluated the biological pathways and genetic aberrations that were associated with the subgroups, and compared prognostic and clinical outcome data between the subgroups. Using an unsupervised approach, we determined that approximately 600 CLL samples are needed to define the spectrum of diversity in CLL genomic expression. We identified seven genomically-defined CLL subgroups that have distinct biological properties, are associated with specific chromosomal deletions and amplifications, and have marked differences in molecular prognostic markers and clinical outcomes. Our results indicate that investigations focusing on small numbers of patient samples likely provide a biased outlook on CLL biology. These findings may have important implications in identifying patients who should be treated with specific targeted therapies, which could have efficacy against CLL cells that rely on specific biological pathways.

[PMID: 20353875]
Recently developed molecular prognostic tests in patients with early Binet stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) are costly and often require a high level of technologic expertise. Recent data give evidence for the prognostic relevance of the percentage of smudge cells in B-CLL. In our study we analysed the prognostic potential of this novel marker in a cohort of 100 CLL patients. The percentage of smudge cells ranged from 0% to 70% (median 21%). Patients with <or=20% smudge cells (according to ROC analysis) had a significantly shorter time to first treatment and overall survival than patients with >20% smudge cells. Multivariate Cox regression analysis identified percentages of smudge cells, stage according to Binet and CD38 expression as independent prognostic markers. The percentage of smudge cells was significantly lower in CD38+, ZAP-70+ and unmutated IgVH patients. Combined analysis of smudge cell percentages with CD38 expression provided complementary prognostic information identifying three patient subgroups with good, intermediate and poor prognosis. Comparing gene expression profiles in a subset of 12 patients we identified eight differentially expressed genes in groups with high vs. low percentage of smudge cells suggesting a role of these differentially expressed genes, especially for Tribbles homolog 2 (Trib2), in the disease progression of high risk CLL patients. In conclusion, our data confirm previous studies showing that the simple and inexpensive microscopic detection of smudge cells on blood smears prepared for routine diagnostic purposes is a novel independent factor predicting overall survival in CLL.

[PMID: 16014569]
The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein is the principal activator of the p53 protein in the response to DNA double-strand breaks. Mutations in the ATM gene have been previously found in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemias (B-CLLs) but their clinical significance is unknown. We analyzed 155 CLL tumors and found 12% with ATM mutations and 4% with TP53 mutations; 2 tumors contained mutations in both genes. Retrospective analysis on selected samples indicated that the ATM mutations were usually present at diagnosis. Compared with patients with wild-type ATM/TP53 genes, patients with ATM mutations had statistically significantly reduced overall and treatment-free survival. Although present in both IGVH mutation subgroups, ATM mutations were associated with unmutated IGVH genes and they provided independent prognostic information on multivariate analysis. Mutations in the ATM gene resulted in impaired in vitro DNA damage responses. Tumors with ATM mutations only partially correlated with tumors with loss of an ATM allele through an 11q deletion and, interestingly, those 11q-deleted tumors with a second wild-type ATM allele had a preserved DNA damage response. The majority of patients with ATM mutations were refractory to DNA damaging chemotherapeutic drugs and as such might benefit from therapies that bypass the ATM/p53 pathway.

[PMID: 20090781]
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a heterogeneous disease exhibiting variable clinical course and survival rates. Mutational status of the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable regions (IGHVs) of CLL cells offers useful prognostic information for high-risk patients, but time and economical costs originally prevented it from being routinely used in a clinical setting. Instead, alternative markers of IGHV status, such as zeta-associated protein (ZAP70) or messenger RNA levels are often used. We report a (1)H-NMR-based metabolomics approach to examine serum metabolic profiles of early stage, untreated CLL patients (Binet stage A) classified on the basis of IGHV mutational status or ZAP70. Metabolic profiles of CLL patients (n=29) exhibited higher concentrations of pyruvate and glutamate and decreased concentrations of isoleucine compared with controls (n=9). Differences in metabolic profiles between unmutated (UM-IGHV; n=10) and mutated IGHV (M-IGHV; n=19) patients were determined using partial least square discriminatory analysis (PLS-DA; R(2)=0.74, Q(2)=0.36). The UM-IGHV patients had elevated levels of cholesterol, lactate, uridine and fumarate, and decreased levels of pyridoxine, glycerol, 3-hydroxybutyrate and methionine concentrations. The PLS-DA models derived from ZAP70 classifications showed comparatively poor goodness-of-fit values, suggesting that IGHV mutational status correlates better with disease-related metabolic profiles. Our results highlight the usefulness of (1)H-NMR-based metabolomics as a potential non-invasive prognostic tool for identifying CLL disease-state biomarkers.

[PMID: 17786276]
In B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), Rai stage, immunoglobulin gene mutational status, chromosomal abnormalities, CD38 and ZAP-70 expression were used as prognostic markers. In this study, to understand the molecular basis of chromosomal abnormalities leading to tumor progression, 90 CLL patients were grouped into poor prognosis (with 11q deletion and trisomy 12) and good prognosis (with normal karyotype and 13q deletion) and their clinical outcome was assessed. Gene expression profiles of 35 CLL samples with poor outcome (11q deletion, n=9; trisomy 12, n=5) and good outcome (13q deletion, n=13; normal karyotype, n=8) were analyzed using oligonucleotide microarray. Significance analysis of microarray (SAM) identified 27 differentially expressed genes between these two subgroups with significant overexpression of ATF5 and underexpression of CDC16, PCDH8, SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 in CLL patients with poor outcome. ATF5 gene expression in CLL was further studied because of its role in the regulation of cell cycle progression/differentiation and apoptosis. The overexpression of ATF5 was confirmed by real-time PCR using 39 CLL samples from the poor and good outcome groups. ATF5 was significantly (p<0.001) overexpressed in the poor outcome group. Furthermore, ATF5 expression was significantly higher in the 11q deletion as well as trisomy 12 group alone compared to the 13q deletion and normal karyotype groups. ATF5 overexpression was also associated with significantly (p=0.04) shorter time to treatment. Similarly, expression of five underexpressed genes also correlated with longer time to treatment. Thus, this report demonstrates that ATF5 may be one of the key genes involved in increased proliferation and survival in 11q deletion or trisomy 12, whereas CD16, CD86, SLAM, MNDA and ATF2 may be involved in the decreased proliferation of CLL cells with 13q deletion or normal karyotype.

[PMID: 19500131]
The objective of this study was to confirm previous results regarding the differential expression and prognostic significance of the circadian gene CRY1 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients and its relationship with the expression of other circadian genes and well-established prognostic markers. We also aimed to investigate whether the peripheral circadian machinery may be deregulated in CLL cells. The expression of CRY1, PER1, and PER2 was determined by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 116 CLL patients. The expression at sequential time points over a 24-h period was measured in six CLL patients and six normal donors. We confirmed the differential expression of CRY1 in ZAP-70(+)/CD38(+) and ZAP-70(-)/CD38(-) CLL samples. Subgroups formed according to CRY1 expression levels differed significantly in time to treatment. This difference was even more pronounced for subgroups stratified by a CRY1 : PER2 expression ratio and the ratio was an independent prognostic marker in a multivariate model. Furthermore, our data indicate disturbances in the periodic expression of circadian genes in CLL cells. Because of their role in the expression of cell cycle-related and DNA-damage response genes, we suggest that the deregulated expression of circadian genes may be linked to the molecular pathogenesis of CLL.

[PMID: 16825496]
CD38 expression of tumor cells has been identified as an important prognostic factor in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Although CD38 is involved in effector functions of T cells, the prognostic value of CD38+ T cells has not yet been addressed in B-CLL. In the present study, CD38-expression levels in B-CLL cells and T cells from 204 patients were analyzed by flow cytometry and correlated with clinical and molecular risk parameters. CD38 expression significantly differed in the neoplastic clone from patients with low versus advanced stage, irrespective of the sex of patients. In contrast, CD38 expression was generally higher in T cells from female compared with male patients but only increased in male patients in a stage-dependent manner. In male patients, combined analysis of CD38 in T cells and B-CLL cells identified 4 subgroups with significantly different treatment-free survival. Multivariate analysis including Rai stage and molecular risk parameters of the neoplastic clone identified CD38-expression levels in T cells as an independent prognostic factor in male patients. Combined analysis of CD38 in B-CLL and T cells is superior in predicting outcome of male B-CLL patients than either parameter alone. Further studies are needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of the sex-specific role of CD38+ T cells in B-CLL.

[PMID: 19127482]
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative disorder with a variable clinical course. Patients with unmutated IgV(H) gene show a shorter progression-free and overall survival than patients with immunoglobulin heavy chain variable regions (IgV(H)) gene mutated. In addition, BCL6 mutations identify a subgroup of patients with high risk of progression. Gene expression was analysed in 36 early-stage patients using high-density microarrays. Around 150 genes differentially expressed were found according to IgV(H) mutations, whereas no difference was found according to BCL6 mutations. Functional profiling methods allowed us to distinguish KEGG and gene ontology terms showing coordinated gene expression changes across subgroups of CLL. We validated a set of differentially expressed genes according to IgV(H) status, scoring them as putative prognostic markers in CLL. Among them, CRY1, LPL, CD82 and DUSP22 are the ones with at least equal or superior performance to ZAP70 which is actually the most used surrogate marker of IgV(H) status.