[PMID: 16263726]
Defining the protein factors that directly recognize post-translational, covalent histone modifications is essential toward understanding the impact of these chromatin "marks" on gene regulation. In the current study, we identify human CHD1, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling protein, as a factor that directly and selectively recognizes histone H3 methylated on lysine 4. In vitro binding studies identified that CHD1 recognizes di- and trimethyl H3K4 with a dissociation constant (Kd) of approximately 5 microm, whereas monomethyl H3K4 binds CHD1 with a 3-fold lower affinity. Surprisingly, human CHD1 binds to methylated H3K4 in a manner that requires both of its tandem chromodomains. In vitro analyses demonstrate that unlike human CHD1, yeast Chd1 does not bind methylated H3K4. Our findings indicate that yeast and human CHD1 have diverged in their ability to discriminate covalently modified histones and link histone modification-recognition and non-covalent chromatin remodeling activities within a single human protein.

[PMID: 16468993]
Nucleosome remodelling complexes play a key role in gene activation in response to environmental changes by driving promoter chromatin to reach an accessible configuration. They also mediate genome-wide chromatin organization, although their role in processes other than activation-related chromatin remodelling are poorly understood. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ADH2 gene represents an excellent model for understanding the role of chromatin structure and remodelling in gene regulation. Following glucose depletion, highly positioned promoter nucleosomes are destabilized leading to strictly regulated kinetics of transcriptional activation. Nevertheless, no chromatin remodelling activities responsible for establishing or remodelling ADH2 chromatin structure have been identified to date. Here we show that the absence of the Isw1 and Chd1 ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling activities delays the maximal expression of ADH2 without impairing the chromatin remodelling that occurs upon activation. Instead, a destabilized chromatin structure on the ADH2 coding and termination region is observed in the absence of Isw1 or Chd1 in repressing conditions. The specific Isw1 complex involved in this nucleosome repositioning is Isw1b because the deletion of Ioc2 and Ioc4, but not of Ioc3, causes the same phenotype as the deletion of Isw1. Moreover, the lack of Chd1 combined with the absence of Isw1 and Isw2 impairs nucleosome spacing along the ADH2 gene, and genome-wide in S. cerevisiae. Thus, the ISWI and Chd1 remodelling factors are not only involved in transcription-related chromatin remodelling, but also are required to maintain a specific chromatin configuration across the yeast genome.

[PMID: 17098252]
Chromodomain from heterochromatin protein 1 and polycomb protein is known to be a lysine-methylated histone H3 tail-binding module. Chromo-helicase/ATPase DNA-binding protein 1 (CHD1) is an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling factor, containing two tandem chromodomains. In human CHD1, both chromodomains are essential for specific binding to a K4 methylated histone H3 (H3 MeK4) peptide and are found to bind cooperatively in the crystal structure. For the budding yeast homologue, Chd1, the second but not the first chromodomain was once reported to bind to an H3 MeK4 peptide. Here, we reveal that neither the second chromodomain nor a region containing tandem chromodomains from yeast Chd1 bind to any lysine-methylated or arginine-methylated histone peptides that we examined. In addition, we examined the structures of the chromodomains from Chd1 by NMR. Although the tertiary structure of the region containing tandem chromodomains could not be obtained, the secondary structure deduced from NMR is well conserved in the tertiary structures of the corresponding first and second chromodomains determined individually by NMR. Both chromodomains of Chd1 demonstrate a structure similar to that of the corresponding part of CHD1, consisting of a three-stranded beta-sheet followed by a C-terminal alpha-helix. However, an additional helix between the first and second beta-strands, which is found in both of the first chromodomains of Chd1 and CHD1, is positioned in an entirely different manner in Chd1 and CHD1. In human CHD1 this helix forms the peptide-binding site. The amino acid sequences of the chromodomains could be well aligned on the basis of these structures. The alignment showed that yeast Chd1 lacks several key functional residues, which are responsible for specific binding to a methylated lysine residue in other chromodomains. Chd1 is likely to have no binding affinity for any H3 MeK peptide, as found in other chromodomain proteins.

[PMID: 21177652]
The molecular motor protein CHD1 has been implicated in the regulation of transcription and in the transcription-independent genome-wide incorporation of H3.3 into paternal chromatin in Drosophila melanogaster. A key feature of CHD1 is the presence of two chromodomains, which can bind to histone H3 methylated at lysine 4 and thus might serve to recruit and/or maintain CHD1 at the chromatin. Here, we describe genetic and biochemical approaches to the study of the Drosophila CHD1 chromodomains. We found that overall localization of CHD1 on polytene chromosomes does not appreciably change in chromodomain-mutant flies. In contrast, the chromodomains are important for transcription-independent activities of CHD1 during early embryonic development as well as for transcriptional regulation of several heat shock genes. However, neither CHD1 nor its chromodomains are needed for RNA polymerase II localization and H3K4 methylation but loss of CHD1 decreases transcription-induced histone eviction at the Hsp70 gene in vivo. Chromodomain mutations negatively affect the chromatin assembly activities of CHD1 in vitro, and they appear to be involved in linking the ATP-dependent motor to the chromatin assembly function of CHD1.

[PMID: 23533627]
CHD1 is a conserved chromatin remodeling factor that localizes to active genes and functions in nucleosome assembly and positioning as well as histone turnover. Mouse CHD1 is required for the maintenance of stem cell pluripotency while human CHD1 may function as a tumor suppressor. To investigate the action of CHD1 on higher order chromatin structure in differentiated cells, we examined the consequences of loss of CHD1 and over-expression of CHD1 on polytene chromosomes from salivary glands of third instar Drosophila melanogaster larvae. We observed that chromosome structure is sensitive to the amount of this remodeler. Loss of CHD1 resulted in alterations of chromosome structure and an increase in the heterochromatin protein HP1a, while over-expression of CHD1 disrupted higher order chromatin structure and caused a decrease in levels of HP1a. Over-expression of an ATPase inactive form of CHD1 did not result in severe chromosomal defects, suggesting that the ATPase activity is required for this in vivo phenotype. Interestingly, changes in CHD1 protein levels did not correlate with changes in the levels of the euchromatin mark H3K4me3 or elongating RNA Polymerase II. Thus, while CHD1 is localized to transcriptionally active regions of the genome, it can function to alter the levels of HP1a, perhaps through changes in methylation of H3K9.

[PMID: 21623345]
The ATP-dependent chromatin-remodelling enzyme Chd1 is a 168-kDa protein consisting of a double chromodomain, Snf2-related ATPase domain, and a C-terminal DNA-binding domain. Here, we show the DNA-binding domain is required for Saccharomyces cerevisiae Chd1 to bind and remodel nucleosomes. The crystal structure of this domain reveals the presence of structural homology to SANT and SLIDE domains previously identified in ISWI remodelling enzymes. The presence of these domains in ISWI and Chd1 chromatin-remodelling enzymes may provide a means of efficiently harnessing the action of the Snf2-related ATPase domain for the purpose of nucleosome spacing and provide an explanation for partial redundancy between these proteins. Site directed mutagenesis was used to identify residues important for DNA binding and generate a model describing the interaction of this domain with DNA. Through inclusion of Chd1 sequences in homology searches SLIDE domains were identified in CHD6-9 proteins. Point mutations to conserved amino acids within the human CHD7 SLIDE domain have been identified in patients with CHARGE syndrome.

[PMID: 15647753]
The specific post-translational modifications to histones influence many nuclear processes including gene regulation, DNA repair and replication. Recent studies have identified effector proteins that recognize patterns of histone modification and transduce their function in downstream processes. For example, histone acetyltransferases (HATs) have been shown to participate in many essential cellular processes, particularly those associated with activation of transcription. Yeast SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase) and SLIK (SAGA-like) are two highly homologous and conserved multi-subunit HAT complexes, which preferentially acetylate histones H3 and H2B and deubiquitinate histone H2B. Here we identify the chromatin remodelling protein Chd1 (chromo-ATPase/helicase-DNA binding domain 1) as a component of SAGA and SLIK. Our findings indicate that one of the two chromodomains of Chd1 specifically interacts with the methylated lysine 4 mark on histone H3 that is associated with transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the SLIK complex shows enhanced acetylation of a methylated substrate and this activity is dependent upon a functional methyl-binding chromodomain, both in vitro and in vivo. Our study identifies the first chromodomain that recognizes methylated histone H3 (Lys 4) and possibly identifies a larger subfamily of chromodomain proteins with similar recognition properties.

[PMID: 23319591]
The circadian oscillator controls time-of-day gene expression by a network of interconnected feedback loops and is reset by light. The requisite for chromatin regulation in eukaryotic transcription necessitates temporal regulation of histone-modifying and chromatin-remodeling enzymes for proper clock function. CHD1 is known to bind H3K4me3 in mammalian cells, and Neurospora CHD1 is required for proper regulation of the frequency (frq) gene. Based on this, we examined a strain lacking SET1 to determine the role of H3K4 methylation in clock- and light-mediated frq regulation. Expression of frq was altered in strains lacking set1 under both circadian- and light-regulated gene expression. There is a delay in the phasing of H3K4me3 relative to the peak in frq expression. White Collar 2 (WC-2) association with the frq promoter persists longer in Δset1, suggesting a more permissible chromatin state. Surprisingly, SET1 is required for DNA methylation in the frq promoter, indicating a dependence on H3K4me for DNA methylation. The data support a model where SET1 is needed for proper regulation by modulating chromatin at frq.

[PMID: 16606615]
ISWI proteins form the catalytic core of a subset of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling activities in eukaryotes from yeast to man. Many of these complexes have been found to reposition nucleosomes but with different directionalities. We find that the yeast Isw1a, Isw2, and Chd1 enzymes preferentially move nucleosomes toward more central locations on short DNA fragments whereas Isw1b does not. Importantly, the inherent positioning properties of the DNA play an important role in determining where nucleosomes are relocated to by all of these enzymes. However, a key difference is that the Isw1a, Isw2, and Chd1 enzymes are unable to move nucleosomes to positions closer than 15 bp from a DNA end, whereas Isw1b can. We also find that there is a correlation between the inability of enzymes to move nucleosomes close to DNA ends and the preferential binding to nucleosomes bearing linker DNA. These observations suggest that the accessibility of linker DNA together with the positioning properties of the underlying DNA play important roles in determining the outcome of remodeling by these enzymes.

[PMID: 19948887]
Spt4-Spt5, a general transcription elongation factor for RNA polymerase II, also has roles in chromatin regulation. However, the relationships between these functions are not clear. Previously, we isolated suppressors of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae spt5 mutation in genes encoding members of the Paf1 complex, which regulates several cotranscriptional histone modifications, and Chd1, a chromatin remodeling enzyme. Here, we show that this suppression of spt5 can result from loss of histone H3 lysines 4 or 36 methylation, or reduced recruitment of Chd1 or the Rpd3S complex. These spt5 suppressors also rescue the synthetic growth defects observed in spt5 mutants that also lack elongation factor TFIIS. Using a FLO8 reporter gene, we found that a chd1 mutation caused cryptic initiation of transcription. We further observed enhancement of cryptic initiation in chd1 isw1 mutants and increased histone acetylation in a chd1 mutant. We suggest that, as previously proposed for H3 lysine 36 methylation and the Rpd3S complex, H3 lysine 4 methylation and Chd1 function to maintain normal chromatin structures over transcribed genes, and that one function of Spt4-Spt5 is to help RNA polymerase II overcome the repressive effects of these histone modifications and chromatin regulators on transcription.