[PMID: 12171605]
The dinucleotide relative abundance profile can be regarded as a genomic signature because, despite diversity between species, it varies little between 50 kilobase or longer windows on a given genome. Both the causes and the functional significance of this phenomenon could be illuminated by determining if it persists on smaller scales. The profile is computed from the base step "odds ratios" that compare dinucleotide frequencies to those expected under the assumption of stochastic equilibrium (thorough shuffling). Analysis is carried out on 22 sequences, representing 19 species and comprised of about 53 million bases all together, to assess stability of the signature in windows ranging in size from 50 kilobases down to 125 bases. Dinucleotide relative abundance distance from the global signature is computed locally for all non-overlapping windows on each sequence. These distances are log-normally distributed with nearly constant variance and with means that tend to zero slower than reciprocal square root of window size. The mean distance within genomes is larger for protist, plant, and human chromosomes, and smaller for archaea, bacteria, and yeast, for any window size. The imprint of the global signature is locally pervasive on all scales considered in the sequences (either genomes or chromosomes) that were scanned.

[PMID: 15046306]
In this study we investigated the correlation between dinucleotide relative abundance values (the genomic signature) obtained from bacterial whole-genome sequences and two parameters widely used for bacterial classification, 16S rDNA sequence similarity and DNA-DNA hybridisation values. Twenty-eight completely sequenced bacterial genomes were included in the study. The correlation between the genomic signature and DNA-DNA hybridisation values was high and taxa that showed less than 30% DNA-DNA binding will in general not have dinucleotide relative abundance dissimilarity (delta*) values below 40. On the other hand, taxa showing more than 50% DNA-DNA binding will not have delta* values higher than 17. Our data indicate that the overall correlation between genomic signature and 16S rDNA sequence similarity is low, except for closely related organisms (16S rDNA similarity >94%). Statistical analysis of delta* values between different subgroups of the Proteobacteria indicate that the beta- and gamma-Proteobacteria are more closely related to each other than to the other subgroups of the Proteobacteria and that the alpha- and epsilon-Proteobacteria form clearly separate subgroups. Using the genomic signature we have also predicted DNA-DNA binding values for fastidious or unculturable endosymbionts belonging to the genera Rickettsia, Wigglesworthia and Buchnera.

[PMID: 15716010]
In the post genomic era, access to complete genome sequence data for numerous diverse species has opened multiple avenues for examining and comparing primary DNA sequence organization of entire genomes. Previously, the concept of a genomic signature was introduced with the observation of species-type specific Dinucleotide Relative Abundance Profiles (DRAPs); dinucleotides were identified as the subsequences with the greatest bias in representation in a majority of genomes. Herein, we demonstrate that DRAP is one particular genomic signature contained within a broader spectrum of signatures. Within this spectrum, an alternative genomic signature, Chaos Game Representation (CGR), provides a unique visualization of patterns in sequence organization. A genomic signature is associated with a particular integer order or subsequence length that represents a measure of the resolution or granularity in the analysis of primary DNA sequence organization. We quantitatively explore the organizational information provided by genomic signatures of different orders through different distance measures, including a novel Image Distance. The Image Distance and other existing distance measures are evaluated by comparing the phylogenetic trees they generate for 26 complete mitochondrial genomes from a diversity of species. The phylogenetic tree generated by the Image Distance is compatible with the known relatedness of species. Quantitative evaluation of the spectrum of genomic signatures may be used to ultimately gain insight into the determinants and biological relevance of the genome signatures.

[PMID: 9294192]
Eukaryotic genome similarity relationships are inferred using sequence information derived from large aggregates of genomic sequences. Comparisons within and between species sample sequences are based on the profile of dinucleotide relative abundance values (The profile is rho*XY = f*XY/f*Xf*Y for all XY, where f*X denotes the frequency of the nucleotide X and f*XY denotes the frequency of the dinucleotide XY, both computed from the sequence concatenated with its inverted complement). Previous studies with respect to prokaryotes and this study document that profiles of different DNA sequence samples (sample size >/=50 kb) from the same organism are generally much more similar to each other than they are to profiles from other organisms, and that closely related organisms generally have more similar profiles than do distantly related organisms. On this basis we refer to the collection (rho*XY) as the genome signature. This paper identifies rho*XY extremes and compares genome signature differences for a diverse range of eukaryotic species. Interpretations on the mechanisms maintaining these profile differences center on genome-wide replication, repair, DNA structures, and context-dependent mutational biases. It is also observed that mitochondrial genome signature differences between species parallel the corresponding nuclear genome signature differences despite large differences between corresponding mitochondrial and nuclear signatures. The genome signature differences also have implications for contrasts between rodents and other mammals, and between monocot and dicot plants, as well as providing evidence for similarities among fungi and the diversity of protists.

[PMID: 10430918]
We provide data and analysis to support the hypothesis that the ancestor of animal mitochondria (Mt) and many primitive amitochondrial (a-Mt) eukaryotes was a fusion microbe composed of a Clostridium-like eubacterium and a Sulfolobus-like archaebacterium. The analysis is based on several observations: (i) The genome signatures (dinucleotide relative abundance values) of Clostridium and Sulfolobus are compatible (sufficiently similar) and each has significantly more similarity in genome signatures with animal Mt sequences than do all other available prokaryotes. That stable fusions may require compatibility in genome signatures is suggested by the compatibility of plasmids and hosts. (ii) The expanded energy metabolism of the fusion organism was strongly selective for cementing such a fusion. (iii) The molecular apparatus of endospore formation in Clostridium serves as raw material for the development of the nucleus and cytoplasm of the eukaryotic cell.

[PMID: 9190805]
We compare and contrast genome-wide compositional biases and distributions of short oligonucleotides across 15 diverse prokaryotes that have substantial genomic sequence collections. These include seven complete genomes (Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma genitalium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803, Methanococcus jannaschii, and Pyrobaculum aerophilum). A key observation concerns the constancy of the dinucleotide relative abundance profiles over multiple 50-kb disjoint contigs within the same genome. (The profile is rhoXY* = fXY*/fX*fY* for all XY, where fX* denotes the frequency of the nucleotide X and fY* denotes the frequency of the dinucleotide XY, both computed from the sequence concatenated with its inverted complementary sequence.) On the basis of this constancy, we refer to the collection [rhoXY*] as the genome signature. We establish that the differences between [rhoXY*] vectors of 50-kb sample contigs of different genomes virtually always exceed the differences between those of the same genomes. Various di- and tetranucleotide biases are identified. In particular, we find that the dinucleotide CpG=CG is underrepresented in many thermophiles (e.g., M. jannaschii, Sulfolobus sp., and M. thermoautotrophicum) but overrepresented in halobacteria. TA is broadly underrepresented in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but normal counts appear in Sulfolobus and P. aerophilum sequences. More than for any other bacterial genome, palindromic tetranucleotides are underrepresented in H. influenzae. The M. jannaschii sequence is unprecedented in its extreme underrepresentation of CTAG tetranucleotides and in the anomalous distribution of CTAG sites around the genome. Comparative analysis of numbers of long tetranucleotide microsatellites distinguishes H. influenzae. Dinucleotide relative abundance differences between bacterial sequences are compared. For example, in these assessments of differences, the cyanobacteria Synechocystis, Synechococcus, and Anabaena do not form a coherent group and are as far from each other as general gram-negative sequences are from general gram-positive sequences. The difference of M. jannaschii from low-G+C gram-positive proteobacteria is one-half of the difference from gram-negative proteobacteria. Interpretations and hypotheses center on the role of the genome signature in highlighting similarities and dissimilarities across different classes of prokaryotic species, possible mechanisms underlying the genome signature, the form and level of genome compositional flux, the use of the genome signature as a chronometer of molecular phylogeny, and implications with respect to the three putative eubacterial, archaeal, and eukaryote domains of life and to the origin and early evolution of eukaryotes.

[PMID: 7482779]
Early biochemical experiments established that the set of dinucleotide odds ratios or 'general design' is a remarkably stable property of the DNA of an organism, which is essentially the same in protein-coding DNA, bulk genomic DNA, and in different renaturation rate and density gradient fractions of genomic DNA in many organisms. Analysis of currently available genomic sequence data has extended these earlier results, showing that the general designs of disjoint samples of a genome are substantially more similar to each other than to those of sequences from other organisms and that closely related organisms have similar general designs. From this perspective, the set of dinucleotide odds ratio (relative abundance) values constitute a signature of each DNA genome, which can discriminate between sequences from different organisms. Dinucleotide-odds ratio values appear to reflect not only the chemistry of dinucleotide stacking energies and base-step conformational preferences, but also the species-specific properties of DNA modification, replication and repair mechanisms.

[PMID: 10066522]
Early biochemical experiments measuring nearest neighbor frequencies established that the set of dinucleotide relative abundance values (dinucleotide biases) is a remarkably stable property of the DNA of an organism. Analyses of currently available genomic sequence data have extended these earlier results, showing that the dinucleotide biases evaluated for successive 50 kb segments of a genome are significantly more similar to each other than to those of sequences from more distant organisms. From this perspective, the set of dinucleotide biases constitutes a 'genomic signature' that can discriminate sequences from different organisms. The dinucleotide biases appear to reflect species-specific properties of DNA stacking energies, modification, replication, and repair mechanisms. The genomic signature is useful for detecting pathogenicity islands in bacterial genomes.

[PMID: 7809131]
Genomic homogeneity is investigated for a broad base of DNA sequences in terms of dinucleotide relative abundance distances (abbreviated delta-distances) and of oligonucleotide compositional extremes. It is shown that delta-distances between different genomic sequences in the same species are low, only about 2 or 3 times the distance found in random DNA, and are generally smaller than the between-species delta-distances. Extremes in short oligonucleotides include underrepresentation of TpA and overrepresentation of GpC in most temperate bacteriophage sequences; underrepresentation of CTAG in most eubacterial genomes; underrepresentation of GATC in most bacteriophage; CpG suppression in vertebrates, in all animal mitochondrial genomes, and in many thermophilic bacterial sequences; and overrepresentation of GpG/CpC in all animal mitochondrial sets and chloroplast genomes. Interpretations center on DNA structures (dinucleotide stacking energies, DNA curvature and superhelicity, nucleosome organization), context-dependent mutational events, methylation effects, and processes of replication and repair.

[PMID: 18953039]
Plasmids are ubiquitous mobile elements that serve as a pool of many host beneficial traits such as antibiotic resistance in bacterial communities. To understand the importance of plasmids in horizontal gene transfer, we need to gain insight into the 'evolutionary history' of these plasmids, i.e. the range of hosts in which they have evolved. Since extensive data support the proposal that foreign DNA acquires the host's nucleotide composition during long-term residence, comparison of nucleotide composition of plasmids and chromosomes could shed light on a plasmid's evolutionary history. The average absolute dinucleotide relative abundance difference, termed delta-distance, has been commonly used to measure differences in dinucleotide composition, or 'genomic signature', between bacterial chromosomes and plasmids. Here, we introduce the Mahalanobis distance, which takes into account the variance-covariance structure of the chromosome signatures. We demonstrate that the Mahalanobis distance is better than the delta-distance at measuring genomic signature differences between plasmids and chromosomes of potential hosts. We illustrate the usefulness of this metric for proposing candidate long-term hosts for plasmids, focusing on the virulence plasmids pXO1 from Bacillus anthracis, and pO157 from Escherichia coli O157:H7, as well as the broad host range multi-drug resistance plasmid pB10 from an unknown host.