[PMID: 29554826]
A marked heterogeneity is exhibited by asthma both clinically and at the molecular level with different phenotypes driven by diverse mechanistic pathways that require specifically targeted treatments. Biologics aimed at IL-4/13, IL-5 or IgE are proven or potentially effective treatments for patients with difficult to treat eosinophilic asthma. Importantly, it is now widely accepted that biologic-based therapies give significant clinical improvements in those patient populations where asthma phenotypes are taken into account. Such asthma phenotypes have been identified by reproducible and straightforward discriminatory biomarkers. This short review discusses recent studies of the effectiveness of the anti-IL-5 reslizumab in relation to the use of simple reproducible biomarkers in eosinophilic asthma.

[PMID: 29059618]
Eosinophilic asthma is characterized by the eosinophilic inflammation with the allergen independent activation of Th2 lymphocytes. Since IL-5 plays an important role in the maturation, survival and migration of eosinophils, hence the pathogenesis of eosinophilic asthma, biotherapeutics targeting IL-5/IL-5Rα have been developed and/or marketed, including Mepolizumab, Reslizumab, and Benralizumab. Accurate determination of bioactivity is crucial for the safety and efficacy of therapeutic antibodies. The current mode of action (MOA) based method used in the quality control and stability tests for anti-IL-5 mAbs is anti-proliferation assay, which is tedious with long duration and high variation. We describe here the development and validation of a reporter gene assay (RGA), based on an IL-5-dependent TF-1 cell line variant we established that stably expresses the luciferase reporter under the control of STAT5 response elements. After careful optimization, we demonstrate the excellent specificity, precision, accuracy and linearity of the established RGA. Our study also proves that the assay is superior on precision, sensitivity and assay simplicity to the anti-proliferation assay. The established RGA is also applicable to another anti-IL-5Rα mAb. These results show for the first time that this novel RGA, based on the IL-5-IL-5R-STAT5 pathway, can be a valuable supplement to the anti-proliferation assay and employed in the bioactivity determination of anti-IL-5/anti-IL-5Rα biotherapeutics.

[PMID: 30346831]
Reslizumab is a humanized anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody used as add-on maintenance treatment for patients with uncontrolled eosinophilic asthma. To predict response and nonresponse to intravenous reslizumab at 52 weeks with an algorithm we developed based on clinical indicators from pivotal clinical trials. Patients aged 18 years and older who met Global Initiative for Asthma 4 or 5 criteria and received intravenous reslizumab (n = 321) in two trials ( www.clinicaltrials.gov identifiers, NCT01287039 and NCT01285323) were selected as the data source. A mathematical model was constructed that was based on change from baseline to 16 weeks in Asthma Control Questionnaire and Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire scores and FEV<sub>1</sub>, and number of clinical asthma exacerbations during the year before enrollment and in the first 16 weeks of treatment, and these measures were evaluated for their ability to predict the outcome at 52 weeks: responder, nonresponder, or indeterminate. The algorithm predicted that 276 patients would be classified as responders; in 248 (89.9%), the prediction was correct. In comparison, 26 patients were predicted to be nonresponders; 50.0% of these predictions were correct. Nineteen patients were classified as indeterminate. The algorithm had 95.4-95.5% sensitivity and 40.6-54.1% specificity. Jackknife and cross-study validation confirmed the robustness of the algorithm. Our algorithm enabled prediction at 16 weeks of treatment of the response to intravenous reslizumab treatment at 52 weeks, but it was not suitable for predicting nonresponse. A positive score at 16 weeks should encourage continued treatment, and a negative score should prompt close monitoring to determine whether discontinuation is warranted.

[PMID: 27458609]
The starting point for this drug was the growing realization that eosinophils appeared to be associated with a severe form of asthma in which patients were subject to exacerbations of their condition that could not be adequately managed using inhaled and/or oral corticosteroids. Studies of the pathophysiology of eosinophils revealed that they produce many bioactive compounds that contribute to the pathophysiology of a number of diseases including asthma. Interleukin-5 (IL-5) in particular is an important factor in some forms of severe asthma. A rat antibody to IL-5 (39D10) was humanized producing the product now know as reslizumab. However, initial studies of this antibody in patients with asthma were unsuccessful. It was only when the importance of the eosinophilic asthma endotype was recognized that reslizumab was found to indeed reduce the severity and exacerbations of asthma in patients who were inadequately treated by inhaled and/ or oral corticosteroids. These studies have determined that reslizumab is a valuable drug for the management of such patients provided that they have an eosinophil count of > 400 cells/mcL. Because a very small percentage of patients receiving reslizumab may experience anaphylaxis, reslizumab must be only given in a facility with adequate facilities and by a health professional trained in the management of anaphylaxis.

[PMID: 27445482]
Within the context of the heterogeneous phenotypic stratification of asthmatic population, many patients are characterized by moderate-to-severe eosinophilic asthma, not adequately controlled by relatively high dosages of inhaled and even oral corticosteroids. Therefore, these subjects can obtain significant therapeutic benefits by additional biologic treatments targeting interleukin-5 (IL-5), given the key pathogenic role played by this cytokine in maturation, activation, proliferation, and survival of eosinophils. In particular, reslizumab is a humanized anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody that has been found to be an effective and safe add-on therapy, capable of decreasing asthma exacerbations and significantly improving disease control and lung function in patients experiencing persistent allergic or nonallergic eosinophilic asthma, despite the regular use of moderate-to-high doses of inhaled corticosteroids. These important therapeutic effects of reslizumab, demonstrated by several controlled clinical trials, have led to the recent approval by US Food and Drug Administration of its use, together with other antiasthma medications, for the maintenance treatment of patients suffering from severe uncontrolled asthma.

[PMID: 28683596]
Eosinophils have long been implicated as playing a central role in the pathophysiology of asthma in many patients, and eosinophilic asthma is now recognized as an important asthma endotype. Eosinophil differentiation, maturation, migration, and survival are primarily under the control of interleukin-5 (IL-5). Reslizumab is a humanized monoclonal (immunoglobulin G4/κ) antibody that binds with high affinity to circulating human IL-5 and downregulates the IL-5 signaling pathway, potentially disrupting the maturation and survival of eosinophils. In 2016, an intravenous formulation of reslizumab was approved in the USA, Canada, and Europe as add-on maintenance treatment for patients aged ⩾18 years with severe asthma and with an eosinophilic phenotype. The efficacy of reslizumab as add-on intravenous therapy has been reported in several phase III studies in patients with inadequately controlled moderate-to-severe asthma and elevated blood eosinophil counts (⩾400 cells/µl). Compared with placebo, reslizumab was associated with significant improvements in clinical exacerbation rate, forced expiratory volume in 1 s, asthma symptoms and quality of life, and significant reductions in blood eosinophil counts. Reslizumab also demonstrated a favorable tolerability profile similar to that of placebo, with reported adverse events being mostly mild to moderate in severity. Ongoing studies are focusing on the evaluation of a subcutaneous formulation of reslizumab in patients with asthma and elevated eosinophil levels. This review discusses the preclinical and clinical trial data available on reslizumab, potential opportunities for predicting an early response to reslizumab, and future directions in the field of anti-IL-5 antibody therapy.

[PMID: 28344579]
Human eosinophils represent approximately 1% of peripheral blood leukocytes. However, these cells have the propensity to leave the blood stream and migrate into inflamed tissues. Eosinophilic inflammation is present in a significant proportion of patients with severe asthma. Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder that affects more than 315 million people worldwide, with 10% having severe uncontrolled disease. Although the majority of patients can be efficiently treated, severe asthmatics continue to be uncontrolled and are at risk of exacerbations and even death. Interleukin-5 (IL-5) plays a fundamental role in eosinophil differentiation, maturation, activation and inhibition of apoptosis. Therefore, targeting IL-5 is an appealing approach to the treatment of patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. Reslizumab, a humanized anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody, binds with high affinity to amino acids 89-92 of IL-5 that are critical for binding to IL-5 receptor α. Two phase III studies have demonstrated that reslizumab administration in adult patients with severe asthma and eosinophilia (≥400 cells/μL) improved lung function, asthma control, and symptoms. Thus, the use of blood eosinophils as a baseline biomarker could help to select patients with severe uncontrolled asthma who are likely to achieve benefits in asthma control with reslizumab. In conclusion, targeted therapy with reslizumab represents one step closer to precision medicine in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma.

[PMID: 29486600]
Reslizumab, a humanized mAb against IL-5, reduces the number of eosinophils in the blood and lungs. Based on efficacy and safety data from pivotal RCTs, reslizumab had been approved for use as an add-on maintenance treatment of severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype in adults who have a history of exacerbations despite receiving their current asthma medicines. Areas covered: Current literature on reslizumab has been reviewed with a specific focus on its safety profile in the treatment of severe asthma. Expert opinion: Large pivotal and supportive trials reinforce the view that reslizumab is well tolerated, with an acceptable safety profile in patients exposed for longer than 2 years. However, no or few data concerning safety in special populations such as smokers, those with immune- and cellular senescence, patients with comorbidities and those receiving multi-drug treatments are available as yet. Furthermore, we need to fully elucidate some fundamental issues such as the risk of anaphylaxis and the long-term risk-benefit ratio of the impact of depletion of eosinophils and the potential risk of malignancies induced by a treatment with this anti-IL-5 agent.

[PMID: 28421429]
Reslizumab (Cinqaero<sup>®</sup>; Cinqair<sup>®</sup>) is a humanized monoclonal antibody against interleukin-5 (IL-5), a cytokine mediator of eosinophilic airway inflammation. Reslizumab is indicated as an add-on treatment for severe eosinophilic asthma in adults, on the basis of data from the BREATH phase III clinical trial programme. In three double-blind BREATH studies of up to 52 weeks' duration, adding intravenous reslizumab (3 mg/kg, once every 4 weeks) to the current asthma therapy of patients (aged 12-75 years) with eosinophilic asthma inadequately controlled with inhaled corticosteroids resulted in significant reductions in clinical asthma exacerbation frequency and significant improvements in lung function, asthma control and health-related quality of life relative to adding placebo. Pooled data from the two trials of 52 weeks' duration indicated similar benefits with reslizumab across various patient subgroups, including patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. Reslizumab was generally well tolerated, with very few recipients experiencing severe or serious treatment-related adverse events. Moreover, in an open-label extension study, continued use of reslizumab for up to 2 years was associated with durable lung function benefit, without any new tolerability concerns. Thus, intravenous reslizumab extends the valuable add-on treatment options for adults with severe eosinophilic asthma inadequately controlled with standard therapies.

[PMID: 23326187]
Eosinophils are important proinflammatory cells that make a major contribution to the inflammation seen in allergic diseases including asthma. Interleukin-5 is central to eosinophil maturation, release from the bone marrow, and subsequent accumulation, activation, and persistence in the tissues. Reslizumab (Cinquil™) is a humanized monoclonal antibody with potent interleukin-5 neutralizing effects, which represents a potential treatment for poorly controlled eosinophilic asthma. This review will consider the current status of the clinical development of reslizumab for asthma and in other inflammatory diseases with a marked eosinophilic component.