[PMID: 21527722]
Questions of if and when protein structures change within cells pervade biology and include questions of how the cytoskeleton sustains stresses on cells--particularly in mutant versus normal cells. Cysteine shotgun labeling with fluorophores is analyzed here with mass spectrometry of the spectrin-actin membrane skeleton in sheared red blood cell ghosts from normal and diseased mice. Sheared samples are compared to static samples at 37 °C in terms of cell membrane intensity in fluorescence microscopy, separated protein fluorescence, and tryptic peptide modification in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Spectrin labeling proves to be the most sensitive to shear, whereas binding partners ankyrin and actin exhibit shear thresholds in labeling and both the ankyrin-binding membrane protein band 3 and the spectrin-actin stabilizer 4.1R show minimal differential labeling. Cells from 4.1R-null mice differ significantly from normal in the shear-dependent labeling of spectrin, ankyrin, and band 3: Decreased labeling of spectrin reveals less stress on the mutant network as spectrin dissociates from actin. Mapping the stress-dependent labeling kinetics of α- and β-spectrin by LC-MS/MS identifies Cys in these antiparallel chains that are either force-enhanced or force-independent in labeling, with structural analyses indicating the force-enhanced sites are sequestered either in spectrin's triple-helical domains or in interactions with actin or ankyrin. Shear-sensitive sites identified comprehensively here in both spectrin and ankyrin appear consistent with stress relief through forced unfolding followed by cytoskeletal disruption.

[PMID: 10652315]
The spectrin heterodimer is formed by the antiparallel lateral association of an alpha and a beta subunit, each of which comprises largely a series of homologous triple-helical motifs. Initiation of dimer assembly involves strong binding between complementary motifs near the actin-binding end of the dimer. In this study, the mechanism of lateral spectrin association at this dimer nucleation site was investigated using the analytical ultracentrifuge to analyze heterodimers formed from recombinant peptides containing two or four homologous motifs from each subunit (alpha20-21/beta1-2; alpha18-21/beta1-4). Both the two-motif and four-motif dimer associations were weakened substantially with increasing salt concentration, indicating that electrostatic interactions are important for the dimer initiation process. Modeling of the electrostatic potential on the surface of the alpha20 and beta2 motifs showed that the side of the motifs comprising the A and B helices is the most favorable for association, with an area of positive electrostatic potential on the AB face of the beta2 motif opposite negative potential on the AB face of the alpha20 motif and vise versa. Protease protection analysis of the alpha20-21/beta1-2 dimer showed that multiple trypsin and proteinase K sites in the A helices of the beta2 and alpha21 motifs become buried upon dimer formation. Together, these data support a model where complementary long range electrostatic interactions on the AB faces of the triple-helical motifs in the dimer nucleation site initiate the correct pairing of motifs, i.e. alpha21-beta1 and alpha20-beta2. After initial docking of these complementary triple-helical motifs, this association is probably stabilized by subsequent formation of stronger hydrophobic interactions in a complex involving the A helices of both subunits and possibly most of the AB faces. The beta subunit A helix in particular appears to be buried in the dimer interface.

[PMID: 14747656]
The large size of spectrin, the flexible protein promoting reversible deformation of red cells, has been an obstacle to elucidating the molecular mechanism of its function. By studying cloned fragments of the repeating unit domain, we have found a correspondence between positions of selected spectrin repeats in a tetramer with their stabilities of folding. Six fragments consisting of two spectrin repeats were selected for study primarily on the basis of the predicted secondary structures of their linker regions. Fragments with a putatively helical linker were more stable to urea- and heat-induced unfolding than those with a putatively nonhelical linker. Two of the less stably folded fragments, human erythroid alpha-spectrin repeats 13 and 14 (HEalpha13,14) and human erythroid beta-spectrin repeats 8 and 9 (HEbeta8,9), are located opposite each other on antiparallel spectrin dimers. At least partial unfolding of these repeats under physiological conditions indicates that they may serve as a hinge. Also less stably folded, the fragment of human erythroid alpha-spectrin repeats 4 and 5 (HEalpha4,5) lies opposite the site of interaction between the partial repeats at the C- and N-terminal ends of beta- and alpha-spectrin, respectively, on the opposing dimer. More stably folded fragments, human erythroid alpha-spectrin repeats 1 and 2 (HEalpha1,2) and human erythroid alpha-spectrin repeats 2 and 3 (HEalpha2,3), lie nearly opposite each other on antiparallel spectrin dimers of a tetramer. These clusterings along the spectrin tetramer of repeats with similar stabilities of folding may have relevance for spectrin function, particularly for its well known flexibility.

[PMID: 14761982]
Protein extensibility appears to be based broadly on conformational changes that can in principle be modulated by protein-protein interactions. Spectrin family proteins, with their extensible three-helix folds, enable evaluation of dimerization effects at the single molecule level by atomic force microscopy. Although some spectrin family members function physiologically only as homodimers (e.g. alpha-actinin) or are strictly monomers (e.g. dystrophin), alpha- and beta-spectrins are stable as monomeric forms but occur physiologically as alpha,beta-heterodimers bound laterally lengthwise. For short constructs of alpha- and beta-spectrin, either as monomers or as alpha,beta-dimers, sawtooth patterns in atomic force microscopy-forced extension show that unfolding stochastically extends repeats approximately 4-5-fold greater in length than native conformations. For both dimers and monomers, distributions of unfolding lengths appear bimodal; major unfolding peaks reflect single repeats, and minor unfolding peaks at twice the length reflect tandem repeats. Cooperative unfolding thus propagates through helical linkers between serial repeats (1, 2). With lateral heterodimers, however, the force distribution is broad and shifted to higher forces. The associated chains in a dimer can stay together and unfold simultaneously in addition to unfolding independently. Weak lateral interactions do not inhibit unfolding, but strong lateral interactions facilitate simultaneous unfolding analogous to serial repeat coupling within spectrin family proteins.

[PMID: 21215336]
Spectrins comprise α- and β-subunits made up predominantly of a series of homologous repeating units of about 106 amino acids; the α- and β-chains form antiparallel dimers by lateral association, and tetramers through head-to-head contacts between the dimers. Here we consider the first of these interactions. (1) We confirm earlier observations, showing that the first two paired repeats (βIR1 with αIR21, and βIR2 with αRI20) at one end of the erythroid spectrin (αIβI) dimer are necessary and sufficient to unite the chains; (2) we resolve a conflict in published reports by showing that the strength of the interaction is considerably increased on adding the adjoining pair of repeats (βIR3-αIR19); (3) in brain (αIIβII) spectrin the first two pairs of repeats are similarly essential and sufficient for heterodimer formation; (4) this interaction is ~60-fold stronger than that in the erythroid counterpart, but no enhancement can be detected on addition of three further pairs of repeats; (5) formation of a tight αIβI dimer probably depends on structural coupling of the first two repeats in each chain; (6) an analysis of the sequences of the strongly interacting repeats, βIR1, βIIR1, αIR21 and αIIR20 and repeats in α-actinin, which also interact very strongly in forming an antiparallel dimer, affords a possible explanation for the different properties of the two spectrin isoforms in respect of the stability of the inter-chain interactions, and also suggests the evolutionary path by which the erythroid and non-erythroid sequences diverged.

[PMID: 15522301]
Previous X-ray crystal structures have shown that linkers of five amino acid residues connecting pairs of chicken brain alpha-spectrin and human erythroid beta-spectrin repeats can undergo bending without losing their alpha-helical structure. To test whether bending at one linker can influence bending at an adjacent linker, the structures of two and three repeat fragments of chicken brain alpha-spectrin have been determined by X-ray crystallography. The structure of the three-repeat fragment clearly shows that bending at one linker can occur independently of bending at an adjacent linker. This observation increases the possible trajectories of modeled chains of spectrin repeats. Furthermore, the three-repeat molecule crystallized as an antiparallel dimer with a significantly smaller buried interfacial area than that of alpha-actinin, a spectrin-related molecule, but large enough and of a type indicating biological specificity. Comparison of the structures of the spectrin and alpha-actinin dimers supports weak association of the former, which could not be detected by analytical ultracentrifugation, versus strong association of the latter, which has been observed by others. To correlate features of the structure with solution properties and to test a previous model of stable spectrin and dystrophin repeats, the number of inter-helical interactions in each repeat of several spectrin structures were counted and compared to their thermal stabilities. Inter-helical interactions, but not all interactions, increased in parallel with measured thermal stabilities of each repeat and in agreement with the thermal stabilities of two and three repeats and also partial repeats of spectrin.

[PMID: 1634521]
The antiparallel side-to-side association of spectrin alpha and beta monomers is a two-step process which occurs in seconds even at 0 degrees C and at low concentrations. Assembly involves initial contact of complementary nucleation sites on each subunit, which are located near the actin binding end of the long, flexible heterodimer rod. The minimum nucleation sites are comprised of approximately four contiguous 106-residue homologous segments or repeats. Three repeats in the nucleation site contain an 8-residue insertion and have the highest homology to the four spectrin-like repeats in alpha-actinin. The adjacent actin binding domain on the beta subunit and the adjacent EF hand motifs on the alpha subunit are not required for heterodimer assembly. The nucleation sites probably have a specific lock and key structure which defines the unique side-to-side pairing of the many homologous segments in both subunits. Assembly of spectrin heterodimers is probably most analogous to a zipper. After initial nucleation site binding, the remainder of the subunits quickly associate along their full lengths to reconstitute a normal dimer by supercoiling around each other to form a rope-like, flexible rod. Assembly is terminated if either polypeptide is interrupted by a protease cleavage. Heterozygotic mutations involving either nucleation site are predicted to affect allele incorporation into the mature membrane skeleton.

[PMID: 11502188]
Human erythrocyte spectrin is an antiparallel heterodimer comprised of a 280 kDa alpha subunit and a 246 kDa beta subunit which further associates into tetramers in the red cell membrane cytoskeleton. Lateral association of the flexible rodlike monomers involves a multiple-step process that is initiated by a high affinity association near the actin-binding end of the molecule (dimer nucleation site). In this study, recombinant alpha and beta proteins comprising two or four "spectrin type" motifs with and without adjacent, terminal nonhomologous domains were evaluated for their relative contributions to dimer initiation, and the thermodynamic properties of these heterodimer complexes were measured. Sedimentation equilibrium studies showed that in the absence of the heterologous subunit, individual recombinant proteins formed weak homodimers (K(d) > 0.3 mM). When 2-motif (alpha20-21 and beta1-2) and 4-motif (alpha18-21 and beta1-4) recombinants lacking the terminal nonhomologous domains were paired with the complementary protein, high affinity heterodimers were formed in sedimentation equilibrium analysis. Both the alpha20-21/beta1-2 complex and the alpha20-21EF/betaABD1-2 complex showed stoichiometric binding with similar binding affinities (K(d) approximately 10 nM) using isothermal titration calorimetry. The alpha20-21/beta1-2 complex showed an enthalpy of -10 kcal/mol, while the alpha20-21EF/betaABD1-2 complex showed an enthalpy of -13 kcal/mol. Pull-down assays using alpha spectrin GST fusion proteins showed strong associations between all heterodimer complexes in physiological buffer, but all heterodimer complexes were destabilized by the presence of Triton X-100 and other detergents. Complexes lacking the nonhomologous domains were destabilized to a greater extent than complexes that included the nonhomologous domains. The detergent effect appears to be responsible for the apparent essential role of the nonhomologous domains in prior reports. Taken together, our results indicate that the terminal nonhomologous domains do not contribute to dimer initiation nor are they required for formation of high affinity spectrin heterodimers in physiological buffers.

[PMID: 9356261]
Cytoskeletal proteins belonging to the spectrin family have an elongated structure composed of repetitive units. The three-dimensional solution structure of the 16th repeat from chicken brain alpha-spectrin (R16) has been determined by NMR spectroscopy and distance geometry-simulated annealing calculations. We used a total of 1035 distance restraints, which included 719 NOE-based values obtained by applying the ambiguous restraints for iterative assignment (ARIA) method. In addition, we performed a direct refinement against 1H-chemical shifts. The final ensemble of 20 structures shows an average RMSD of 1.52 A from the mean for the backbone atoms, excluding loops and N and C termini. R16 is made up of three antiparallel alpha-helices separated by two loops, and folds into a left-handed coiled-coil. The basic unit of spectrin is an antiparallel heterodimer composed of two homologous chains, beta and alpha. These assemble a tetramer via a mechanism that relies on the completion of a single repeat by association of the partial repeats located at the C terminus of the beta-chain (two helices) and at the N terminus of the alpha-chain (one helix). This tetramer is the assemblage able to cross-link actin filaments. Model building by homology of the "tetramerization" repeat from human erythrocyte spectrin illuminates the possible role of point mutations which cause hemolytic anemias.

[PMID: 3517024]
Spectrin, the major component of the erythroid membrane skeleton, is a long, asymmetrical rodlike protein that interacts with several other proteins to form a two-dimensional membrane skeleton. Progress in several laboratories over the past few years including substantial partial peptide and nucleotide sequence determination has greatly enhanced our knowledge of the structural properties of this large molecule (heterodimer = 465,000 daltons). The alpha and beta subunits are homologous with approximately 30% identity. They are aligned in an antiparallel side-to-side orientation with the amino- and carboxy-termini near opposite physical ends of the molecule. The predominant structural feature elucidated from sequencing this large molecule is the nearly universal occurrence in both subunits of a single type of repetitive structure. The periodicity of this homologous structure is exactly 106 amino acid residues. As many as 36 homologous, but nonidentical, repeats exist and comprise more than 90% of the mass of the heterodimer. Each of these repetitive units is folded into a triple-stranded structure that is highly helical. Peptide maps, antibody crossreactivity, peptide sequence analysis, and more recently nucleic acid sequences have defined several major properties of the erythroid molecule and related proteins in other tissues. Tissue-specific spectrins have the same 106-residue repetitive structure and show sequence homology to erythroid spectrin.

[PMID: 9115173]
The actin-cross-linking protein spectrin is a prominent component of the membrane cytoskeleton. Spectrin is a tetramer of two antiparallel alphabeta-dimers which share a unique and ancient gene structure. The alpha-spectrin and beta-spectrin genes are composed primarily of tandemly repeated 106-amino-acid segments, each of which forms a triple alpha-helical coiled coil. Both the genes and the repeats themselves are homologous. The two genes are thought to be the result of a gene duplication event, and each gene is the product of duplications of the 106-amino-acid repeats. In this work we compare the process of molecular evolution across the repeated segments of the alpha- and beta-spectrin genes. We find that the alpha-spectrin segments have, for the most part, evolved in a homogeneous fashion, while considerable heterogeneity is found among beta-spectrin segments. Several segments with unique known functions are found to have evolved differently than the others. On the basis of heterogeneity of the evolutionary process, we suggest that at least one repeat has a unique function that has yet to be documented. We also present new statistical methods for comparing the evolutionary process between different regions of DNA sequences.