[PMID: 19276629]
Although first described as early as 1898 and long considered a vestigial organelle of little functional importance, the primary cilium has become one of the hottest research topics in modern cell biology and physiology. Primary cilia are nonmotile sensory organelles present in a single copy on the surface of most growth-arrested or differentiated mammalian cells, and defects in their assembly or function are tightly coupled to many developmental defects, diseases and disorders. In normal tissues, the primary cilium coordinates a series of signal transduction pathways, including Hedgehog, Wnt, PDGFRalpha and integrin signaling. In the kidney, the primary cilium may function as a mechano-, chemo- and osmosensing unit that probes the extracellular environment and transmits signals to the cell via, e.g., polycystins, which depend on ciliary localization for appropriate function. Indeed, hypomorphic mutations in the mouse ift88 (previously called Tg737) gene, which encodes a ciliogenic intraflagellar transport protein, result in malformation of primary cilia, and in the collecting ducts of kidney tubules this is accompanied by development of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (PKD). While PKD was one of the first diseases to be linked to dysfunctional primary cilia, defects in this organelle have subsequently been associated with many other phenotypes, including cancer, obesity, diabetes as well as a number of developmental defects. Collectively, these disorders of the cilium are now referred to as the ciliopathies. In this review, we provide a brief overview of the structure and function of primary cilia and some of their roles in coordinating signal transduction pathways in mammalian development, health and disease.

[PMID: 14978161]
Recent evidence suggests that structural and functional abnormalities of primary cilia in kidney epithelia are associated with mouse and human autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. To determine whether fibrocystin/polyductin/tigmin (FPC), the protein product encoded by the PKHD1 gene that is responsible for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease among human subjects, is also a component of primary cilia in the kidney, antipeptide antibodies to the carboxyl-terminal intracellular domain and amino-terminal extracellular domain of FPC were generated and were characterized with immunoblotting and immuno-light and -electron microscopy. Immunolocalization in normal kidney tissue sections and cultured kidney cells demonstrated that FPC was localized to the primary cilia and concentrated on the basal bodies in both kidney tissue sections and cultured kidney cells. The FPC expression pattern was not altered in kidney cells with Pkd1 mutations. These findings suggest that FPC is a functional and/or structural component of primary cilia in kidney tubular cells. It is proposed that the pathogenesis of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease is linked to the dysfunction of primary cilia.

[PMID: 19186246]
Primary (nonmotile) cilia are currently enjoying a renaissance in light of novel ascribed functions ranging from mechanosensory to signal transduction. Their importance for key developmental pathways such as Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt is beginning to emerge. The function of nodal cilia, for example, is vital for breaking early embryonic symmetry, Shh signaling is important for tissue morphogenesis and successful Wnt signaling for organ growth and differentiation. When ciliary function is perturbed, photoreceptors may die, kidney tubules develop cysts, limb digits multiply and brains form improperly. The etiology of several uncommon disorders has recently been associated with cilia dysfunction. The causative genes are often similar and their cognate proteins certainly share cellular locations and/or pathways. Animal models of ciliary gene ablation such as Ift88, Kif3a, and Bbs have been invaluable for understanding the broad function of the cilium. Herein, we describe the wealth of information derived from the study of the ciliopathies and their animal models.

[PMID: 14983006]
Mutations of the polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 1 (PKHD1) gene have been shown to cause autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD), but the cellular functions of the gene product (PKHD1) remain uncharacterized. To illuminate its properties, the spatial and temporal expression patterns of PKHD1 were determined in mouse, rat, and human tissues by using polyclonal Abs and mAbs recognizing various specific regions of the gene product. During embryogenesis, PKHD1 is widely expressed in epithelial derivatives, including neural tubules, gut, pulmonary bronchi, and hepatic cells. In the kidneys of the pck rats, the rat model of which is genetically homologous to human ARPKD, the level of PKHD1 was significantly reduced but not completely absent. In cultured renal cells, the PKHD1 gene product colocalized with polycystin-2, the gene product of autosomal dominant polycystic disease type 2, at the basal bodies of primary cilia. Immunoreactive PKHD1 localized predominantly at the apical domain of polarized epithelial cells, suggesting it may be involved in the tubulogenesis and/or maintenance of duct-lumen architecture. Reduced PKHD1 levels in pck rat kidneys and its colocalization with polycystins may underlie the pathogenic basis for cystogenesis in polycystic kidney diseases.

[PMID: 21439862]
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), an inherited disease, leads to cyst formation in the kidneys. In this condition, the kidneys are grossly enlarged with multiple cysts that result in kidney failure in a majority of individuals. This condition is also associated with cysts in other organs. Recent research has focused on defects in signaling mediated by the primary cilia as the causative factor in ADPKD. Primary cilia are also present in odontogenic epithelium. Dentigerous cyst also is a developmental cyst whose pathogenesis is controversial. Recent studies have shown that loss of Ptch and Shh signaling pathways are involved in the cystogenesis of dentigerous cyst. The Shh signaling pathway is active in the primary cilia. A scanning electron microscopic study of a dentigerous cyst wall in an ADPKD patient showed structures similar to primary cilia. Based on the presentation of a dentigerous cyst in an autosomal dominant polycystic kidney patient and the demonstration of primary cilia like structures on the cyst wall by using a scanning electron microscope, a new hypothesis for the pathogenesis of dentigerous cyst is proposed.

[PMID: 18407555]
The epithelial cells lining intrahepatic bile ducts (i.e., cholangiocytes), like many cell types in the body, have primary cilia extending from the apical plasma membrane into the bile ductal lumen. Cholangiocyte cilia express proteins such as polycystin-1, polycystin-2, fibrocystin, TRPV4, P2Y12, AC6, that account for ciliary mechano-, osmo-, and chemo-sensory functions; when these processes are disturbed by mutations in genes encoding ciliary-associated proteins, liver diseases (i.e., cholangiociliopathies) result. The cholangiociliopathies include but are not limited to cystic and fibrotic liver diseases associated with mutations in genes encoding polycystin-1, polycystin-2, and fibrocystin. In this review, we discuss the functions of cholangiocyte primary cilia, their role in the cholangiociliopathies, and potential therapeutic approaches.

[PMID: 23124509]
The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the onset and inexorable progression of the late‑onset form of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are still the object of controversy. This review takes stock of some most recent advancements of this field concerning the complex roles played by the amyloid‑β (Aβ)‑binding p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and calcium‑sensing receptor (CaSR) and by the primary cilia in AD. Apart from their physiological roles, p75NTR is more intensely expressed in the hippocampus of human AD brains and Aβ‑bound p75NTR triggers cell death, whereas Aβ‑bound CaSR signalling induces the de novo synthesis and release of nitric oxide (NO), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)‑A and Aβ peptides (Aβs), particularly on the part of normal adult human astrocytes. The latter effect could significantly increase the pool of Aβ‑ and NO‑producing nerve cells favouring the progressive spread of a self‑sustaining and self‑reinforcing 'infectious' mechanism of neural and vascular (i.e. blood-brain barrier) cell damage. Interestingly, primary cilia concentrate p75NTR receptors in their membranes and are abnormally structured/damaged in transgenic (Tg) AD‑model mice, which could impact on the adult neurogenesis occurring in the dentate gyrus's subgranular zone (SGZ) that is necessary for new memory encoding, thereby favouring typical AD cognitive decline. Altogether, these findings may pave the way to novel therapeutic approaches to AD, particularly in its mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and pre‑MCI stages of development.

[PMID: 18694559]
Primary cilia are nonmotile organelles implicated in signaling and sensory functions. Understanding how primary cilia assemble could shed light on the many human diseases caused by mutations in ciliary proteins. The centrosomal protein CP110 is known to suppress ciliogenesis through an unknown mechanism. Here, we report that CP110 interacts with CEP290--a protein whose deficiency is implicated in human ciliary disease--in a discrete complex separable from other CP110 complexes involved in regulating the centrosome cycle. Ablation of CEP290 prevents ciliogenesis without affecting centrosome function or cell-cycle progression. Interaction with CEP290 is absolutely required for the ability of CP110 to suppress primary cilia formation. Furthermore, CEP290 and CP110 interact with Rab8a, a small GTPase required for cilia assembly. Depletion of CEP290 interferes with localization of Rab8a to centrosomes and cilia. Our results suggest that CEP290 cooperates with Rab8a to promote ciliogenesis and that this function is antagonized by CP110.

[PMID: 15226261]
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) includes a group of disorders that are characterized by the presence of cysts in the kidney and other organs, including the pancreas. Here we show that in orpk mice, a model system for PKD that harbors a mutation in the gene that encodes the polaris protein, pancreatic defects start to occur at the end of gestation, with an initial expansion of the developing pancreatic ducts. Ductal dilation continues rapidly after birth and results in the formation of large, interconnected cysts. Expansion of pancreatic ducts is accompanied by apoptosis of neighboring acinar cells, whereas endocrine cell differentiation and islet formation appears to be unaffected. Polaris has been shown to co-localize with primary cilia, and these structures have been implicated in the formation of renal cysts. In the orpk pancreas, cilia numbers are reduced and cilia length is decreased. Expression of polycystin-2, a protein involved in PKD, is mislocalized in orpk mice. Furthermore, the cellular localization of beta-catenin, a protein involved in cell adhesion and Wnt signaling, is altered. Thus, polaris and primary cilia function are required for the maturation and maintenance of proper tissue organization in the pancreas.

[PMID: 17429051]
Cysts in the kidney are among the most common inherited human pathologies, and recent research has uncovered that a defect in cilia-mediated signaling activity is a key factor that leads to cyst formation. The cilium is a microtubule-based organelle that is found on most cells in the mammalian body. Multiple proteins whose functions are disrupted in cystic diseases have now been localized to the cilium or at the basal body at the base of the cilium. Current data indicate that the cilium can function as a mechanosensor to detect fluid flow through the lumen of renal tubules. Flow-mediated deflection of the cilia axoneme induces an increase in intracellular calcium and alters gene expression. Alternatively, a recent finding has revealed that the intraflagellar transport 88/polaris protein, which is required for cilia assembly, has an additional role in regulating cell-cycle progression independent of its function in ciliogenesis. Further research directed at understanding the relationship between the cilium, cell-cycle, and cilia-mediated mechanosensation and signaling activity will hopefully provide important insights into the mechanisms of renal cyst pathogenesis and lead to better approaches for therapeutic intervention.

[PMID: 19273592]
In this study, we describe the generation and partial characterization of Krüppel-like zinc finger protein Glis3 mutant (Glis3(zf/zf)) mice. These mice display abnormalities very similar to those of patients with neonatal diabetes and hypothyroidism syndrome, including the development of diabetes and polycystic kidney disease. We demonstrate that Glis3 localizes to the primary cilium, suggesting that Glis3 is part of a cilium-associated signaling pathway. Although Glis3(zf/zf) mice form normal primary cilia, renal cysts contain relatively fewer cells with a primary cilium. We further show that Glis3 interacts with the transcriptional modulator Wwtr1/TAZ, which itself has been implicated in glomerulocystic kidney disease. Wwtr1 recognizes a P/LPXY motif in the C terminus of Glis3 and enhances Glis3-mediated transcriptional activation, indicating that Wwtr1 functions as a coactivator of Glis3. Mutations in the P/LPXY motif abrogate the interaction with Wwtr1 and the transcriptional activity of Glis3, indicating that this motif is part of the transcription activation domain of Glis3. Our study demonstrates that dysfunction of Glis3 leads to the development of cystic renal disease, suggesting that Glis3 plays a critical role in maintaining normal renal functions. We propose that localization to the primary cilium and interaction with Wwtr1 are key elements of the Glis3 signaling pathway.