[PMID: 9012519]
The beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is contained on a 20 kb DNA fragment and is characterized by the presence of five DNaseI hypersensitive sites in erythroid cells, termed 5'HS1-5. A fully active 6.5 kb version of the LCR, called the muLCR, has been described. Expression of the beta-like globin genes is absolutely dependent on the presence of the LCR. The developmental expression pattern of the genes in the cluster is achieved through competition of the promoters for the activating function of the LCR. Transgenic mice experiments suggest that subtle changes in the transcription factor environment lead to the successive silencing of the embryonic epsilon-globin and fetal gamma-globin promoters, resulting in the almost exclusive transcription of the beta-globin gene in adult erythropoiesis. In this paper, we have asked the question whether the LCR and its individual hypersensitive sites 5'HS1-4 can activate a basic promoter in the absence of any other globin sequences. We have employed a minimal promoter derived from the mouse Hsp68 gene driving the bacterial beta-galactosidase (lacZ) gene. The results show that the muLCR and 5'HS3 direct erythroid-specific, embryonic expression of this construct, while 5'HS1, 5'HS2 and 5'HS4 are inactive at any stage of development. Expression of the muLCR and 5'HS3 transgenes is repressed during fetal stages of development. The transgenes are in an inactive chromatin conformation and the lacZ gene is not transcribed, as shown by in situ hybridization. These data are compatible with the hypothesis that the LCR requires the presence of an active promoter to adopt an open chromatin conformation and with models proposing progressive heterochromatization during embryogenesis. The results suggest that the presence of a beta-globin gene is required for LCR function as conditions become more stringent during development.

[PMID: 9114030]
The human beta-globin locus control region (LCR) consists of four erythroid-specific DNaseI hypersensitive sites (HSs) at the 5' end of the beta-globin cluster. The LCR functions over a long distance on chromosome 11 to regulate transcription and replication of the beta-globin genes. To determine whether the HSs function independently or as an integrated unit, we analyzed the requirements for long-range transcriptional activation. If the HSs function independently, individual HSs would be expected to have long-range activity. In contrast, if long-range activity requires multiple HSs, individual HSs would have a limited functional distance. HS2, HS3, and a miniLCR containing multiple HSs, were separated from a gamma-globin promoter by fragments of phage lambda DNA. After stable transfection into K562 cells, HS2 had strong enhancer activity, but only when positioned close to the promoter. HS3 also had strong enhancer activity, although it was weaker than HS2 and more sensitive to the spacer DNA. The miniLCR had the strongest enhancer activity and functioned even at a distance of 7.3 kb. A model is proposed in which synergistic interactions between HSs confer long-range activation by creating a stable LCR nucleoprotein structure, which is competent for recruiting chromatin-modifying enzymes. These enzymes would mediate the well-characterized activity of the LCR to modulate chromatin structure.

[PMID: 11867225]
The distal locus control region (LCR) is required for high-level expression of the complex of genes (HBBC) encoding the beta-like globins of mammals in erythroid cells. Several major DNase hypersensitive sites (HSs 1-5) mark the LCR. Sequence conservation and direct experimental evidence have implicated sequences within and between the HS cores in function of the LCR. In this report we confirm the mapping of a minor HS between HS3 and HS4, called HS3.2, and show that sequences including it increase the number of random integration sites at which a drug resistance gene is expressed. We also show that nuclear proteins including GATA1 and Oct1 bind specifically to sequences within HS3.2. However, the protein Pbx1, whose binding site is the best match to one highly conserved sequence, does not bind strongly. GATA1 and Oct1 also bind in the HS cores of the LCR and to promoters in HBBC. Their binding to this minor HS suggests that they may be used in assembly of a large complex containing multiple regulatory sequences.

[PMID: 9744863]
The locus control region of the beta-globin cluster contains five DNase I hypersensitive sites (5'HS1-5) required for locus activation. 5'HS3 contains six G-rich motifs that are essential for its activity. Members of a protein family, characterized by three zinc fingers highly homologous to those found in transcription factor Sp1, interact with these motifs. Because point mutagenesis cannot distinguish between family members, it is not known which protein activates 5'HS3. We show that the function of such closely related proteins can be distinguished in vivo by matching point mutations in 5'HS3 with amino acid changes in the zinc fingers of Sp1 and EKLF. Testing their activity in transgenic mice shows that EKLF is a direct activator of 5'HS3.

[PMID: 12324650]
The human beta-globin locus is a complex genetic system widely used for analysis of eukaryotic gene expression. The locus consists of five functional beta-like globin genes, epsilon, (G)gamma, (A)gamma, delta, and beta, arrayed on the chromosome in the order that they are expressed during ontogeny. Globin gene expression is regulated, in part, by the locus control region, which physically consists of five DNaseI-hypersensitive sites located 6-22 Kb upstream of the epsilon -globin gene. During ontogeny two switches occur in beta-globin gene expression that reflect the changing oxygen requirements of the fetus. The first switch from embryonic epsilon - to fetal gamma-globin occurs at six weeks of gestation. The second switch from gamma- to adult delta- and beta-globin occurs shortly after birth. Throughout the locus, cis-acting elements exist that are dynamically bound by trans-acting proteins, including transcription factors, co-activators, repressors, and chromatin modifiers. Discovery of novel erythroid-specific transcription factors and a role for chromatin structure in gene expression have enhanced our understanding of the mechanism of globin gene switching. However, the hierarchy of events regulating gene expression during development, from extracellular signaling to transcriptional activation or repression, is complex. In this review we attempt to unify the current knowledge regarding the interplay of cis-acting elements, transcription factors, and chromatin modifiers into a comprehensive overview of globin gene switching.

[PMID: 10828050]
Mammalian beta-globin loci are composed of multiple orthologous genes whose expression is erythroid specific and developmentally regulated. The expression of these genes both from the endogenous locus and from transgenes is strongly influenced by a linked 15-kilobase region of clustered DNaseI hypersensitive sites (HSs) known as the locus control region (LCR). The LCR encompasses 5 major HSs, each of which is highly homologous among humans, mice, and other mammals. To analyze the function of individual HSs in the endogenous murine beta-globin LCR, we have used homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells to produce 5 mouse lines, each of which is deficient for 1 of these major HSs. In this report, we demonstrate that deletion of the conserved region of 5'HS 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5/6 abolishes HS formation at the deletion site but has no influence on the formation of the remaining HSs in the LCR. Therefore, in the endogenous murine locus, there is no dominant or initiating site whose formation must precede the formation of the other HSs. This is consistent with the idea that HSs form autonomously. We discuss the implications of these findings for current models of beta-globin regulation.

[PMID: 2040696]
In addition to local sequence elements the regulation of the high-level, development- and tissue-specific expression of the human beta globin gene cluster appears to require distant regulatory sequences which have been termed locus control region. In the chromatin of erythroid cells the locus control region is characterized by four DNaseI hypersensitive sites that are located 6-18 kb 5' of the epsilon globin gene. The definition of the sequences minimally required for locus control region activity is likely to further the understanding of its physiology and will be of interest for the development of somatic gene therapy strategies of the hemoglobinopathies. We present here the analysis of a family with a 3,030-bp deletion of sequences upstream of the epsilon globin gene including the most 3' locus control region element and cosegregating beta(0) thalassemia. The deletion is linked in cis to a structurally and functionally normal beta globin gene. The proximal element of the locus control region does not therefore appear to be necessary for beta globin gene activity in vivo.

[PMID: 16189270]
The beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is a large DNA element that is required for high-level expression of beta-like globin genes from the endogenous mouse locus or in transgenic mice carrying the human beta-globin locus. The LCR encompasses 6 DNaseI hypersensitive sites (HSs) that bind transcription factors. These HSs each contain a core of a few hundred base pairs (bp) that has most of the functional activity and exhibits high interspecies sequence homology. Adjoining the cores are 500- to 1000-bp "flanks" with weaker functional activity and lower interspecies homology. Studies of human beta-globin transgenes and of the endogenous murine locus show that deletion of an entire HS (core plus flanks) moderately suppresses expression. However, human transgenes in which only individual HS core regions were deleted showed drastic loss of expression accompanied by changes in chromatin structure. To address these disparate results, we have deleted the core region of 5'HS2 from the endogenous murine beta-LCR. The phenotype was similar to that of the larger 5'HS2 deletion, with no apparent disruption of chromatin structure. These results demonstrate that the greater severity of HS core deletions in comparison to full HS deletions is not a general property of the beta-LCR.

[PMID: 10220430]
In mouse and human, the beta-globin genes reside in a linear array that is associated with a positive regulatory element located 5' to the genes known as the locus control region (LCR). The sequences of the mouse and human beta-globin LCRs are homologous, indicating conservation of an essential function in beta-globin gene regulation. We have sequenced regions flanking the beta-globin locus in both mouse and human and found that homology associated with the LCR is more extensive than previously known, making up a conserved block of approximately 40 kb. In addition, we have identified DNaseI-hypersensitive sites within the newly sequenced regions in both mouse and human, and these structural features also are conserved. Finally, we have found that both mouse and human beta-globin loci are embedded within an array of odorant receptor genes that are expressed in olfactory epithelium, and we also identify an olfactory receptor gene located 3' of the beta-globin locus in chicken. The data demonstrate an evolutionarily conserved genomic organization for the beta-globin locus and suggest a possible role for the beta-globin LCR in control of expression of these odorant receptor genes and/or the presence of mechanisms to separate regulatory signals in different tissues.

[PMID: 2362805]
The human beta-globin dominant control region (DCR) which flanks the multigene beta-globin locus directs high level, site of integration independent, copy number dependent expression on a linked human beta-globin gene in transgenic mice and stably transfected mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. We have assayed each of the individual DNaseI hypersensitive regions present in the full 15kb DCR for position independence and copy number dependence of a linked beta-globin gene in transgenic mice. The results show that at least three of the individual DNaseI hypersensitive site regions (sites 1, 2 and 3), though expressing at lower levels than the full DCR, are capable of position independent, copy number dependent expression. Site 2 alone directs the highest level of expression of the single site constructs, producing nearly 70% of the level of the full DCR. Sites 1 and 3 each provide 30% of the full activity. Deletion of either site 2 or 3 from the complete set significantly reduces the level of expression, but does not effect position independence or copy number dependence. This demonstrates that sites 2 and 3 are required for full expression and suggests that all the sites are required for the full expression of even a single gene from this multigene locus.

[PMID: 11567985]
The mammalian beta-globin locus is a multigenic, developmentally regulated, tissue-specific locus from which gene expression is regulated by a distal regulatory region, the locus control region (LCR). The functional mechanism by which the beta-globin LCR stimulates transcription of the linked beta-like globin genes remains unknown. The LCR is composed of a series of 5 DNaseI hypersensitive sites (5'HSs) that form in the nucleus of erythroid precursors. These HSs are conserved among mammals, bind transcription factors that also bind to other parts of the locus, and compose the functional components of the LCR. To test the hypothesis that individual HSs have unique properties, homologous recombination was used to construct 5 lines of mice with individual deletions of each of the 5'HSs of the endogenous murine beta-globin LCR. Here it is reported that deletion of 5'HS1 reduces expression of the linked genes by up to 24%, while deletion of 5'HS4 leads to reductions of up to 27%. These deletions do not perturb the normal stage-specific expression of genes from this multigenic locus. In conjunction with previous studies of deletions of the other HSs and studies of deletion of the entire LCR, it is concluded that (1) none of the 5'HSs is essential for nearly normal expression; (2) none of the HSs is required for proper developmental expression; and (3) the HSs do not appear to synergize either structurally or functionally, but rather form independently and appear to contribute additively to the overall expression from the locus.