[PMID: 23390548]
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia is a common side effect developed after chronic treatment with 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl-l-alanine (l-DOPA) in Parkinson's disease. The biological mechanisms behind this side effect are not fully comprehended although involvement of dopaminergic, serotonergic, and glutamatergic systems has been suggested. The present study utilizes in vivo amperometry to investigate the impact from unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions and l-DOPA (4 mg/kg, including benserazide 15 mg/kg) -induced dyskinetic behavior on striatal basal extracellular glutamate concentration and potassium-evoked glutamate release in urethane-anesthetized rats. Recordings were performed before and after local L-DOPA application in the striatum. In addition, effects from the 5-HT(1A) receptor agonist (2R)-(+)-8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)tetralin hydrobromide (8-OHDPAT; 1 mg/kg) was assessed on glutamate release and on dyskinetic behavior. The results revealed a bilateral ≈ 30% reduction of basal extracellular glutamate concentration and attenuated potassium-evoked glutamate release after a unilateral dopamine-depletion in L-DOPA naïve animals. In dyskinetic subjects, basal glutamate concentration was comparable to normal controls, although potassium-evoked glutamate release was reduced to similar levels as in drug naïve dopamine-lesioned animals. Furthermore, acute striatal L-DOPA administration attenuated glutamate release in all groups, except in the dopamine-lesioned striatum of dyskinetic animals. Co-administration of 8-OHDPAT and L-DOPA decreased dyskinesia in dopamine-lesioned animals, but did not affect potassium-evoked glutamate release, which was seen in normal animals. These findings indicate altered glutamate transmission upon dopamine-depletion and dyskinesia.

[PMID: 22384042]
Dopa decarboxylase (DDC), a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of dopamine and serotonin, is involved in Parkinson's disease (PD). PD is a neurodegenerative disease mainly due to a progressive loss of dopamine-producing cells in the midbrain. Co-administration of L-Dopa with peripheral DDC inhibitors (carbidopa or benserazide) is the most effective symptomatic treatment for PD. Although carbidopa and trihydroxybenzylhydrazine (the in vivo hydrolysis product of benserazide) are both powerful irreversible DDC inhibitors, they are not selective because they irreversibly bind to free PLP and PLP-enzymes, thus inducing diverse side effects. Therefore, the main goals of this study were (a) to use virtual screening to identify potential human DDC inhibitors and (b) to evaluate the reliability of our virtual-screening (VS) protocol by experimentally testing the "in vitro" activity of selected molecules. Starting from the crystal structure of the DDC-carbidopa complex, a new VS protocol, integrating pharmacophore searches and molecular docking, was developed. Analysis of 15 selected compounds, obtained by filtering the public ZINC database, yielded two molecules that bind to the active site of human DDC and behave as competitive inhibitors with K(i) values ≥10 µM. By performing in silico similarity search on the latter compounds followed by a substructure search using the core of the most active compound we identified several competitive inhibitors of human DDC with K(i) values in the low micromolar range, unable to bind free PLP, and predicted to not cross the blood-brain barrier. The most potent inhibitor with a K(i) value of 500 nM represents a new lead compound, targeting human DDC, that may be the basis for lead optimization in the development of new DDC inhibitors. To our knowledge, a similar approach has not been reported yet in the field of DDC inhibitors discovery.

[PMID: 10884518]
Clozapine reduces L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-Dopa)-induced dyskinesias in parkinsonian patients. To test if the antidyskinetic effect of clozapine is related to antagonism at the dopamine D(4) receptor, we investigated the effect of 8-methyl-6-(4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)-11H-pyrido[2,3-b][1, 4]benzodiazepine (JL-18), a structural analog of clozapine which is more selective for this receptor. Four 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated cynomolgus monkeys with a stable parkinsonian syndrome and reproducible dyskinesias to L-Dopa were used in this study. They were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) with L-Dopa methyl ester (125 mg per animal) plus benserazide (50 mg per animal; L-Dopa/benserazide) alone or in combination with JL-18 (at the doses of 0.1, 0.3, or 0.9 mg/kg, s.c.). Subcutaneous injection of sterile saline was used as control. L-Dopa/benserazide increased locomotion and improved parkinsonism but also induced dyskinesias. Co-administration of JL-18, at low doses (0.1, 0.3 mg/kg) with L-Dopa/benserazide, produced a dose-dependent reduction in L-Dopa-induced dyskinesias without a parallel return to parkinsonism. The present results suggest that novel selective dopamine D(4) receptor antagonists may represent a useful tool to reduce L-Dopa-induced dyskinesias.

[PMID: 11166288]
(S)-(-)-3-(3-(methylsulfonyl)phenyl)-1-propylpiperidine ((-)-OSU6162) is a phenylpiperidine derivative which exhibits low affinity to the dopamine D2 receptor in vitro. However, in vivo, positron emission tomography scanning studies show that the compound displaces the selective dopamine D2 receptor antagonist, raclopride. We have evaluated, in this study, the effect of (-)-OSU6162, on L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA)-induced dyskinesias in a primate model of Parkinson's disease. Five 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated cynomolgus monkeys with a stable parkinsonian syndrome and reproducible dyskinesias to L-DOPA were used in this study. The monkeys were housed in observation cages equipped with an electronic motility monitoring system. They were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) with L-DOPA methyl ester (125 mg per animal) plus benserazide (50 mg per animal; L-DOPA/benserazide) alone or in combination with (-)-OSU6162 (1.0, 3.0, 6.0 or 10 mg/kg, s.c.). Subcutaneous injection of sterile saline was used as control. L-DOPA/benserazide increased locomotion and improved parkinsonism but also induced dyskinesias. Co-administration of (-)-OSU6162 with L-DOPA/benserazide produced a significant reduction in L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias. This improvement in L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias occurred mainly at the onset of the L-DOPA/benserazide effect as reflected by an increase in the duration of the "ON" state without dyskinesias up to 3.4 fold after (-)-OSU6162 co-administration as compared to L-DOPA/benserazide alone. The anti-dyskinetic effect of (-)-OSU6162 was maintained during 14 days and no tolerance to this effect was observed. Our data suggests that (-)-OSU6162 could be of significant clinical value to reduce L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias in fluctuating advanced Parkinson's disease patients.

[PMID: 17553556]
Dopamine (DA) replacement therapy with l-DOPA remains the standard pharmacotherapy for Parkinson's disease (PD). Unfortunately, chronic l-DOPA treatment is accompanied by development of motor fluctuations and l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID). While serotonin (5-HT)(1A) agonists acutely reduce these complications, their prophylactic and long-term effects are not well-delineated. To test this, male Sprague-Dawley rats received unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesions. In experiment 1, l-DOPA-primed rats were pre-treated with Vehicle (0.9% NaCl), various doses of the partial 5-HT(1A) agonist, buspirone (0.25, 1.0 or 2.5 mg/kg, ip) or buspirone (2.5 mg/kg, ip)+the 5-HT(1A) antagonist, WAY100635 (0.5 mg/kg, ip) 5 min prior to l-DOPA (12 mg/kg+15 mg/kg benserazide, ip). Rats were tested for LID using the abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) scale and motor performance using the forepaw adjusting steps test (FAS). In experiment 2, l-DOPA-naïve rats received co-administration of l-DOPA+buspirone (1.0 or 2.5 mg/kg, ip) for 2 weeks. AIMs and FAS were measured throughout. In l-DOPA-primed rats, buspirone dose-dependently reduced LID and improved l-DOPA-related motor performance due to action at the 5-HT(1A) receptor. In l-DOPA-naïve rats, buspirone delayed LID development while improving l-DOPA's anti-parkinsonian efficacy indicating the potential long-term benefits of 5-HT(1A) agonists for reduction of l-DOPA-related side effects.

[PMID: 17113046]
5-HT1A autoreceptor stimulation can act to attenuate supraphysiological swings in extracellular dopamine levels following long-term levodopa treatment and may be useful in the treatment and prevention of the motor complications. The purpose of this study was to investigate cellular and behavioral effects of 5-HT1A receptor agonist 8-OH-DPAT in a rat model of levodopa-induced motor complications. Two sets of experiments were performed. First, animals were treated with levodopa (50 mg/kg with benserazide 12.5 mg/kg, twice daily), intraperitoneally (i.p.) for 22 days. On day 23, animals received either 8-OH-DPAT (1 mg/kg, i.p.) or 8-OH-DPAT plus WAY-100635 (0.1 mg/kg, i.p) or vehicle with each levodopa dose. In the second set, animals were treated either with levodopa (50 mg/kg, i.p.) plus 8-OH-DPAT (1 mg/kg, i.p.) or levodopa (50 mg/kg, i.p.) plus vehicle, administered twice daily for 22 consecutive days. Our study showed that 8-OH-DPAT plus levodopa both prolonged the duration of the motor response and reduced peak turning. 8-OH-DPAT plus levodopa also decreased the frequency of failures to levodopa. Co-administration of WAY-100635, a 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, with 8-OH-DPAT eliminated the effect of 8-OH-DPAT on motor complications indicating that the observed 8-OH-DPAT responses were probably mediated at the 5-HT1A autoreceptor. Moreover, 8-OH-DPAT plus levodopa significantly reduced hyperphosphorylation of GluR1 at serine 845, which was closely associated with levodopa-induced motor complications.

[PMID: 7737328]
In vivo brain microdialysis was used to assess the effects of tolcapone, a novel central and peripheral inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase on striatal 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl-L-alanine (L-dopa) and dopamine metabolism. The oral administration of 30 mg/kg of tolcapone failed to change dopamine output but elicited a marked and long-lasting decrease of the extracellular levels of homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3-methoxytyramine with a concomitant increase of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). The administration of L-dopa (20 and 60 mg/kg p.o.) + benserazide (15 mg/kg p.o.) resulted in dose-dependent increase of dialysate levels of L-dopa and 3-O-methyl-DOPA. Tolcapone (30 mg/kg p.o.), given as adjunct to both doses of L-dopa, markedly enhanced the elevation or extracellular L-dopa, while it completely prevented the formation of 3-O-methyl-DOPA. In another experiment, the administration of L-dopa + benserazide (30 + 15 mg/kg p.o.) resulted in increased extracellular levels of dopamine, DOPAC, HVA and 3-methoxytyramine. The co-administration of tolcapone (30 mg/kg p.o.) further increased dopamine and DOPAC levels, whereas HVA and 3-methoxytyramine effluxes were reduced. These findings support the notion that tolcapone has the ability to enhance striatal dopamine neurotransmission by increasing L-dopa bioavailability through peripheral and central inhibition of L-dopa O-methylation, as well as by blocking the central conversion of dopamine into 3-methoxytyramine.

[PMID: 2760634]
The effect of levodopa (L-dopa), alone or in combination with a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor (PDI), on plasma levels of aromatic-L-amino acid decarboxylase (ALAAD, = dopa decarboxylase), L-dopa, 3-O-methyl-dopa (3-OMD), dopamine (DA), noradrenaline, adrenaline and dopamine beta-hydroxylase has been studied. In healthy subjects and in patients with parkinsonism plasma ALAAD level fell after administration of L-dopa + benserazide, but returned to previous levels within 90 min. In a cross-sectional study blood was obtained, 2 h after dosing, from 104 patients with idiopathic parkinsonism, divided into four groups: no L-dopa treatment (group 1), L-dopa alone (group 2), L-dopa + benserazide (Madopar) (group 3) and L-dopa + carbidopa (Sinemet) (group 4). Plasma ALAAD, which was normal in groups 1 and 2, was increased 3-fold in groups 3 and 4, indicating that there was induction of ALAAD by the co-administration of PDI. Despite this induction of ALAAD, in groups 3 and 4, with half the daily L-dopa dose compared with group 2, plasma L-dopa and 3-OMD levels were 5 times higher, while plasma DA levels were not different. The DA/L-dopa ratio was decreased 5-fold in group 2 and 16-fold in groups 3 and 4 as compared with group 1. Neither 3-OMD levels nor 3-OMD/L-dopa ratios correlated with the occurrence of on-off fluctuations. In a longitudinal study of three patients started on Madopar treatment the induction of plasma ALAAD was found to occur gradually over 3-4 weeks. Further detailed pharmacokinetic studies in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid are required in order to elucidate whether the ALAAD induction by PDI may be related to the loss of clinical efficacy of combination therapy in some patients and how it is related to end-of-dose deterioration and on-off phenomena.

[PMID: 16023708]
Using a rat model of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID), the contributions of dopamine D1 and D2 receptors to axial, limb, and orolingual (ALO) abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) elicited by L-DOPA were examined. Chronic L-DOPA-treated rats received the D1 receptor antagonist SCH23390 (0.01, 0.1, and 1.0 mg/kg; i.p.), the D2 receptor antagonist Eticlopride (0.01, 0.1, and 1.0 mg/kg; i.p.), a mixture of both antagonists (0.01, 0.1, 1.0 mg/kg each; i.p.), or vehicle 30 min prior to L-DOPA (6 mg/kg; i.p.)+Benserazide (15 mg/kg; i.p.). SCH23390 (0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg) significantly reduced axial and limb AIMs, while the same doses of Eticlopride significantly decreased axial, limb, and orolingual AIMs. Co-administration of SCH23390+Eticlopride significantly reduced axial (0.01, 0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg), limb (0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg), and orolingual (0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg) AIMs. These results indicate the importance of D1 and D2 receptors to LID and further validate the rat AIMs model.

[PMID: 17141847]
Previously we reported on L-DOPA's antinociceptive effect on substance P-induced nociceptive behaviors in mice [Shimizu T, Iwata S, Morioka H, Masuyama T, Fukuda T, Nomoto M. Antinociceptive mechanism of L-DOPA. Pain 2004;110;246-9.]. Since significant hyperalgesia was noted following antinociception, our study was designed to investigate the mechanism of this hyperalgesia. Nociceptive behaviors were enhanced 2 h after L-DOPA administration. L-DOPA induced hyperalgesia occurred after conversion to dopamine because co-administration of benserazide, a DOPA decarboxylase inhibitor, completely abolished the L-DOPA-induced hyperalgesia. The D2 receptor agonist, quinpirole, depressed these behaviors entirely, while the D1 antagonist, SCH23390, inhibited the enhancement of these behaviors by L-DOPA. The D2 receptor antagonist, sulpiride, which induced hyperalgesia of the substance P-induced behaviors in naive mice, did not have any effects on L-DOPA-induced hyperalgesia. Spinal cord dopamine content increased rapidly after L-DOPA administration, exhibiting levels 100 times greater than baseline, and then returned to control after 1 h. These results suggested that the dopaminergic inhibitory system for pain sensation was temporarily impaired by excess amounts of exogenous dopamine that were derived from L-DOPA and both D1 and D2 receptors were involved in L-DOPA-induced hyperalgesia.

[PMID: 15275774]
The mechanism of L-DOPA for antinociception was investigated. Nociceptive behaviors in mice after an intrathecal (i.t.) administration of substance P were evaluated. L-DOPA (i.t.) dose-dependently attenuated the substance P-induced nociceptive behaviors. Co-administration of benserazide (i.t.), a DOPA decarboxylase inhibitor, abolished the antinociceptive effect of L-DOPA. The L-DOPA-induced antinociception was antagonized by sulpiride, a D2 blocker, but not by SCH 23390, a D1 blocker. These results suggest that L-DOPA relieves pain after conversion to dopamine, with the dopamine sedating pain transmission by way of the dopamine D2 receptor.