[PMID: 28130396]
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a highly prevalent virus, transmitted via saliva, which often causes asymptomatic infection in children but frequently results in infectious mononucleosis in adolescents. Heterophile antibody tests, including the Monospot test, are red cell or latex agglutination assays, which detect antired cell antibodies produced as part of a polyclonal antibody response occurring during EBV infection. Heterophile antibody tests are rapid, cheap and specific tests that can be performed from the onset of symptoms of infectious mononucleosis. In adolescents, heterophile antibody tests have high specificity and sensitivity in the diagnosis of primary acute EBV infection. However, the tests have low sensitivity and low negative predictive value in young children and are not useful under the age of 4. Heterophile tests may be positive in other viral infections, autoimmune disease and haematological malignancies, but do not appear to be positive in primary bacterial infection. Virus-specific serology is required in children under the age of 4 or if an older child is heterophile negative. Virus-specific serology allows diagnosis and the pattern of positivity and negativity enables the clinician to stage the EBV infection. Virus-specific serology appears to have better sensitivity in young children, but there is cross-reaction with other herpesvirus infections, a longer turnaround time and it is more expensive to perform. Further research is needed to establish which children benefit from and hence require testing for heterophile antibodies, the cost-effectiveness of EBV investigations and whether heterophile titres have predictive value for the severity of infection and the likelihood of complications.

[PMID: 11369969]
This case report is about an elderly man who presented with a long-standing history of high-grade fever and weight loss. He initially had only hepatosplenomegaly, but then developed jaundice. He also had pancytopenia and raised liver enzymes. His septic screen was negative, but he had a positive Monospot test and immunoglobulin G for Epstein-Barr virus. The liver biopsy showed sinusoidal phagocytosis and the subsequent bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed significant hemophagocytosis, hence Hemophagocytic syndrome was diagnosed. The fever was refractory to antibiotic and anti-tuberculosis therapy, but it responded only partially to steroids. Full response was only noticed following anti-viral treatment in the form of intravenous Ganciclovir. The patient's general condition, liver enzymes, bilirubin, hematological parameters and even the weight returned back to their normal range 2 weeks after Ganciclovir therapy. Cessation of this drug resulted in relapse of his symptoms and oral antivirals did not help. Splenectomy, steroid pulse therapy and immunosuppressive treatment were only partially helpful. Reintroduction of Ganciclovir did help for a short period. We conclude that our patient had virus-associated hemophagocytic syndrome most likely related to Epstein-Barr virus infection, which was then confirmed by the splenic biopsy, and that Ganciclovir can be of great help in eradicating the virus and treating the disease, provided that it is given for a long enough period.

[PMID: 1295944]
A study was carried out on 200 patients of ages 20-40 years suffering from acute viral hepatitis. Sera were tested for markers of hepatitis B (HBsAg, and IgM anti-HBc) and hepatitis A (IgM-anti-HAV) by the ELISA technique. Sera negative for the markers of both viruses: Hepatitis A (HAV) and Hepatitis B (HBV) were subsequently tested for IGM Heterophil antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) by the Monospot slide test to diagnose acute infectious mononucleosis and tested for anti-CMV (IgM) by ELISA technique for the diagnosis of acute Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. Non-A, non-B hepatitis (NANB) was diagnosed by exclusion. The results of the study showed that 133 (66.5%) patients had evidence of HBV infection, while only 9(4.5%) were diagnosed as HAV infection. EBV and CMV were the possible etiological agents of acute viral hepatitis in (3.5%) and 1%) respectively. Accordingly the Non-A, non-B hepatitis in this study amounts to (24.5%) of the acute viral hepatitis.

[PMID: 22123662]
Infectious mononucleosis is a common, usually self-limited disease. However, infectious mononucleosis may present with severe manifestations. Complications may also occur. Consequently, diagnostic and treatment issues regarding infectious mononucleosis are of major importance. In this review, we focus on the evaluation of articles providing diagnosis and treatment data for infectious mononucleosis, published during the past 2 years. Twelve studies, deriving from extended search in PubMed, were included. Nine studies provided diagnosis data. The evaluated diagnostic methods were real-time PCR (RT-PCR), IgM/IgG antibodies measured with different assays [measurement of Epstein-Barr virus viral load (EBV-VL) in peripheral blood, neutrophil/lymphocyte/monocyte counts, C-reactive protein values, and monospot test]. The sensitivities reported for RT-PCR were high. The available treatment data were scarce (three studies). Two of them suggested that antivirals (mainly acyclovir and valacyclovir) may have a role in the treatment of infectious mononucleosis with complications, whereas the remaining study presented novel potential therapeutic patents including 5-substituted uracyle, azacytosine derivatives, and peptides inhibiting EBV-mediated membrane fusion. RT-PCR and measurement of EBV-VL may provide useful tools for the early diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis in cases with inconclusive serological results. Antiviral agents may provide a useful treatment option in patients with severe infectious mononucleosis.

[PMID: 24650116]
Infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is almost ubiquitous in humans and generally occurs at two ages: infantile, which is usually asymptomatic and associated with poorer socioeconomic conditions, and adolescent, which causes infectious mononucleosis (IM) in ~25% cases. The determinants of whether the infection causes IM remain uncertain. We aimed to evaluate seasonality and temporal trends in IM. Data from all Monospot tests, used as a marker for IM, were collected from the Grampian population over 16 years. Positive Monospot test results peaked at 17 years in females and 19 in males. Females had 16% more diagnoses, although 55% more tests. IM was ~38% more common in winter than summer. The annual rate of positive tests decreased progressively over the study period, from 174/100 000 (95% CI 171-178) in 1997 to 67/100 000 (95% CI 65-69) in 2012. IM appears to be decreasing in incidence, which may be caused by changing environmental influences on immune systems. One such factor may be exposure to sunlight.Words 168. The Medical Research Council and NHS Grampian-MS endowments.

[PMID: 21045362]
Infectious Mononucleosis (IM), a benign lymphoproliferative disease, is the best known clinical syndrome caused by Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). It usually resolves over a period of weeks or months without sequelae but may occasionally be complicated by a wide variety of neurologic, hematologic, hepatic, respiratory, and psychological complications. In this report we describe a patient with acute hepatitis following EBV-IM in a previously healthy woman. A 26-year-old woman who presented with fever, generalized weakness, nausea, sore throat, yellowing of skin, and a generalized skin rash was admitted to our clinic. Tonsillar enlargement, pharyngeal erythema, palatal petechiae, lymphadenopathy, and jaundice were noted. Significant atypical lymphocytes ( > 10%) were seen on the peripheral blood smear. Liver function tests such as ALT: 303 U/L, AST: 172 U/L, ALP: 193 U/L and total bilirubin: 7.3 mg/dl were elevated. Serological tests for EBV infection were consistent with acute infection (EBV virus capsid antigen was reactive with IgM and IgG antibodies). The Monospot test was also positive. On the seventh day, liver function tests and bilirubin had risen to peak level and platelets were decreased. The patient was managed supportively and her critical condition improved and was finally stabilized. Although the prognosis for IM is very favorable, a variety of acute complications may occur.

[PMID: 24686796]
A 29-year-old man presented with sudden left-sided pleuritic chest pain on a background of sore throat during the preceding week. On examination he had tender cervical lymphadenopathy, he was tachycardic and had a 24 mm Hg blood pressure difference between the left and right arms. Bloods revealed deranged liver function tests and a lymphocytosis. His D-dimer was raised, hence he was treated for presumed pulmonary embolism before imaging was available. Monospot test was positive. He subsequently had both a CT pulmonary angiogram and a CT angiogram of the aorta to exclude pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. The CT revealed splenomegaly with a large subdiaphragmatic haematoma secondary to splenic rupture. This had likely caused referred pain through diaphragmatic irritation. He was taken to theatre for urgent splenectomy. The unifying diagnosis was infectious mononucleosis complicated by spontaneous splenic rupture secondary to Epstein-Barr virus infection.

[PMID: 6270614]
Once acquired, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a latent virus, remains in the body for what appears to be the lifetime of the human host. Circumstantial data suggest EBV is involved in clinical disease including malignancies far more often than previously recognized. A serologic test for early antigen (EA) is more specific for diagnosing active EBV disease than the monospot or heterophile test. A case study of active Epstein-Barr infection is reported showing persistently elevated early antigen titers prior to and following malignant transformation.

[PMID: 21886730]
The rash in infectious mononucleosis is usually diffusely macular. A 15-year-old boy presented to us with high grade fever, sore throat, malaise, body aches, and polyarthralgia. He developed annular, erythematous, and non-scaly eruptions on chest and right arm. Blanching erythema was noted on his trunk. He had bilateral tender cervical lymph nodes, severe pharyngeal congestion, petechiae on soft palate, uvular edema, infraorbital edema, and marginal tender hepatomegaly. Investigations revealed lymphocytosis and activated atypical lymphocytes in the peripheral smear, and positive monospot test. The boy subsequently recovered in one week with total disappearance of his rash. Epstein-Barr virus-related infectious mononucleosis was considered the most likely diagnosis for our patient. To our knowledge, this atypical case is the third reported case of annular lesions in infectious mononucleosis. Dermatologists and other clinicians should be alerted to this special presentation of primary EBV infection.

[PMID: 26275628]
A 75-year-old woman presented with altered mental status, septic picture, and influenza-like symptoms. Initial investigations revealed atypical lymphocytosis, thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, and a positive monospot test result. Further investigation showed the Epstein-Barr virus viral capsid antibody IgM/IgG and Epstein-Barr virus DNA by polymerase chain reaction to be negative; however, interestingly her cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgM and IgG were positive, suggesting that her mononucleosis-like syndrome was due to acute CMV infection. Herein, we report the first case of a heterophile-positive mononucleosis syndrome caused by acute CMV infection in an elderly immunocompetent woman. This case conveys that monospot test can yield false-positive result in the setting of acute CMV infection.

[PMID: 28761605]
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is the most common form of childhood vasculitis. Various viral and bacterial infections, drugs, vaccines, food allergy and even insect bites have been considered as triggering factors in pathogenesis of HSP. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, which is associated with HSP, have been rarely reported. Herein we present HSP patient possibly caused by EBV infection. A 8-year old boy was admitted to our department with fever, rashes on legs and arms and intermittent mild abdominal pain. Multiple purpuric rashes were on his extremities, abdomen and buttock. Laboratory investigations revealed that monospot test was positive, EBV serology tests; Anti-EA-D Ig G: 3+, Anti-VCA gp125 Ig G: 3+, Anti-VCA p19 Ig M: 2+, Anti EBNA-1 Ig M: negative, Anti EBNA-1 Ig M: negative, Anti EBNA-1 Ig G: negative. The patient was interpreted as the primary active acute EBV infection. A skin biopsy showed leucocytoclastic vasculitis. The other viral and bacterial investigations were negative. The patient was diagnosed as HSP vasculitis according to EULAR criteria and treated with intravenous hydration and ibuprofen. He was discharged after 15 days with normal laboratory findings and physical examination. We think that EBV infection may be stimulant factor for autoimmune reactions and may cause HSP vasculitis. Hence, it may be useful to investigate the EBV infection in etiology of HSP cases.