[PMID: 19808991]
The authors report a patient with dystonia secondary to bilateral lesions of the basal ganglia, who improved dramatically with levodopa. The patient presented at the age of 4 years with progressive dystonia of the lower extremities and right upper extremity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed bilateral hyperintensities of the globus pallidus that remained stable over the years. Despite extensive investigations, the etiology of her basal ganglia lesions remained nebulous. The patient's dystonia responded to Trihexyphenidyl and to tetrabenazine, but these medications needed to be stopped because of side effects. At the age of 12 years, small doses of levodopa-carbidopa were tried and resulted in dramatic improvement of her dystonia. The authors believe that in the pediatric population with secondary dystonias other than Segawa disease, even though this has been reported only rarely to be effective, a therapeutic trial with levodopa should be considered in some instances.

[PMID: 9040721]
Over the past 15 years we have treated 526 patients with severe hyperkinetic movement disorders with tetrabenazine (TBZ), a monoamine-depleting and a dopamine-receptor-blocking drug. We report here the results in 400 patients with adequate follow-up. The response was rated on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 = marked improvement, 4 = no response, 5 = worsening) and was assessed initially and at the last clinic visit. The average duration of TBZ treatment was 28.9 months (+/- 31.1; range, 0.25 to 180 months). The global response rating of 1 (marked improvement) was recorded in 89.2% of 93 patients with tardive stereotypy, 83.3% of 12 with myoclonus, 82.8% of 29 with Huntington's disease, 80.5% of 82 with tardive dystonia, 79.3% of 29 with other movement disorders, 62.9% of 108 with idiopathic dystonia, and in 57.4% of 47 with Tourette's syndrome. The most common side effects included drowsiness (36.5%), parkinsonism (28.5%), depression (15.0%), insomnia (11.0%), nervousness or anxiety (10.3%), and akathisia (9.5%). The side effects were controlled with reduction in the dosage. TBZ is an effective and safe drug for the treatment of a variety of hyperkinetic movement disorders. In contrast to typical neuroleptics, TBZ has not been demonstrated to cause tardive dyskinesia.

[PMID: 12710012]
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a lifelong disorder in which dopamine deficiency is not associated with neuronal loss and therefore it is an ideal human model for investigating the compensatory changes that occur in response to this biochemical abnormality. Using positron emission tomography (PET), we examined the (+/-)-alpha-[(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine ([(11)C]DTBZ) binding potential of untreated DRD patients and normal controls. Two other PET markers of presynaptic nigrostriatal function, d-threo-[(11)C]methylphenidate ([(11)C]MP) and 6-[(18)F]fluoro-L-dopa ([(18)F]-dopa), and [(11)C]raclopride were also used in the study. We found increased [(11)C]DTBZ binding potential in the striatum of DRD patients. By contrast, no significant changes were detected in either [(11)C]MP binding potential or [(18)F]-dopa uptake rate constant. In addition, we found evidence for increased dopamine turnover in one DRD patient by examining changes in [(11)C]raclopride binding potential in relation to levodopa treatment. We propose that the increase in [(11)C]DTBZ binding likely reflects the dramatic decrease in the intravesicular concentration of dopamine that occurs in DRD; upregulation of vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2) expression may also contribute. Our findings suggest that the striatal expression of VMAT2 (as estimated by [(11)C]DTBZ binding) is not coregulated with dopamine synthesis. This is in keeping with a role for VMAT2 in other cellular processes (i.e., sequestration and release from the cell of potential toxic products), in addition to its importance for the quantal release of monoamines.

[PMID: 6128697]
It is not widely recognized that antipsychotic drugs can cause late-onset and persistent dystonia. This dystonia, which we call tardive dystonia, is to be distinguished from acute dystonic reactions, which are transient, and from classic tardive dyskinesia, which is a choreic disorder that predominantly affects the oral region. We present 42 patients with tardive dystonia. The age of onset of dystonia was 13 to 60 years. Symptoms began after 3 days to 11 years of antipsychotic therapy. Younger patients tended to have more generalized dystonia. In a few patients, spontaneous remission occurred, but dystonia persisted for years in most. Therapy was rarely a complete success. The most frequently helpful medications were tetrabenazine (68% of patients improved) and anticholinergics (39% improved).

[PMID: 3400500]
We retrospectively reviewed the clinical course and response to treatment of 67 patients with tardive dystonia. The age at onset ranged from 13 to 72 years without predilection to any particular age group or sex. Patients developed tardive dystonia even after relatively short duration of exposure to dopamine antagonists (21% within 1 year). Five of 42 patients withdrawn from these drugs remitted. Overall clinical improvement occurred in 52% of patients. Tetrabenazine and reserpine were most effective (greater than 50% response rate) in controlling dystonia. Anticholinergic drugs diminished dystonia in 46% of patients. In conclusion, this review supports our original concept of tardive dystonia as a subtype of tardive dyskinesia, which is quite disabling, usually persistent, and difficult to treat. Although anticholinergics and dopamine-depleting drugs frequently improved symptoms, treatment with them only rarely led to a remission or satisfactory control of symptoms. The difficulty of treating this condition necessitates reemphasis of one important observation of this study, that this condition may develop early in the course of dopamine antagonist treatment; there is no minimum period of exposure which can be considered safe. These drugs must therefore be used only for correct medical indications, and every attempt should be made to withdraw them at the first sign of dyskinesia, particularly of the dystonic type.

[PMID: 6502174]
Twenty-three children (aged less than 18 years) and 17 adults with severe widespread dystonia were treated with high doses of benzhexol (up to 130 mg daily introduced slowly over many weeks). Children tolerated higher doses (median 30 mg/day) than adults (median 20 mg/day). 52% of the children gained useful benefit, many (43%) without unwanted side effects. Such an approach was less successful in adults; 41% gained benefit, but only 35% had no side effects. Twelve adults with severe axial dystonia, and two children with life-threatening generalised dystonia were treated with a combination of a low constant dose of tetrabenazine to which were added pimozide and benzhexol as necessary. The dose of tetrabenazine was aimed at 75 mg daily; pimozide was increased (6 to 25 mg/day) until the dystonia was relieved or Parkinsonism and other side-effects prevented further increments; if necessary benzhexol (6 to 30 mg/day) then was added to control side-effects and to provide additional benefit. 75% of the adults with severe axial dystonia, and one of the two children with life threatening generalised dystonia gained useful benefit from this regime. It is concluded that high dose benzhexol is the present first treatment of choice for children with severe dystonia, and is worth a try in adults but with less expectation of success. When benzhexol treatment alone fails in adults with severe disabling axial dystonia, or in children with life-threatening generalised dystonia, combined therapy with tetrabenazine, pimozide and benzhexol may give valuable symptomatic relief.

[PMID: 9549503]
Patients with dystonic syndromes sometimes develop increasingly frequent and relentless episodes of devastating generalized dystonia which we call status dystonicus. Twelve cases of status dystonicus, of various underlying aetiologies, are presented. Possible precipitating factors were identified in only five cases: intercurrent infection (one); discontinuation of lithium (one) and tetrabenazine (one); and the introduction of clonazepam (two). Nine patients required mechanical ventilation and three others were sedated with intravenous chlormethiazole. Drug therapy used included benzhexol, tetrabenazine, pimozide, baclofen, chlorpromazine, haloperidol, carbamazepine and acetozolamide. Two patients underwent thalamotomies, one of whom improved. Two patients died, five returned to their pre-status dystonicus condition, two eventually made a full recovery and three were worse. Patients with status dystonicus should be managed on an intensive care unit as they may develop bulbar and respiratory complications which may require ventilation. Metabolic problems encountered can include rhabdomyolysis with acute renal failure. Drug therapy with benzhexol, tetrabenazine and pimozide or haloperidol may be beneficial in some cases.

[PMID: 18555882]
Cerebral calcifications are a cause of secondary dystonia and may be an uncommon complication of radiotherapy. We report a very severe case of generalized dystonia due to postradiotherapy basal ganglia calcifications. An 8-year-old girl received 53 grays radiotherapy after surgery for craniopharyngioma. One year later she developed generalized dystonia. Computed tomography showed bilateral basal ganglia calcifications, especially of the lenticular nuclei. Pharmacological treatment with tetrabenazine, clonazepam and trihexiphenydile allowed a very limited improvement of dystonia; the course was complicated by dystonic storms and decompensations resulting from the iatrogenous panhypopituitarism. This case illustrates a severe complication of cranial irradiation which should be considered in the indications of this treatment, especially for children.

[PMID: 2904118]
We retrospectively reviewed the clinical course and response to treatment of 67 patients with tardive dystonia. The age at onset ranged from 13 to 72 years without predilection to any particular age group or sex. Patients developed tardive dystonia even after relatively short duration of exposure to dopamine antagonists (21% within one year). Five of 42 patients withdrawn from these drugs remitted. Overall clinical improvement occurred in 52% of patients. Tetrabenazine and reserpine were most effective (greater than 50% response rate) in controlling dystonia. Anticholinergic drugs diminished dystonia in 46% of patients.

[PMID: 6889706]
Myoglobinuria may follow extreme muscular exertion or disorders that cause muscle necrosis. Dystonia has not been implicated previously. We studied an 8-year-old boy of non-Jewish, Mexican-American descent with autosomal-dominant dystonia musculorum deformans who developed rapidly progressive and severe generalized dystonia, hyperpyrexia, myoglobinuria, and renal failure. Curarization was required. Transient improvement was achieved with tetrabenazine and baclofen, but bilateral thalamotomy was then performed. Patients with severe dystonia should be observed for evidence of myoglobinuria.

[PMID: 22515742]
Neuroferritinopathy is an autosomal dominant extra - pyramidal movement disorder caused by mutations in the ferritin light chain gene (FTL). The most frequent presentation is with chorea (50%), followed by dystonia (42.5 %) and parkinsonism (7.5%). Seven different mutations are known; 6 insertions in exon 4 and a missense mutation in exon 3 with the 460insA mutation in exon 4 being the most common. Brain magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates iron deposition in the basal ganglia and cavitation. Neuropathological studies have shown neuronal loss in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum and basal ganglia. Ferritin inclusion bodies were demonstrated within neurons and glia. Studies of patient derived fibroblasts and HeLa cells expressing mutant ferritin demonstrate increased iron levels and oxidative stress. These abnormalities have been recapitulated in mouse models of neuroferritinopathy. There is no disease modifying treatement for neuroferritinopathy but benzodiazepines and botulinum toxin may palliate dystonia and tetrabenazine may relieve chorea and facial tics. There is no role for iron chelation.