[PMID: 22546085]
The feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV) is a member of the feline coronavirus family that causes FIP, which is incurable and fatal in cats. Cyclosporin A (CsA), an immunosuppressive agent that targets the nuclear factor pathway of activated T-cells (NF-AT) to bind cellular cyclophilins (CyP), dose-dependently inhibited FIPV replication in vitro. FK506 (an immunosuppressor of the pathway that binds cellular FK506-binding protein (FKBP) but not CyP) did not affect FIPV replication. Neither cell growth nor viability changed in the presence of either CsA or FK506, and these factors did not affect the NF-AT pathway in fcwf-4 cells. Therefore, CsA does not seem to exert inhibitory effects via the NF-AT pathway. In conclusion, CsA inhibited FIPV replication in vitro and further studies are needed to verify the practical value of CsA as an anti-FIPV treatment in vivo.

[PMID: 27712624]
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) belongs to the few animal virus diseases in which, in the course of a generally harmless persistent infection, a virus acquires a small number of mutations that fundamentally change its pathogenicity, invariably resulting in a fatal outcome. The causative agent of this deadly disease, feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), arises from feline enteric coronavirus (FECV). The review summarizes our current knowledge of the genome and proteome of feline coronaviruses (FCoVs), focusing on the viral surface (spike) protein S and the five accessory proteins. We also review the current classification of FCoVs into distinct serotypes and biotypes, cellular receptors of FCoVs and their presumed role in viral virulence, and discuss other aspects of FIPV-induced pathogenesis. Our current knowledge of genetic differences between FECVs and FIPVs has been mainly based on comparative sequence analyses that revealed "discriminatory" mutations that are present in FIPVs but not in FECVs. Most of these mutations result in amino acid substitutions in the S protein and these may have a critical role in the switch from FECV to FIPV. In most cases, the precise roles of these mutations in the molecular pathogenesis of FIP have not been tested experimentally in the natural host, mainly due to the lack of suitable experimental tools including genetically engineered virus mutants. We discuss the recent progress in the development of FCoV reverse genetics systems suitable to generate recombinant field viruses containing appropriate mutations for in vivo studies.

[PMID: 31375588]
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is one of the most important infectious diseases in cats and is caused by feline coronavirus (FCoV). Tissue culture-adapted type I FCoV shows reduced FIP induction in experimental infections, which complicates the understanding of FIP pathogenesis caused by type I FCoV. We previously found that the type I FCoV strain C3663 efficiently induces FIP in specific-pathogen-free cats through the naturally infectious route. In this study, we employed a bacterial artificial chromosome-based reverse genetics system to gain more insights into FIP caused by the C3633 strain. We successfully generated recombinant virus (rC3663) from Fcwf-4 cells transfected with infectious cDNA that showed growth kinetics similar to those shown by the parental virus. Next, we constructed a reporter C3663 virus carrying the nanoluciferase (Nluc) gene to measure viral replication with high sensitivity. The inhibitory effects of different compounds against rC3663-Nluc could be measured within 24 h postinfection. Furthermore, we found that A72 cells derived from canine fibroblasts permitted FCoV replication without apparent cytopathic effects. Thus, our reporter virus is useful for uncovering the infectivity of type I FCoV in different cell lines, including canine-derived cells. Surprisingly, we uncovered aberrant viral RNA transcription of rC3663 in A72 cells. Overall, we succeeded in obtaining infectious cDNA clones derived from type I FCoV that retained its virulence. Our recombinant FCoVs are powerful tools for increasing our understanding of the viral life cycle and pathogenesis of FIP-inducing type I FCoV.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is one of the most significant coronaviruses, because this virus induces feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), which is a lethal disease in cats. Tissue culture-adapted type I FCoV often loses pathogenicity, which complicates research on type I FCoV-induced feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Since we previously found that type I FCoV strain C3663 efficiently induces FIP in specific-pathogen-free cats, we established a reverse genetics system for the C3663 strain to obtain recombinant viruses in the present study. By using a reporter C3663 virus, we were able to examine the inhibitory effect of 68 compounds on C3663 replication in Fcwf-4 cells and infectivity in a canine-derived cell line. Interestingly, one canine cell line, A72, permitted FCoV replication but with low efficiency and aberrant viral gene expression.

[PMID: 29329682]
Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is an etiological agent that causes a benign enteric illness and the fatal systemic disease feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). The FCoV spike (S) protein is considered the viral regulator for binding and entry to the cell. This protein is also involved in FCoV tropism and virulence, as well as in the switch from enteric disease to FIP. This regulation is carried out by spike's major functions: receptor binding and virus-cell membrane fusion. In this review, we address important aspects in FCoV genetics, replication and pathogenesis, focusing on the role of S. To better understand this, FCoV S protein models were constructed, based on the human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) S structure. We describe the specific structural characteristics of the FCoV S, in comparison with other coronavirus spikes. We also revise the biochemical events needed for FCoV S activation and its relation to the structural features of the protein.

[PMID: 30065095]
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), one of the most important lethal infections of cats, is caused by feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), the high-virulence biotype of feline coronaviruses (FCoVs). FIPVs are suggested to emerge from feline enteric coronaviruses (FECVs) by acquiring mutations in specific genes in the course of persistent infections. Although numerous studies identified mutations predicted to be responsible for the FECV-FIPV biotype switch, the presumed roles of specific genetic changes in FIP pathogenesis have not been confirmed experimentally. Reverse genetics systems established previously for serotype I and the less common serotype II FCoVs were based on cell culture-adapted FIPV strains which, however, were shown to be unsuitable for FIP pathogenesis studies <i>in vivo</i> To date, systems to produce and manipulate recombinant serotype I field viruses have not been developed, mainly because these viruses cannot be grown <i>in vitro</i> Here, we report the first reverse genetics system based on a serotype I FECV field isolate that is suitable to produce high-titer stocks of recombinant FECVs. We demonstrate that these recombinant viruses cause productive persistent infections in cats that are similar to what is observed in natural infections. The system provides an excellent tool for studying FCoVs that do not grow in standard cell culture systems and will greatly facilitate studies into the molecular pathogenesis of FIP. Importantly, the system could also be adapted for studies of other RNA viruses with large genomes whose production and characterization <i>in vivo</i> are currently hampered by the lack of <i>in vitro</i> propagation systems.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The availability of recombinant serotype I FCoV field isolates that are amenable to genetic manipulation is key to studying the molecular pathogenesis of FIP, especially since previous studies using cell culture-adapted FIPVs had proven unsuccessful. To our knowledge, we report the first serotype I FECV field isolate-based reverse genetics system that allows the production of high-titer recombinant virus stocks that can be used for subsequent <i>in vivo</i> studies in cats. The system represents a milestone in FCoV research. It provides an essential tool for studying the molecular pathogenesis of FIP and, more specifically, the functions of specific gene products in causing a fundamentally different progression of disease following acquisition of specific mutations. The system developed in this study will also be useful for studying other coronaviruses or more distantly related RNA viruses with large genomes for which suitable <i>in vitro</i> culture systems are not available.

[PMID: 23865689]
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a fatal disease caused by feline coronavirus (FCoV) infection. FCoV can be divided into serotypes I and II. The virus that causes FIP (FIPV) is believed to occur sporadically and spread infrequently from cat to cat. Recently, an FIP outbreak from an animal shelter was confirmed in Taiwan. FCoV from all the cats in this shelter were analyzed to determine the epidemiology of this outbreak. Thirteen of 46 (28.2%) cats with typical signs of FIP were identified. Among them, seven cats were confirmed by necropsy and/or histopathological examinations. Despite the fact that more than one FCoV was identified in this multi-cat environment, the eight FIP cats were invariably found to be infected with a type II FCoV. Sequence analysis revealed that the type II FIPV detected from fecal samples, body effusions and granulomatous tissue homogenates from the cats that succumbed to FIP all harbored an identical recombination site in their S gene. Two of the cats that succumbed to FIP were found to harbor an identical nonsense mutation in the 3c gene. Fecal shedding of this type II virus in the effusive form of FIP can be detected up to six days before death. Taken together, our data demonstrate that horizontal transmission of FIPV is possible and that FIP cats can pose a potential risk to other cats living in the same environment.

[PMID: 23763835]
Feline coronaviruses (FCoV) exist as 2 biotypes: feline enteric coronavirus (FECV) and feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV). FECV causes subclinical infections; FIPV causes feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), a systemic and fatal disease. It is thought that mutations in FECV enable infection of macrophages, causing FIP. However, the molecular basis for this biotype switch is unknown. We examined a furin cleavage site in the region between receptor-binding (S1) and fusion (S2) domains of the spike of serotype 1 FCoV. FECV sequences were compared with FIPV sequences. All FECVs had a conserved furin cleavage motif. For FIPV, there was a correlation with the disease and >1 substitution in the S1/S2 motif. Fluorogenic peptide assays confirmed that the substitutions modulate furin cleavage. We document a functionally relevant S1/S2 mutation that arises when FIP develops in a cat. These insights into FIP pathogenesis may be useful in development of diagnostic, prevention, and treatment measures against coronaviruses.

[PMID: 29778200]
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a common and highly lethal coronavirus disease of domestic cats. Recent studies of diseases caused by several RNA viruses in people and other species indicate that antiviral therapy may be effective against FIP in cats. The small molecule nucleoside analog GS-441524 is a molecular precursor to a pharmacologically active nucleoside triphosphate molecule. These analogs act as an alternative substrate and RNA-chain terminator of viral RNA dependent RNA polymerase. We determined that GS-441524 was non-toxic in feline cells at concentrations as high as 100 uM and effectively inhibited FIPV replication in cultured CRFK cells and in naturally infected feline peritoneal macrophages at concentrations as low as 1 uM. We determined the pharmacokinetics of GS-441524 in cats in vivo and established a dosage that would sustain effective blood levels for 24 h. In an experimental FIPV infection of cats, GS-441524 treatment caused a rapid reversal of disease signs and return to normality with as little as two weeks of treatment in 10/10 cats and with no apparent toxicity.

[PMID: 25701212]
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIP virus: FIPV), a feline coronavirus of the family Coronaviridae, causes a fatal disease called FIP in wild and domestic cat species. The genome of coronaviruses encodes a hydrophobic transmembrane protein, the envelope (E) protein. The E protein possesses ion channel activity. Viral proteins with ion channel activity are collectively termed "viroporins". Hexamethylene amiloride (HMA), a viroporin inhibitor, can inhibit the ion channel activity of the E protein and replication of several coronaviruses. However, it is not clear whether HMA and other viroporin inhibitors affect replication of FIPV. We examined the effect of HMA and other viroporin inhibitors (DIDS [4,4'-disothiocyano-2,2'-stilbenedisulphonic acid] and amantadine) on infection by FIPV serotypes I and II. HMA treatment drastically decreased the titers of FIPV serotype I strains Black and KU-2 in a dose-dependent manner, but it only slightly decreased the titer of FIPV serotype II strain 79-1146. In contrast, DIDS treatment decreased the titer of FIPV serotype II strain 79-1146 in dose-dependent manner, but it only slightly decreased the titers of FIPV serotype I strains Black and KU-2. We investigated whether there is a difference in ion channel activity of the E protein between viral serotypes using E. coli cells expressing the E protein of FIPV serotypes I and II. No difference was observed, suggesting that a viroporin other than the E protein influences the differences in the actions of HMA and DIDS on FIPV serotypes I and II.

[PMID: 29478397]
Practical relevance: Feline coronavirus (FCoV) infection is very common in cats, usually causing only mild intestinal signs such as diarrhoea. Up to 10% of FCoV infections, however, result in the fatal disease feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Clinical challenges: Obtaining a definitive diagnosis of FIP based on non-invasive approaches is difficult. Confirmation of the disease relies on finding appropriate cytological or histopathological changes in association with positive immunostaining for FCoV antigen. In FIP cases with effusions, cytology and immunostaining on effusion samples can be relatively easy to perform; otherwise obtaining diagnostic samples is more challenging and collection of biopsies from tissues with gross lesions is necessary. In the absence of a definitive diagnosis, a high index of suspicion of FIP may be obtained from the cat's signalment and history, combined with findings on clinical examination and laboratory test results. If largely consistent with FIP, these can be used as a basis for discussion with the owner about whether additional, more invasive, diagnostic tests are warranted. In some cases it may be that euthanasia is discussed as an alternative to pursuing a definitive diagnosis ante-mortem, especially if financial limitations exist or where there are concerns over a cat's ability to tolerate invasive diagnostic procedures. Ideally, the diagnosis should be confirmed in such patients from samples taken at post-mortem examination. Global importance: FIP occurs wherever FCoV infection is present in cats, which equates to most parts of the world. Evidence base: This review provides a comprehensive overview of how to approach the diagnosis of FIP, focusing on the tests available to the veterinary practitioner and recently published evidence supporting their use.

[PMID: 26656689]
Coronaviruses (CoVs) can cause highly prevalent diseases in humans and animals. Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV) belongs to the genus Alphacoronavirus, resulting in a lethal systemic granulomatous disease called feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), which is one of the most important fatal infectious diseases of cats worldwide. No specific vaccines or drugs have been approved to treat FIP. CoV main proteases (M(pro)s) play a pivotal role in viral transcription and replication, making them an ideal target for drug development. Here, we report the crystal structure of FIPV M(pro) in complex with dual inhibitors, a zinc ion and a Michael acceptor. The complex structure elaborates a unique mechanism of two distinct inhibitors synergizing to inactivate the protease, providing a structural basis to design novel antivirals and suggesting the potential to take advantage of zinc as an adjunct therapy against CoV-associated diseases. Coronaviruses (CoVs) have the largest genome size among all RNA viruses. CoV infection causes various diseases in humans and animals, including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). No approved specific drugs or vaccinations are available to treat their infections. Here, we report a novel dual inhibition mechanism targeting CoV main protease (M(pro)) from feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), which leads to lethal systemic granulomatous disease in cats. M(pro), conserved across all CoV genomes, is essential for viral replication and transcription. We demonstrated that zinc ion and a Michael acceptor-based peptidomimetic inhibitor synergistically inactivate FIPV M(pro). We also solved the structure of FIPV M(pro) complexed with two inhibitors, delineating the structural view of a dual inhibition mechanism. Our study provides new insight into the pharmaceutical strategy against CoV M(pro) through using zinc as an adjuvant therapy to enhance the efficacy of an irreversible peptidomimetic inhibitor.