[PMID: 28623093]
SMARCAL1 (SWI/SNF Related, Matrix Associated, Actin Dependent Regulator Of Chromatin, Subfamily A-Like 1), also known as HARP, is an ATP-dependent annealing helicase that stabilizes replication forks during DNA damage. Mutations in this gene are the cause of Schimke immune-osseous dysplasia (SIOD), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by T-cell immunodeficiency and growth dysfunctions. In this review, we summarize the main roles of SMARCAL1 in DNA repair, telomere maintenance and replication fork stability in response to DNA replication stress.

[PMID: 25748404]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD), is an autosomal recessive inherited disease caused by SMARCAL1 (MIM:20606622) mutations, while in about half of the patients no any mutation in SMARCAL1 could be found. This disease involves multiple systems and is characterized by short and dissymmetric stature with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, progressive renal failure, lymphopenia with recurrent infections, and hyperpigmented macules. This study aimed to analyze SMARCAL1 gene of 2 unrelated suspected SIOD children, to make definite diagnosis, and find more SMARCAL1 mutation types of Chinese SIOD. Two suspected Chinese Han male SIOD children who visited our hospital from 2008 to 2014, aged 3 y 6 m and 7 y 8 m, both were short and had spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, progressive renal failure, lymphopenia with recurrent infections. After informed consent, they and their parents's DNA were extracted from blood. PCRs for all 16 exons of SMARCAL1 were performed and PCR products were purified by 2% gel electrophoresis and sequenced directly. Pathogenicity of missense variations was confirmed by SIFT and sequencing SMARCAL1 of fifty normal controls. (1) Four gene variations were found in the two children: Two reported missense mutations c.1129G>C, p.Glu377Gln and c.1933C>T, p. Arg645Cys. Two splicing mutations c.1334+1G>A and c.2142-1 G>A were detected. (2) c.1129G>C, p.Glu377Gln were reported as a disease-causing mutations before, but it was an single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) which was found in 15 of 50 normal controls. (3) Two novel splicing mutations were found in this study: c.1334+1G>A and c.2142-1 G>A. (1) We detected 3 disease-causing mutations in 2 SIOD children by SMARCAL1 gene analysis, while 2 splicing mutations were novel mutations. (2) c.1129G>C, p.Glu377Gln was a SNP but not a disease-causing mutation at least in Chinese population.

[PMID: 16237566]
Autosomal-recessive Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD) characterized by spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, focal-segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), T-cell immunodeficiency and facial dysmorphism is caused by defects in the SMARCAL1 gene. The gene product is involved in the transcriptional regulation of other genes. A 12-year-old boy of consanginous Turkish descent developed disproportionate short stature from spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia at the age of 6 and nephrotic syndrome at the age of 10 years. Renal biopsy revealed FSGS, the kidney function was normal, T-lymphocytes were diminished without infectious complications, and he has had no cerebral ischemia. Analysis of the patient's SMARCAL1 gene revealed a novel homozygous C1798T transition leading to a R561C substitution. The parents and two healthy sisters were found to be heterozygous. A younger brother, who is also homozygous for the mutation, is clinically asymptomatic and has no proteinuria at the age of 18 months. Still, his CD4 cells are diminished. For SMARCAL1 mutations a clear genotype-phenotype correlation has been reported: severe SIOD with in utero or early-childhood onset leading to end-stage renal disease within a few years is caused by nonsense, frame shift or splice mutations. Many patients die from infections and cerebrovascular insults during childhood. Mild SIOD manifests later and progresses more slowly without infectious or cerebral vascular complications--the underlying defect being missense mutations in all three patients reported so far. The novel R561C missense mutation in our patient with mild SIOD is additional evidence for the genotype-phenotype correlation reported for SMARCAL1 mutations.

[PMID: 11799392]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD, MIM 242900) is an autosomal-recessive pleiotropic disorder with the diagnostic features of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, renal dysfunction and T-cell immunodeficiency. Using genome-wide linkage mapping and a positional candidate approach, we determined that mutations in SMARCAL1 (SWI/SNF2-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like 1), are responsible for SIOD. Through analysis of data from persons with SIOD in 26 unrelated families, we observed that affected individuals from 13 of 23 families with severe disease had two alleles with nonsense, frameshift or splicing mutations, whereas affected individuals from 3 of 3 families with milder disease had a missense mutation on each allele. These observations indicate that some missense mutations allow retention of partial SMARCAL1 function and thus cause milder disease.

[PMID: 18520775]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (OMIM 242900) is an uncommon autosomal-recessive multisystem disease caused by mutations in SMARCAL1 (swi/snf-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like 1), a gene encoding a putative chromatin remodeling protein. Neurologic manifestations identified to date relate to enhanced atherosclerosis and cerebrovascular disease. Based on a clinical survey, we determined that half of Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia patients have a small head circumference, and 15% have social, language, motor, or cognitive abnormalities. Postmortem examination of 2 Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia patients showed low brain weights and subtle brain histologic abnormalities suggestive of perturbed neuron-glial migration such as heterotopia, irregular cortical thickness, incomplete gyral formation, and poor definition of cortical layers. We found that SMARCAL1 is highly expressed in the developing and adult mouse and human brain, including neural precursors and neuronal lineage cells. These observations suggest that SMARCAL1 deficiency may influence brain development and function in addition to its previously recognized effect on cerebral circulation.

[PMID: 23359635]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, immunodeficiency, and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Mutations in SWI/SNF2 related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like 1 (SMARCAL1) gene are responsible for the disease. The present report describes, for the first time, a Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia child with SMARCAL1 missense mutation (R561H) and manifestations of intussusception secondary to Epstein-Barr virus-negative non-Hodgkin lymphoma, who expired due to septicemia following chemotherapy. The report emphasizes the necessity of more limited immunosuppressive protocols in Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia patients with lymphoproliferative disorders.

[PMID: 27411420]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder caused by defects in SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like 1 gene (SMARCAL1). SMARCAL1 product is a helicase that has role in selective cellular proliferation. The disorder is characterized by spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with short stature, nephropathy, T cell deficiency, neurologic and cutaneous signs. Patients may have hyperpigmented skin lesions similar to café au lait spots. Symptoms and disease severity in Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia varies from patient to patient. Genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors play role on the severity of the disease. Here we report on a patient with short stature, steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome and recurrent infections. Cutaneous findings and developmental delay helped us to reach the diagnosis of Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia. A homozygous missense mutation in SMARCAL1 gene confirmed the clinical diagnosis.

[PMID: 16816006]
Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia is a rare autosomal-recessive multisystem disorder with the main clinical features of disproportionate growth deficiency, defective cellular immunity, and progressive renal disease. It is caused by mutations of SMARCAL1, a gene encoding a putative chromatin remodeling protein of unknown function. Because a detailed description of the clinical features is an essential first step in elucidating the function of SMARCAL1, we present the first detailed anthropometric data for Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia patients. By comprehensive anthropometric examination (28 parameters) of 8 patients (3 females) with the typical findings of Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia (mean age: 14.8 years; range: 4.9-30.5 years) and 304 patients (117 females) with congenital and hereditary chronic kidney disease (mean age: 10.7 +/- 4.8 years; range: 3-21.8 years), we show that Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia patients differ significantly from those with other forms of chronic kidney disease. z scores were calculated with reference limits derived from 5155 healthy children (2591 females) aged 3 to 18 years. The key finding was that, in the latter group, median leg length was significantly more reduced than sitting height, whereas in Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia patients, the reduction of sitting height was significantly more pronounced than for leg length. Therefore, the ratio of sitting height/leg length might be a simple tool for the clinician to distinguish Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia from other chronic kidney disease patients. Schimke-immuno-osseous dysplasia is very likely if this ratio is < 0.83. However, other forms of chronic kidney disease have to be discussed in case of a ratio > 1.01.

[PMID: 24589093]
Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD, OMIM #242900) is an autosomal-recessive pleiotropic disorder characterized by spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, renal dysfunction and T-cell immunodeficiency. SIOD is caused by mutations in the gene SMARCAL1. We report the clinical and genetic diagnosis of a 5-years old girl with SIOD, referred to our Center because of nephrotic-range proteinuria occasionally detected during the follow-up for congenital hypothyroidism. Mutational analysis of SMARCAL1 gene was performed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bidirectional sequencing. Sequence analysis revealed that patient was compound heterozygous for two SMARCAL1 mutations: a novel missense change (p.Arg247Pro) and a well-known nonsense mutation (p.Glu848*). This report provided the clinical and genetic description of a mild phenotype of Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia associated with nephrotic proteinuria, decreasing after combined therapy with ACE inhibitors and sartans. Our experience highlighted the importance of detailed clinical evaluation, appropriate genetic counseling and molecular testing, to provide timely treatment and more accurate prognosis.

[PMID: 27813696]
Mutations in SMARCAL1, which encodes a DNA annealing helicase with roles in DNA replication fork restart, DNA repair, and gene expression modulation, cause Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD), an autosomal recessive disease characterized by skeletal dysplasia, renal disease, T-cell immunodeficiency, and arteriosclerosis. The clinical features of SIOD arise from pathological changes in gene expression; however, the underlying mechanism for these gene expression alterations remains unclear. We hypothesized that changes of the epigenome alter gene expression in SIOD. To test this, we performed a genetic screen for interaction between Marcal1, the Drosophila melanogaster ortholog of SMARCAL1, and the genes of the trithorax group (trxG) and Polycomb group (PcG), which encode epigenetic regulators. SMARCAL1 and Marcal1 genetically interacted with trxG and PcG members. A homozygous null mutation of Marcal1 suppressed the wing-to-haltere transformation, ectopic Ultrabithorax (Ubx) expression, and ectopic Ubx minigene expression caused by PcG deficiency. The suppression of ectopic Ubx expression correlated with reduced chromatin accessibility of the Ubx promoter. To our knowledge, this is the first in vivo evidence for deficiency of a SMARCAL1 ortholog altering the chromatin structure of a gene.

[PMID: 22378147]
Biallelic mutations of the DNA annealing helicase SMARCAL1 (SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a-like 1) cause Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD, MIM 242900), an incompletely penetrant autosomal recessive disorder. Using human, Drosophila and mouse models, we show that the proteins encoded by SMARCAL1 orthologs localize to transcriptionally active chromatin and modulate gene expression. We also show that, as found in SIOD patients, deficiency of the SMARCAL1 orthologs alone is insufficient to cause disease in fruit flies and mice, although such deficiency causes modest diffuse alterations in gene expression. Rather, disease manifests when SMARCAL1 deficiency interacts with genetic and environmental factors that further alter gene expression. We conclude that the SMARCAL1 annealing helicase buffers fluctuations in gene expression and that alterations in gene expression contribute to the penetrance of SIOD.