[PMID: 17572487]
In cells of the immune system that are stimulated by antigen or antigen-antibody complexes, Ca(2+) entry from the extracellular medium is driven by depletion of endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) stores and occurs through specialized store-operated Ca(2+) channels known as Ca(2+)-release-activated Ca(2+) (CRAC) channels. The process of store-operated Ca(2+) influx is essential for short-term as well as long-term responses by immune-system cells. Short-term responses include mast cell degranulation and killing of target cells by effector cytolytic T cells, whereas long-term responses typically involve changes in gene transcription and include T and B cell proliferation and differentiation. Transcription downstream of Ca(2+) influx is in large part funneled through the transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), a heavily phosphorylated protein that is cytoplasmic in resting cells, but that enters the nucleus when dephosphorylated by the calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine phosphatase calcineurin. The importance of the Ca(2+)/calcineurin/NFAT signalling pathway for lymphocyte activation is underscored by the finding that the underlying defect in a family with a hereditary severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) syndrome is a defect in CRAC channel function, store-operated Ca(2+) entry, NFAT activation and transcription of cytokines, chemokines and many other NFAT target genes whose transcription is essential for productive immune defence. We recently used a two-pronged genetic approach to identify Orai1 as the pore subunit of the CRAC channel. On the one hand, we initiated a positional cloning approach in which we utilised genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) mapping to identify the genomic region linked to the mutant gene in the SCID family described above. In parallel, we used a genome-wide RNAi screen in Drosophila to identify critical regulators of NFAT nuclear translocation and store-operated Ca(2+) entry. These approaches, together with subsequent mutational and electrophysiological analyses, converged to identify human Orai1 as a pore subunit of the CRAC channel and as the gene product mutated in the SCID patients.

[PMID: 10593895]
Calcineurin, a Ca(2+)/calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase, plays a key role in T-cell activation by regulating the activity of NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells), a family of transcription factors required for the synthesis of several cytokine genes. Calcineurin is the target of the immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A and FK506 complexed with their cytoplasmic receptors cyclophilin and FKBP12, respectively. In this study we report that calcineurin is also the target of a recently identified Ca(2+)-binding protein, CHP (for calcineurin homologous protein), which shares a high degree of homology with the regulatory B subunit of calcineurin and with calmodulin. In Jurkat and HeLa cells, overexpression of CHP specifically impaired the nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of NFAT but had no effect on AP-1 transcriptional activity and only a small (<25%) inhibitory effect on the transcriptional activity of NFkappaB. Further study indicated that CHP inhibits calcineurin activity. In cells overexpressing CHP, the phosphatase activity of immunoprecipitated calcineurin was inhibited by approximately 50%; and in a reconstituted assay, the activity of purified calcineurin was inhibited up to 97% by the addition of purified recombinant CHP in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, prolonged activation of Jurkat cells was associated with a decreased abundance of CHP, suggesting a possible regulatory mechanism allowing activation of calcineurin. CHP, therefore, is a previously unrecognized endogenous inhibitor of calcineurin activity.

[PMID: 17099778]
The heart responds to injury and chronic pressure overload by pathologic growth and remodeling, which frequently result in heart failure and sudden death. Calcium-dependent signaling pathways promote cardiac growth and associated changes in gene expression in response to stress. The calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin, which signals to nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) transcription factors, serves as a transducer of calcium signals and is sufficient and necessary for pathologic cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling. Transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins regulate cation entry into cells in response to a variety of signals, and in skeletal muscle, expression of TRP cation channel, subfamily C, member 3 (TRPC3) is increased in response to neurostimulation and calcineurin signaling. Here we show that TRPC6 was upregulated in mouse hearts in response to activated calcineurin and pressure overload, as well as in failing human hearts. Two conserved NFAT consensus sites in the promoter of the TRPC6 gene conferred responsiveness to cardiac stress. Cardiac-specific overexpression of TRPC6 in transgenic mice resulted in heightened sensitivity to stress, a propensity for lethal cardiac growth and heart failure, and an increase in NFAT-dependent expression of beta-myosin heavy chain, a sensitive marker for pathologic hypertrophy. These findings implicate TRPC6 as a positive regulator of calcineurin-NFAT signaling and a key component of a calcium-dependent regulatory loop that drives pathologic cardiac remodeling.

[PMID: 9374467]
The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) group of transcription factors is retained in the cytoplasm of quiescent cells. NFAT activation is mediated in part by induced nuclear import. This process requires calcium-dependent dephosphorylation of NFAT caused by the phosphatase calcineurin. The c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylates NFAT4 on two sites. Mutational removal of the JNK phosphorylation sites caused constitutive nuclear localization of NFAT4. In contrast, JNK activation in calcineurin-stimulated cells caused nuclear exclusion of NFAT4. These findings show that the nuclear accumulation of NFAT4 promoted by calcineurin is opposed by the JNK signal transduction pathway.

[PMID: 16260608]
The calcium-regulated protein phosphatase calcineurin (PP2B) functions as a regulator of gene expression in diverse tissues through the dephosphorylation and activation of a family of transcription factors known as nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). Here we show that NFATc3, in addition to being calcium responsive, is regulated through an indirect recruitment of class II histone deacetylases (HDACs). Specifically, yeast two-hybrid screening with the rel homology domain of NFATc3 identified the chaperone mammalian relative of DnaJ (Mrj) as a specific interacting factor. Mrj and NFATc3 were shown to directly associate with one another in mammalian cells and in vitro. Mrj served as a potent inhibitor of NFAT transcriptional activity within the nucleus through a mechanism involving histone deacetylase recruitment in conjunction with heat shock stimulation. Indeed, Mrj was determined to interact with class II histone deacetylases, each of which translocated to the nucleus following heat shock stimulation. Mrj also decreased NFATc3 occupancy of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha promoter in cardiomyocytes in an HDAC-dependent manner, and Mrj blocked calcineurin-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophic growth. Conversely, small-interfering-RNA-mediated reduction of Mrj augmented NFAT transcriptional activity and spontaneously induced cardiac myocyte growth. Collectively, our results define a novel response pathway whereby NFATc3 is negatively regulated by class II histone deacetylases through the DnaJ (heat shock protein-40) superfamily member Mrj.

[PMID: 18005668]
Calcium activated gene transcription through Nuclear Factor of Activated T-cells, (NFAT) proteins, is emerging as a ubiquitous mechanism for the control of important physiological processes. Of the five mammalian NFAT isoforms, transcriptional activities of NFATs 1-4 are stimulated by a calcium driven association between the ubiquitous phosphatase calcineurin and the calcium-sensing protein calmodulin. Published in vitro evidence has suggested that other members of the calmodulin super-family, in particular the neuronal calcium sensor (NCS) proteins, can similarly modulate calcineurin activity. In this study we have assessed the ability of NCS proteins to interact directly with calcineurin in vitro and report a specific if weak association between various NCS proteins and the phosphatase. In an extension to these analyses we have also examined the effects of over-expression of NCS-1 or NCS-1 mutants on calcineurin signalling in HeLa cells in experiments examining the dephosphorylation of an NFAT-GFP reporter construct as a readout of calcineurin activity. Results from these experiments indicate that NCS-1 was not able to detectably modulate calcineurin/NFAT signalling in a live mammalian cell system, findings that are consistent with the idea that calmodulin and not NCS-1 or other NCS family proteins is the physiologically relevant modulator of calcineurin activity.

[PMID: 9727000]
Transcription factors belonging to the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family regulate the expression of cytokine genes and other inducible genes during the immune response. The functions of NFAT proteins are directly controlled by the calcium- and calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin. Here we show that the binding of calcineurin to NFAT is substantially increased when calcineurin is activated with calmodulin and calcium. FK506.FKBP12 drug-immunophilin complexes inhibited the interaction of NFAT with activated calcineurin much more effectively than they inhibited the interaction with inactive calcineurin, suggesting that part of the interaction with activated calcineurin involved the enzyme active site. We have previously shown that NFAT is targeted to inactive calcineurin at a region distinct from the calcineurin active site (Aramburu, J., Garcia-Cozar, F. J., Raghavan, A., Okamura, H., Rao, A., and Hogan, P. G. (1998) Mol. Cell 1, 627-637); this region is also involved in NFAT binding to activated calcineurin, since binding is inhibited by an NFAT peptide spanning the calcineurin docking site on NFAT. The interacting surfaces are located on the catalytic domain of the calcineurin A chain and on an 86-amino acid fragment of the NFAT regulatory domain. NFAT binding to the calcineurin catalytic domain was inhibited by the calcineurin autoinhibitory domain and the RII substrate peptide, which bind in the calcineurin active site, as well as by the NFAT docking site peptide, which binds to a region of calcineurin distinct from the active site. We propose that, in resting cells, NFAT is targeted to a region of the calcineurin catalytic domain that does not overlap the calcineurin active site. Upon cell activation, displacement of the autoinhibitory domain by calmodulin binding allows NFAT to bind additionally to the calcineurin active site, thus positioning NFAT for immediate dephosphorylation at functional phosphoserine residues.

[PMID: 16229015]
Ca2+ is a ubiquitous intracellular messenger responsible for controlling numerous cellular processes including fertilization, mitosis, neuronal transmission, contraction and relaxation of muscles, gene transcription, and cell death. At rest, the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration [Ca2+]i is approximately 100 nM, but this level rises to 500-1,000 nM upon activation. In osteoblasts, the elevation of [Ca2+]i is a result of an increase in the release of Ca2+ from endoplasmic reticulum and/or extracellular Ca2+ influx through voltage gated Ca2+ channels. Many of the cellular effects of Ca2+ are mediated by the Ca2+ binding protein, calmodulin (CaM). Upon binding up to four calcium ions, CaM undergoes a conformational change, which enables it to bind to specific proteins eliciting a specific response. Calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) is a major target of the Ca(2+)/CaM second messenger system. Once bound to Ca(2+)/CaM, the multimeric CaMKII is released from its autoinhibitory status and maximally activated, which then leads to an intraholoenzyme autophosphorylation reaction. Calcineurin (Cn) is another major target protein that is activated by Ca(2+)/CaM. Cn is a serine-threonine phosphatase that consists of a heterodimeric protein complex composed of a catalytic subunit (CnA) and a regulatory subunit (CnB). Upon activation, Cn directly binds to, and dephosphorylates nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) transcription factors within the cytoplasm allowing them to translocate to the nucleus and participate in the regulation of gene expression. This review will examine the potential mechanisms by which calcium, CaM, CaMKII, and Cn/NFAT control osteoblast proliferation and differentiation.

[PMID: 14729474]
Calcineurin signaling has been implicated in a broad spectrum of developmental processes in a variety of organ systems. Calcineurin is a calmodulin-dependent, calcium-activated protein phosphatase composed of catalytic and regulatory subunits. The serine/threonine-specific phosphatase functions within a signal transduction pathway that regulates gene expression and biological responses in many developmentally important cell types. Calcineurin signaling was first defined in T lymphocytes as a regulator of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) transcription factor nuclear translocation and activation. Recent studies have demonstrated the vital nature of calcium/calcineurin/NFAT signaling in cardiovascular and skeletal muscle development in vertebrates. Inhibition, mutation, or forced expression of calcineurin pathway genes result in defects or alterations in cardiomyocyte maturation, heart valve formation, vascular development, skeletal muscle differentiation and fiber-type switching, and cardiac and skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Conserved calcineurin genes are found in invertebrates such as Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans, and genetic studies have demonstrated specific myogenic functions for the phosphatase in their development. The ability to investigate calcineurin signaling pathways in vertebrates and model genetic organisms provides a great potential to more fully comprehend the functions of calcineurin and its interacting genes in heart, blood vessel, and muscle development.

[PMID: 11559828]
Transcription factors of the NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) family are expressed in most immune system cells and in a range of other cell types. Signaling through NFAT is implicated in the regulation of transcription for the immune response and other processes, including differentiation and apoptosis. NFAT normally resides in the cytoplasm, and a key aspect of the NFAT activation pathway is the regulation of its nuclear import by the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin. In a cell line stably expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-NFAT, this import can be triggered by elevation of intracellular calcium and visualized in live cells. Here we show that the inducible nuclear import of GFP-NFAT is efficiently blocked at early stages of herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection. This is a specific effect, since we observed abundant nuclear accumulation of a test viral protein and no impediment to general nuclear localization signal-dependent nuclear import and retention in infected cells. We show that virus binding at the cell surface is not itself sufficient to inhibit the signaling that induces NFAT nuclear translocation. Since the block occurs following infection in the presence of phosphonoacetic acid but not cycloheximide, we infer that the entry of the virion and early gene transcription are required but the effect is independent of DNA replication or late virus gene expression. A consequence of the block to GFP-NFAT import is a reduction in NFAT-dependent transcriptional activation from the interleukin-2 promoter in infected cells. This HSV-mediated repression of the NFAT pathway may constitute an immune evasion strategy or subversion of other NFAT-dependent cellular processes to promote viral replication.

[PMID: 11592964]
NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cell) proteins are expressed in most immune system cells and regulate the transcription of cytokine genes critical for the immune response. The activity of NFAT proteins is tightly regulated by the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase 2B/calcineurin (CaN). Dephosphorylation of NFAT by CaN is required for NFAT nuclear localization. Current immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporin A and FK506 block CaN activity thus inhibiting nuclear translocation of NFAT and consequent cytokine gene transcription. The inhibition of CaN in cells outside of the immune system may contribute to the toxicities associated with cyclosporin A therapy. In a search for safer immunosuppressive drugs, we identified a series of 3,5-bistrifluoromethyl pyrazole (BTP) derivatives that block Th1 and Th2 cytokine gene transcription. The BTP compounds block the activation-dependent nuclear localization of NFAT as determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Confocal microscopy of cells expressing fluorescent-tagged NFAT confirmed that the BTP compounds block calcium-induced movement of NFAT from the cytosol to the nucleus. Inhibition of NFAT was selective because the BTP compounds did not affect the activation of NF-kappaB and AP-1 transcription factors. Treatment of intact T cells with the BTP compounds prior to calcium ionophore-induced activation of CaN caused NFAT to remain in a highly phosphorylated state. However, the BTP compounds did not directly inhibit the dephosphorylation of NFAT by CaN in vitro, nor did the drugs block the dephosphorylation of other CaN substrates including the type II regulatory subunit of protein kinase A and the transcription factor Elk-1. The data suggest that the BTP compounds cause NFAT to be maintained in the cytosol in a phosphorylated state and block the nuclear import of NFAT and, hence, NFAT-dependent cytokine gene transcription by a mechanism other than direct inhibition of CaN phosphatase activity. The novel inhibitors described herein will be useful in better defining the cellular regulation of NFAT activation and may lead to identification of new therapeutic targets for the treatment of autoimmune disease and transplant rejection.