[PMID: 1823954]
The polybren test (P) was used parallelly with the antiglobulin test (PTA-LISS) and enzymatic test (LEN) for detection of HIV-1 antibodies. The analysis of the results of testing of 646 sera showed that the P test is a simple method making possible detection of most antibodies of the IgG class without using antiglobulin serum within up to 3 minutes. The sensitivity of the P test was high. The sera with antibodies to the antigens of the systems Rh, Kidd, Duffy, MNSs and other less frequent antibodies such as anti-Vel, anti-Coa anti-Co(b), anti-Dia and anti-Ge showed the highest activity in the P test. In one serum anti-D antibodies, in three sera anti-C and in one serum anti-Ge antibodies were detected only in the P test, while no reactions were obtained in the PTA-LISS and LEN tests. Among the immune antibodies the exception was the antibody to Kell antigens which weakly reacted in the P test and in most cases an additional phase of testing with antiglobulin PTA-P was necessary for its demonstration. The P test was of low usefulness in the detection of cold IgM antibodies such as anti-Le, anti-Fe1, anti-I and anti-HI.

[PMID: 14617316]
There is only little information on the transfusion support of patients with antibodies to high-frequency RBC antigens. In cooperation with reference laboratories and transfusion services in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, the transfusion support provided to hospitalized patients identified as having such antibodies was reviewed during a 20-month period. A total of 52 patients with antibodies to high-frequency antigens were treated in hospitals. Twenty-two of them received 104 units of antigen-negative RBCs. In 23 cases, a deviation from the standard transfusion policy (e.g., transfusion of antigen-incompatible units) occurred. The use of frozen or fresh units varied amongst the different countries but did not affect the rate of deviation from protocol. About 20 percent of all units were supplied internationally. Four antibody specificities, anti-Kpb, anti-Vel, anti-Lub, and anti-Yta, were identified in two-thirds of the patients. This survey indicated that transfusion support was unsatisfactory in about one-third of the hospitalized patients with antibodies to high-frequency antigens. Maintaining a rapidly accessible stock of just four types of rare blood units would ensure adequate transfusion support for most of these patients.

[PMID: 23505126]
Here, we report the biochemical and genetic basis of the Vel blood group antigen, which has been a vexing mystery for decades, especially as anti-Vel regularly causes severe haemolytic transfusion reactions. The protein carrying the Vel blood group antigen was biochemically purified from red blood cell membranes. Mass spectrometry-based de novo peptide sequencing identified this protein to be small integral membrane protein 1 (SMIM1), a previously uncharacterized single-pass membrane protein. Expression of SMIM1 cDNA in Vel- cultured cells generated anti-Vel cell surface reactivity, confirming that SMIM1 encoded the Vel blood group antigen. A cohort of 70 Vel- individuals was found to be uniformly homozygous for a 17 nucleotide deletion in the coding sequence of SMIM1. The genetic homogeneity of the Vel- blood type, likely having a common origin, facilitated the development of two highly specific DNA-based tests for rapid Vel genotyping, which can be easily integrated into blood group genotyping platforms. These results answer a 60-year-old riddle and provide tools of immediate assistance to all clinicians involved in the care of Vel- patients.

[PMID: 1304158]
Routine detection of maternal sensitization during pregnancy sometimes reveals alloimmunization by exceptional antigens. A first pregnancy was complicated by a severe post-partum anemia in the mother, that required a blood transfusion. Irregular agglutinins were detected during the first trimester of a second pregnancy, for which the father was different from the first. The specific antibody was not identified at that time. The newborn, born at a gestational age of 39 weeks, developed severe jaundice at 3 hours of life, with hemolytic disease, anemia and hepatomegaly. Therapy included two transfusions of packed, washed red cells obtained from the mother on days 7 and 25. Immunologic tests showed that the hemolytic disease of this newborn was due to an anti-Vel alloimmunization. Antibodies detected during the pregnancy must be identified in order to manage properly any perinatal problems due to rare antibodies.

[PMID: 9745158]
A patient experienced a severe haemolytic transfusion reaction. Neither the haemolytic property nor the specificity of the causative antibody had been sufficiently recognised when performing a microcolumn gel test. Subsequent to the transfusion reaction, the serological property and specificity of the causative antibody were analysed. Tube and gel test methods were compared, as were various reagent red cell specimens and their constituents. A haemolytic anti-Vel was detected in the tube test. In contrast, the particular commercial gel test kit used did not reveal the haemolytic property or specificity of the antibody. Our experiments suggest that this was apparently due to the presence of EDTA in the low ionic strength saline solution of the test kit. In rare cases life-treatening haemolytic activity of an irregular blood group antibody may be undetected by a commericial microcolum gel test kit in which EDTA is a constituent.

[PMID: 6522937]
A non-transfused, 43 year old Caucasian female presented with acute haemolytic anaemia and splenomegaly. Sections of bone marrow showed erythroid hyperplasia. The patient's red blood cells gave a negative reaction with polyspecific antiglobulin serum, but a positive reaction with specific anti-IgM. A heat eluate prepared from her red cells showed anti-Vel specificity. Her serum agglutinated only Vel-positive cells including her own. All papain pre-treated red cells including her own and Vel-negative cells were completely haemolysed at 37 degrees C. The percentage of haemolysis of Vel-positive cells was greater than that of Vel-negative cells.

[PMID: 1703877]
As reported by other authors we can confirm that the frequency of the blood group Vel negative in Lower Saxony is 1:4000. We report on a patient whose serological characteristics (IgM- and IgA-anti-Vel) made the transfusion of Vel positive blood impossible. Since it was not possible to obtain sufficient Vel negative red cell units in time, the patient was convinced to donate blood for autologous transfusions. This should be the procedure of first choice in the transfusion management of such patients.

[PMID: 12430675]
An anti-Vel, nearly missed in antibody identification studies, and the effect of a commercially available rabbit RBC stroma (RESt, Immucor) adsorptions on eight anti-Vel sera are reported. Anti-Vel is an antibody to an antigen of high prevalence. A 48-year-old woman with chronic vaginal bleeding presented with a Hct of 14.7 percent. The transfusion service was not informed of her history of anti-Vel when she was transferred from another institution. Studies performed on an emergency request for transfusion were interpreted as a cold autoantibody as adsorption with a commercial source of RESt eliminated the reactivity. Stored anti-Vel sera were tested by titration studies before and after adsorption with commercial RESt. Serum from the index case did not react after adsorption with RESt at the transfusion service. Studies with the stored anti-Vel indicated antibody adsorption with four of four samples at immediate spin (IS) and room temperature (RT) phases, four of eight samples at 37 degrees C in albumin (ALB) phase, and four of eight samples at ALB-IgG-AGT phase. Variations in antibody reactivity were observed in the samples tested, but RESt adsorption diminished antibody reactivity in most samples. All eight stored sera demonstrated some reactivity in at least one phase after adsorption with RESt. Anti-Vel was completely or partially adsorbed by RESt. Caution should be used when interpreting cold agglutinins with this method. The manufacturer warns that uncommon alloantibodies may be adsorbed.

[PMID: 18598283]
Routine screening for maternal immunization in a 36-year-old woman revealed an alloimmunization against the high-incidence Vel antigen during a second pregnancy. Because of the development of immunoglobulin G-type anti-Vel, the infant developed haemolytic disease of the newborn, with severe jaundice and reticulocytosis. Phototherapy was needed to reduce hyperbilirubinaemia.

[PMID: 20795312]
Anti-Vel is an uncommon antibody to a high-prevalence antigen. Its clinical significance and management in the prenatal setting are not well characterized. We present a case that demonstrates the utility of serial prenatal anti-Vel quantitative serologic monitoring with 2-ME serum treatment during pregnancy. The patient is a 23-year-old Hispanic woman with history of prior pregnancy and prior transfusion who was discovered to have an antibody to the high-prevalence Vel antigen in the first trimester (week 7) of her second pregnancy. Interval measurements of the serologic antibody titers were performed during the next 26 weeks. The untreated serum (IgM and IgG) titer increased from a baseline of 4 to 16 during that interval, while the 2-ME (presumed IgG component) titer remained stable at 4. Responding to ultrasound findings suspicious for fetal anemia, the child was delivered without complications at 34 weeks' gestation. At birth, the DAT was negative and there was no evidence of HDN. Placed in the context of other similar reports, this case demonstrates the importance of separately reporting the IgG fraction (after either DTT treatment or 2-ME treatment) from the untreated (IgM and IgG) fraction and the importance of correlating the treated serum titer with potential clinical significance.

[PMID: 889425]
The principle of detecting red cell antibodies by automated technique using the two-channel Technicon Auto-Analyser with some modification is described. The sensitivity of automated methods in detecting antibodies of different specificities was determined. The study was carried out with 76 diagnostic human sera produced by the Institute of Hematology, Transfusion Centers and commercial firms: anti-RhD, -C, -E, -CW, -c, -e, anti-K, -k, Kpa, anti-Fya, -Fyb, anti-Jka, -Jkb, anti-M, -S, -s, anti-P1, anti-Lua, anti-Lea, -Leb, anti-H, -A1, anti-I, anti-Lua and anti-Vel. A majority of the antibodies were detected by both automated methods with greater sensitivity than by manual methods. Greatest sensitivity was observed in the detection of anti-S, -Vel and antibodies of the Rh system. Anti-Leb and anti A1 antibodies were not detected. The studies are the basis for introduction of the automated technique into routine use for antibodies in blood donors and recipients.