[PMID: 24311635]
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) has been suggested as a target for radiosensitization. Given that radiotherapy is a primary treatment modality for glioblastoma (GBM) and that mTOR is often dysregulated in GBM, the goal of this study was to determine the effects of AZD2014, a dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor, on the radiosensitivity of GBM stem-like cells (GSCs). mTORC1 and mTORC2 activities were defined by immunoblot analysis. The effects of this mTOR inhibitor on the in vitro radiosensitivity of GSCs were determined using a clonogenic assay. DNA double strand breaks were evaluated according to γH2AX foci. Orthotopic xenografts initiated from GSCs were used to define the in vivo response to AZD2014 and radiation. Exposure of GSCs to AZD2014 resulted in the inhibition of mTORC1 and 2 activities. Based on clonogenic survival analysis, addition of AZD2014 to culture media 1 hour before irradiation enhanced the radiosensitivity of CD133+ and CD15+ GSC cell lines. Whereas AZD2014 treatment had no effect on the initial level of γH2AX foci, the dispersal of radiation-induced γH2AX foci was significantly delayed. Finally, the combination of AZD2014 and radiation delivered to mice bearing GSC-initiated orthotopic xenografts significantly prolonged survival as compared with the individual treatments. These data indicate that AZD2014 enhances the radiosensitivity of GSCs both in vitro and under orthotopic in vivo conditions and suggest that this effect involves an inhibition of DNA repair. Moreover, these results suggest that this dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor may be a radiosensitizer applicable to GBM therapy.

[PMID: 24309100]
Colorectal cancer is a major contributor of cancer-related mortality. The mammalian target or rapamycin (mTOR) signaling is frequently hyper-activated in colorectal cancers, promoting cancer progression and chemo-resistance. In the current study, we investigated the anti-colorectal cancer effect of a novel mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTORC2 dual inhibitor: AZD-2014. In cultured colorectal cancer cell lines, AZD-2014 significantly inhibited cancer cell growth without inducing significant cell apoptosis. AZD-2014 blocked activation of both mTORC1 (S6K and S6 phosphorylation) and mTORC2 (Akt Ser 473 phosphorylation), and activated autophagy in colorectal cancer cells. Meanwhile, autophagy inhibition by 3-methyaldenine (3-MA) and hydroxychloroquine, as well as by siRNA knocking down of Beclin-1 or ATG-7, inhibited AZD-2014-induced cytotoxicity, while the apoptosis inhibitor had no rescue effect. In vivo, AZD-2014 oral administration significantly inhibited the growth of HT-29 cell xenograft in SCID mice, and the mice survival was dramatically improved. At the same time, in xenografted tumors administrated with AZD-2014, the activation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 were largely inhibited, and autophagic markers were significantly increased. Thus, AZD-2014 inhibits colorectal cancer cell growth both in vivo and in vitro. Our results suggest that AZD-2014 may be further investigated for colorectal cancer therapy in clinical trials.

[PMID: 24276258]
The proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in the intima of an artery, known as intimal hyperplasia, is an important component of cardiovascular diseases. This is seen most clearly in the case of in-stent restenosis, where drug eluting stents are used to deliver agents that prevent VSMC proliferation and migration. One class of agents that are highly effective in the prevention of in-stent restenosis is the mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors. Inhibition of mTOR blocks protein synthesis, cell cycle progression, and cell migration. Key to the effects on cell cycle progression and cell migration is the inhibition of mTOR-mediated degradation of p27Kip1 protein. p27Kip1 is a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor that is elevated in quiescent VSMCs and inhibits the G1 to S phase transition and cell migration. Under normal conditions, vascular injury promotes degradation of p27Kip1 protein in an mTOR dependent manner. Recent reports from our lab suggest that in the presence of diabetes mellitus, elevation of extracellular signal response kinase activity may promote decreased p27Kip1 mRNA and produce a relative resistance to mTOR inhibition. Here we review these findings and their relevance to designing treatments for cardiovascular disease in the presence of diabetes mellitus.

[PMID: 24290217]
The chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), are characterized by a Janus Kinase (JAK)-2 V617F point mutation but this molecular abnormality does not explain by itself the pathogenesis of these disorders, or the phenotypic diversity associated with essential thrombocythemia, polycythemia vera (PV), and myelofibrosis. Beyond the JAK/signal transducer and activator of transcription network, a wide number of molecular alterations were described in MPN including the fosfatidilinositolo-3-chinasi (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway constitutive activation. Several pathway inhibitors were developed, including everolimus, up to the latest class of catalytic inhibitors such as BKM120 and BEZ235. In this review, we present some clinical and experimental evidence showing that the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway could represent a therapeutic target in MPNs. In in vitro studies, everolimus has been shown to inhibit cell proliferation and clonogenic potential in human and murine JAK2 V617F mutated cell lines. Patients with PV and primary myelofibrosis hematopoietic progenitors were significantly more sensitive to everolimus compared with healthy control subjects. Of much interest, a combination of everolimus and the JAK1/2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib, showed strong synergism in inducing cell cycle arrest and blockade of cell proliferation. Similar data were obtained using a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, BEZ235, with activity that was also shown in preclinical murine models. A multicenter phase I/II trial with everolimus in myelofibrosis documented a well tolerated clinical efficiency in terms of spleen size reduction and resolution of systemic symptoms and pruritus. These observations indicate that the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway might represent a novel target for treatment in MPN. The synergism demonstrated in vitro with JAK2 inhibitors could open additional therapeutic possibilities based on concurrent targeting of different pathways that might optimize efficacy and reduce toxicity in patients.

[PMID: 24312355]
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is supposed to contribute to the pathogenesis of allergic airway disease. VEGF expression is regulated by a variety of stimuli such as nitric oxide, growth factors, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α). Recently, inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) has been shown to alleviate cardinal asthmatic features, including airway hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilic inflammation, and increased vascular permeability in asthma models. Based on these observations, we have investigated whether mTOR is associated with HIF-1α-mediated VEGF expression in allergic asthma. In studies with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin, we have elucidated the stimulatory role of a mTOR-HIF-1α-VEGF axis in allergic response. Next, the mechanisms by which mTOR is activated to modulate this response have been evaluated. mTOR is known to be regulated by phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt or protein kinase C-delta (PKC δ) in various cell types. Consistent with these, our results have revealed that suppression of PKC δ by rottlerin leads to the inhibition of PI3K/Akt activity and the subsequent blockade of a mTOR-HIF-1α-VEGF module, thereby attenuating typical asthmatic attack in a murine model. Thus, the present data indicate that PKC δ is necessary for the modulation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling cascade, resulting in a tight regulation of HIF-1α activity and VEGF expression. In conclusion, PKC δ may represent a valuable target for innovative therapeutic treatment of allergic airway disease.

[PMID: 24307346]
The objective of this study was to analyze the expression levels of multiple components in the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway in radical nephrectomy specimens from patients with metastatic renal-cell carcinoma (RCC) treated with mTOR inhibitors in order to identify factors predicting susceptibility to these agents. This study retrospectively included a total of 48 consecutive patients undergoing radical nephrectomy, who were diagnosed with metastatic RCC and subsequently treated with an mTOR inhibitor (everolimus or temsirolimus) as either first- or second-line systemic therapy. Expression levels of 5 molecular markers involved in the signaling pathway associated with mTOR, including PTEN, phosphorylated (p)-Akt, p-mTOR, p-p70 ribosomal S6 kinase, and p-4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1), were measured by immunohistochemical staining of primary RCC specimens. Of several factors examined, bone metastasis, liver metastasis, and the expression level of p-4E-BP1 were shown to have significant impacts on the response to the mTOR inhibitors. Progression-free survival (PFS) was significantly correlated with the expression levels of PTEN and p-4E-BP1 in addition to the presence of bone metastasis on univariate analysis. Of these significant factors, p-4E-BP1 expression and bone metastasis appeared to be independently associated with PFS on multivariate analysis. These findings suggest that it would be useful to consider the expression levels of potential molecular markers in the mTOR signaling pathway, particularly p-4E-BP1, as well as conventional clinical parameters when selecting patients with metastatic RCC who are likely to benefit from treatment with mTOR inhibitors.

[PMID: 24312415]
Differentiation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) into cancer cells causes increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. Although inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) leads to CSC survival, the effect of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs), an mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) activator remains unknown. In this study, we examined the effects of BCAA on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells expressing a hepatic CSC marker, EpCAM. We examined the effects of BCAA and/or 5-fluorouracil (FU) on expression of EpCAM and other CSC-related markers, as well as cell proliferation in HCC cells and in a xenograft mouse model. We also characterized CSC-related and mTOR signal-related molecule expression and tumorigenicity in HCC cells with knockdown of Rictor or Raptor, or overexpression of constitutively active rheb (caRheb). mTOR signal-related molecule expression was also examined in BCAA-treated HCC cells. In-vitro BCAA reduced the frequency of EpCAM-positive cells and improved sensitivity to the anti-proliferative effect of 5-FU. Combined 5-FU and BCAA provided better antitumor efficacy than 5-FU alone in the xenograft model. Stimulation with high doses of BCAA activated mTORC1. Knockdown and overexpression experiments revealed that inhibition of mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) or activation of mTORC1 led to decreased EpCAM expression and little or no tumorigenicity. BCAA may enhance the sensitivity to chemotherapy by reducing the population of cscs via the mTOR pathway. This result suggests the utility of BCAA in liver cancer therapy.

[PMID: 24289602]
This study aimed to examine the relationship between expression of mammal target of rapamycin (mTOR) and phosphorylation of mTOR (p-mTOR) protein in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways in gastrointestinal stromal tumors and relatiuonships with clinical factors. Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expression of the associated proteins mTOR, p-mTOR, and phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor genes PTEN, P27, VEGF, and EGFR in 40 cases of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, with division into a very low and low risk group as well as a moderate and high risk group. The positive rate of mTOR and p-mTOR was significantly increased in the moderate and high risk group compared with the very low and low risk group. The difference was statistically significant (P<0.05). When grouped according to size, the positive mTOR expression rate exhibited a statistical difference (P<0.05), which was significantly increased in the group of tumors larger than 5 cm. The difference in the positive mTOR and p-mTOR expression rate exhibit no statistical significance among the PTEN, P27, VEGF, and EGFR expression subgroups (P>0.05). The different expressions of mTOR and p-mTOR in the signal transduction pathway of gastrointestinal stromal tumor in the different degree-of-risk groups suggested that the mTOR and p-mTOR of the signal transduction pathway serve an important function in the occurrence and development of gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

[PMID: 24287118]
Ghrelin exhibits its biological effect through binding to the growth hormone secretagogue 1a receptor (GHS-R1a). Recently, it has been reported that ghrelin has an anti-apoptotic effect in several cell types. However, the molecule mechanisms underlying the anti-apoptotic effect of ghrelin remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the intracellular mechanisms responsible for anti-apoptotic effect of ghrelin on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Treatment of HUVEC with ghrelin inhibited high glucose-induced cell apoptosis. Ghrelin stimulated the rapid phosphorylation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), P70S6K and S6. The GHS-R1a-specific antagonist [D-Lys3]-GHRP-6 abolished the anti-apoptotic effect and inhibited the activation of mTOR, P70S6K, S6 induced by ghrelin. Pretreatment of cells with specific inhibitor of mTOR blocked the anti-apoptotic effect of ghrelin. In addition, ghrelin protected HUVECs against high glucose induced apoptosis by increasing Bcl-2/Bax ratio. Taken together, our results demonstrate that ghrelin produces a protective effect on HUVECs through activating GHS-R1a and mTOR/P70S6K signaling pathway mediates the effect of ghrelin. These observations suggest that ghrelin may act as a survival factor in preventing HUVECs apoptosis caused by high glucose.

[PMID: 24270265]
Enhanced proliferation, resistance to apoptosis, and metabolic shift to glycolysis of pulmonary arterial vascular smooth muscle cells (PAVSMCs) are key pathophysiological components of pulmonary vascular remodeling in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). The role of the distinct mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complexes mTORC1 (mTOR-Raptor) and mTORC2 (mTOR-Rictor) in PAVSMC proliferation and survival in PAH and their therapeutic relevance are unknown. Immunohistochemical and immunoblot analyses revealed that mTORC1 and mTORC2 pathways are markedly upregulated in small remodeled pulmonary arteries and isolated distal PAVSMCs from subjects with idiopathic PAH that have increased ATP levels, proliferation, and survival that depend on glycolytic metabolism. Small interfering RNA- and pharmacology-based analysis showed that although both mTORC1 and mTORC2 contribute to proliferation, only mTORC2 is required for ATP generation and survival of idiopathic PAH PAVSMCs. mTORC2 downregulated the energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase, which led to activation of mTORC1-S6 and increased proliferation, as well as a deficiency of the proapoptotic protein Bim and idiopathic PAH PAVSMC survival. NADPH oxidase 4 (Nox4) protein levels were increased in idiopathic PAH PAVSMCs, which was necessary for mTORC2 activation, proliferation, and survival. Nox4 levels and mTORC2 signaling were significantly upregulated in small pulmonary arteries from hypoxia-exposed rats at days 2 to 28 of hypoxia. Treatment with the mTOR kinase inhibitor PP242 at days 15 to 28 suppressed mTORC2 but not Nox4, induced smooth muscle-specific apoptosis in small pulmonary arteries, and reversed hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular remodeling in rats. These data provide a novel mechanistic link of Nox4-dependent activation of mTORC2 via the energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase to increased proliferation and survival of PAVSMCs in PAH, which suggests a new potential pathway for therapeutic interventions.

[PMID: 24295418]
With the recent introduction of inhibitors of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in oncology, distinct cutaneous and oral adverse events have been identified. In fact, stomatitis and rash are documented as the most frequent and potentially dose-limiting side effects. Clinically, mTOR inhibitor-associated stomatitis (mIAS) more closely resembles aphthous stomatitis than oral mucositis due to conventional anticancer therapies. While most cases of mIAS are mild to moderate and self-limiting, more severe and persistent mIAS can become a dose-limiting toxicity. Small ulcerations may cause significant pain and mucosal sensitivity may occur in the absence of clinical changes. Use of clinical assessment tools that are primarily driven by ulceration size may underestimate mIAS, and assessment should include patient-reported outcomes. This article provides an up-to-date review of the clinical presentation, terminology, pathogenesis, assessment and management of mIAS and other mTOR inhibitor-associated oral adverse events. In addition, areas of future research are considered.