[PMID: 27390287]
Starting from suvorexant (trade name Belsomra), we successfully identified interesting templates leading to potent dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs) via a scaffold-hopping approach. Structure-activity relationship optimization allowed us not only to improve the antagonistic potency on both orexin 1 and orexin 2 receptors (Ox1 and Ox2, respectively), but also to increase metabolic stability in human liver microsomes (HLM), decrease time-dependent inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, and decrease P-glycoprotein (Pgp)-mediated efflux. Compound 80 c [{(1S,6R)-3-(6,7-difluoroquinoxalin-2-yl)-3,8-diazabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-8-yl}(4-methyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-2-yl)methanone] is a potent and selective DORA that inhibits the stimulating effects of orexin peptides OXA and OXB at both Ox1 and Ox2. In calcium-release assays, 80 c was found to exhibit an insurmountable antagonistic profile at both Ox1 and Ox2, while displaying a sleep-promoting effect in rat and dog models, similar to that of the benchmark compound suvorexant.

[PMID: 25227290]
Suvorexant (Belsomra(®)), a first-in-class, orally active dual orexin-1 receptor and orexin-2 receptor antagonist, has been developed by Merck for the treatment of insomnia. Variations in the levels of the neuropeptides orexin A and orexin B have been linked to circadian rhythms and wakefulness. Orexin-producing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus regulate wakefulness by signalling through orexin receptors. Blockade of orexin receptors is known to promote sleep. Suvorexant was approved in the US in August 2014 for the treatment of adults with sleep onset and/or sleep maintenance insomnia. The drug is also preregistration in Japan, with approval submissions planned for other countries worldwide for this indication. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of suvorexant leading to this first approval for insomnia.

[PMID: 28012090]
One decade ago, our laboratory provided the first direct evidence linking orexin/hypocretin signaling with drug seeking by showing that activation of these neurons promotes conditioned morphine-seeking behavior. In the years since, contributions from many investigators have revealed roles for orexins in addiction for all drugs of abuse tested, but only under select circumstances. We recently proposed that orexins play a fundamentally unified role in coordinating "motivational activation" under numerous behavioral conditions, and here we unpack this hypothesis as it applies to drug addiction. We describe evidence collected over the past 10 years that elaborates the role of orexin in drug seeking under circumstances where high levels of effort are required to obtain the drug, or when motivation for drug reward is augmented by the presence of external stimuli like drug-associated cues/contexts or stressors. Evidence from studies using traditional self-administration and reinstatement models, as well as behavioral economic analyses of drug demand elasticity, clearly delineates a role for orexin in modulating motivational, rather than the primary reinforcing aspects of drug reward. We also discuss the anatomical interconnectedness of the orexin system with wider motivation and reward circuits, with a particular focus on how orexin modulates prefrontal and other glutamatergic inputs onto ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons. Last, we look ahead to the next decade of the research in this area, highlighting the recent FDA approval of the dual orexin receptor antagonist suvorexant (Belsomra<sup>®</sup>) for the treatment of insomnia as a promising sign of the potential clinical utility of orexin-based therapies for the treatment of addiction.

[PMID: 25336862]
Idelalisib (Zydelig) for certain types of leukemia and lymphoma, peginterferon beta-1a (Plegridy) for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis, and suvorexant (Belsomra) for insomnia.

[PMID: 28035034]
Suvorexant (Belsomra®) is a new hypnotic drug with a novel mechanism of action. In prescribed doses of 10 mg before bedtime, the drug produces rapid onset of sleep by inhibiting the orexin neurons of the arousal system, promoting decreased wakefulness. Suvorexant is a potent and highly selective dual orexin receptor antagonist. Sedative hypnotics are of forensic importance due to their widespread use, potential for additive effects with other central nervous system depressants, impairing effects and potential for misuse. In this report we describe a highly sensitive assay for the identification and quantification of suvorexant in urine. Suvorexant was isolated using liquid/liquid extraction (LLE) and identified using liquid chromatography-quadrupole/time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Suvorexant was quantified using a quadratic calibration model between 5 and 250 ng/mL (R2 = 1.000, n = 6). Processed sample stability was demonstrated for up to 24 h. The limit of detection was 0.5 ng/mL and the limit of quantification (LOQ) was 5 ng/mL. The accuracy, bias and precision of the assay at the LOQ were 99% (81-117%), -1% and 12% (n = 18). Intraassay (n = 5) and interassay (n = 15) precision (% CV) at 10, 50 and 200 ng/mL were ≤8%, and bias ranged from -2% to 4% (98-104% accuracy). No qualitative interferences were detected from matrix, internal standard or 50 common drugs. Matrix effects evaluated at low and high concentrations were -16% and -9%, respectively, and produced CVs of 11% and 5% (n = 20). Suvorexant is a new drug of forensic importance. In this report we describe how a simple acidic/neutral LLE can be used to isolate this lipophilic drug with high recoveries and sound analytical performance.

[PMID: 28365447]
Suvorexant is a dual orexin receptor agonist and is currently approved for the treatment of insomnia in the United States and Japan. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the efficacy and safety of suvorexant for the treatment of primary insomnia. We searched PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane central register of controlled trials, contacted a relevant pharmaceutical company, and accessed websites of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA) for published and unpublished data. A total of four randomized trials involving 3076 patients with primary insomnia were included in our analysis. Our analysis suggested that suvorexant was associated with significant improvements in subjective time to sleep onset, subjective total sleep time, and subjective quality of sleep at 1 mo and 3 mo. Somnolence, fatigue, and abnormal dreams were the most common adverse effects. We concluded that suvorexant was associated with improvement in some sleep parameters and some adverse effects. To determine the place of suvorexant in the treatment of insomnia, comparative effectiveness trials are needed.

[PMID: 28279667]
Suvorexant (Belsomra<sup>®</sup>) is a dual orexin receptor antagonist approved for the treatment of insomnia. Because of its pharmacology within the central nervous system, intended therapeutic indication, and first-in-class status, an assessment of suvorexant abuse liability potential was required prior to marketing approval. The nonclinical abuse liability potential studies for suvorexant included: 1) rat drug-dependence model to assess physical dependence following abrupt cessation; 2) rat drug-discrimination model to examine the potential similarity of the interoceptive or subjective effects of suvorexant to those elicited by zolpidem and morphine; 3) self-administration model to assess the relative reinforcing efficacy of suvorexant in rhesus monkeys conditioned to self-administer methohexital. No significant signs of spontaneous drug withdrawal or 'discontinuation syndrome' were observed in rats following abrupt discontinuation of suvorexant. Suvorexant did not elicit complete cross-generalization to either a zolpidem or morphine training/reference stimuli in rats, and suvorexant was devoid of behavioral evidence of positive reinforcing efficacy in monkeys. These nonclinical findings suggested that suvorexant will have low abuse potential in humans. In the final regulatory risk assessment, suvorexant was placed into Schedule IV, likely due to its first-in-class status, its sedative properties, and the outcome of the clinical abuse potential assessment.

[PMID: 27825624]
Suvorexant (Belsomra<sup>®</sup>) is a novel sedative hypnotic drug that is prescribed to promote sleep in patients with insomnia. It is the first of a new class of drugs classified as dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs). Sedative hypnotics with central nervous system depressant effects feature prominently in forensic toxicology investigations. For this reason, a new analytical method was developed to identify suvorexant in urine using liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Due to the absence of a commercially available isotopically labeled internal standard, estazolam-D5 was used due to its azepine, triazole and chlorinated functionality. The limit of detection and limit of quantitation was 10ng/mL and the linear range of the assay was 10-1000ng/mL. Accuracy and precision (%CV) were 98-101% and <11% at 30, 250 and 800ng/mL. Interferences from matrix and fifty common drugs were not present and processed samples were stable for 24h at room temperature. Suvorexant is a new drug of significant forensic interest due to its hypnotic and central nervous system depressant effects. The absence of commercially available metabolites and its chromatographic properties present some challenges in terms of identification. Nevertheless, a robust, reliable and sensitive assay was developed to identify suvorexant using GC/MS analysis.

[PMID: 26864332]
1. Suvorexant (MK-4305, Belsomra®) is a first-in-class dual orexin receptor antagonist approved in the USA and Japan for the treatment of insomnia. The current studies describe suvorexant's absorption, disposition and potential for CYP-mediated drug interactions in humans. 2. Following single oral administration of [(14)C]suvorexant to healthy human subjects, 90% of the radioactivity was recovered (66% in faeces, 23% in urine), primarily as oxidative metabolites. 3. In plasma, suvorexant and M9 were predominant, accounting for 30 and 37% of the total radioactivity, respectively. Metabolite M17 became more prominent (approaching 10%) following multiple daily doses of unlabelled suvorexant. M9 and M17 are not expected to contribute to the pharmacological activity of suvorexant due to reduced orexin receptor binding affinity and limited brain penetration. 4. CYP3A was determined to be the predominant enzyme mediating suvorexant oxidation. In vitro, suvorexant demonstrated reversible inhibition of CYP3A4 and 2C19 (IC50 ∼ 4-5 μM), and weak time-dependent inhibition of CYP3A4 (KI = 12 μM, kinact = 0.14 min(-1)). Suvorexant was also a weak inducer of CYP3A4, 1A2 and 2B6. Given the low plasma concentrations at clinical doses, suvorexant was not anticipated to cause significant drug interactions via inhibition and/or induction of major CYPs in vivo.

[PMID: 26416477]
The orexin receptors OX1 and OX2 play important roles in the regulation of sleep-wake cycles, feeding, reward and energy homeostasis. Since these G protein-coupled receptors were deorphanised in 1998, more than 200 patents containing orexin receptor antagonists have been filed and, in 2014, suvorexant (Belsomra®) became the first of these compounds to receive approval from the FDA. Suvorexant is a dual orexin receptor antagonist (DORA) which is available for the treatment of insomnia. This review provides a historical perspective on the discovery and development of DORAs as well as selective OX1 receptor antagonists (1-SORAs) and selective OX2 receptor antagonists (2-SORAs). 2-SORAs are under clinical evaluation for their ability to modulate sleep, and 1-SORAs have shown promise for the treatment of addiction in pre-clinical animal models. Detailed medicinal chemistry case studies are presented and future opportunities for orexin receptor antagonists are considered.

[PMID: 27471419]
Insomnia, a highly prevalent disorder, can be detrimental to patients' overall health and worsen existing comorbidities. Patients may have acute episodes of insomnia related to a traumatic event, but more commonly insomnia occurs chronically. While proper sleep hygiene and behavioral therapy play important roles in the nonpharmacologic management of short-term and chronic insomnia, medications may also be required. Historically, insomnia has been treated with agents such as benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine receptor agonists, and melatonin agonists. Dual orexin receptor antagonists represent a new class of medications for the treatment of insomnia, which block the binding of wakefulness-promoting neuropeptides orexin A and orexin B to their respective receptor sites. Suvorexant (Belsomra) is the first dual orexin receptor antagonist to be approved in the US and Japan and has demonstrated efficacy in decreasing time to sleep onset and increasing total sleep time. Its unique mechanism of action, data to support efficacy and safety over 12 months of use, and relative lack of withdrawal effects when discontinued may represent an alternative for patients with chronic insomnia who cannot tolerate or do not receive benefit from more traditional sleep agents. Suvorexant is effective and well tolerated, but precautions exist for certain patient populations, including females, obese patients, and those with respiratory disease. Suvorexant has only been studied vs placebo, and hence it is unknown how it directly compares with other medications approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for insomnia. Suvorexant is not likely to replace benzodiazepines or nonbenzodiazepine receptor antagonists as a first-line sleep agent but does represent a novel option for the treatment of patients with chronic insomnia.