[PMID: 26451147]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum is an uncommon cause of blepharoconjunctivitis in which Pthirus pubis infest the eyelashes. We report a case of unilateral phthiriasis palpebrarum with crab louse. A 45-year-old man presented with conjunctival hyperaemia and moderate itching associated with irritation, and crusty excretions of the eyelashes in the left eye. Careful slit-lamp examination revealed many lice and nits in left eye and mild conjunctival hyperaemia. No abnormality was found in the right eye. On dermatologic examination, only one louse was found at the pubic area. The patient was treated effectively with petrolatum jelly (Vaseline) and 1% permethrin shampoo (Kwellada 1% shampoo). At the end of the first week no louse or nit was present on eyelashes and pubic area.

[PMID: 24909484]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum is an infestation of the eyelashes caused by the louse Pthirus pubis (Linnaeus, 1758). We report a case of phthiriasis palpebrarum in a 6-year-old girl, which was initially misdiagnosed as allergic blepharoconjunctivitis. Parasites and their nits were found adhering to the eyelashes and eyelids of her right eye as well as scalp hairs. No abnormality was found in the left eye. The histopathology exam revealed the presence of adults and eggs of Pthirus pubis. We mechanically removed all the eyelashes of the right eye at their base, with lice and nits. The scalp was shaved and washed with phenothrin shampoo. No recurrence was found during 3 months of follow-up. Removal of the eyelashes, cutting of scalp hairs, and phenothrin shampoo may be effective in treating phthiriasis palpebrarum. In cases of blepharoconjunctivitis, eyelids and eyelashes should be carefully examined by slit lamp to avoid misdiagnosis.

[PMID: 16903509]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum, caused by the phthirus pubis, is a rare cause of blepharoconjunctivitis, and is therefore often neglected. We present 2 patients who suffered itching and irritation at the right upper eyelid. Biomicroscopic examination showed a few lice and nits anchored to the eyelashes. Dermatologic examination revealed the presence of numerous lice and nits at the trunk and pubic area. The lice and nits were manually removed if possible, and the patients were asked to put vaseline on the eyelid margins. The patients were also treated with malathion 0.5% lotion. After control, two weeks later, no more lice nor nits were present in the first patient.

[PMID: 12523816]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum is an unusual cause of blepharoconjunctivitis and may easily be overlooked because of the failure of physicians to recognize Phthirus pubis. We report a case of a 30-year-old woman with persistent itching in the left eyelid which was unsuccessfully treated under the diagnosis of allergic blepharoconjunctivitis. Careful ophthalmic examination revealed seven bugs with multiple red pinpoint excretions and numerous small translucent oval eggs (nits) coating the eyelashes. The patient was successfully treated with mechanical removal of all the lice and nits from the eyelashes. The specimen proved histopathologically to be the Phthirus pubis infestation. The Phthirus pubis infestation is usually associated with poor hygiene in overcrowded or undeveloped country. However, it may become a notable problem because of frequent traveling and commercial activities across the different countries.

[PMID: 20339456]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum (PP) is a rare eyelid infestation caused by phthirus pubis. We report a case of PP mimicking lid eczema and blepharitis. A 68-year-old woman had moderate itching in both eyes. Her initial diagnosis was considered to be lid eczema or blepharitis because of findings similar to exfoliative lesions and color changes in eyelids and to excretions over eyelashes. Careful observation revealed many lice and translucent nits, protuberances and hyperpigmentary changes, and the buried lice in both eyelids. No hyperemia or secretion was observed on the lids and in the conjunctiva in both eyes. The patient was treated with pilocarpine hydrochloride 4% drops. At the end of the first week, no louse or nit was present. Although it was known that PP is a rare cause of blepharoconjunctivitis, it might observe as an isolated infestation of the eyelids and this condition can easily be misdiagnosed as lid eczema and blepharitis.

[PMID: 19728949]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum (lice infestation of palpabrae) is a rarely reported disorder and may present as blepharoconjuctivitis. It is usually seen in lower socioeconomic groups and spreads through either sexual contacts or directly through linen or clothing. We report a family with phthiriasis palpebrarum in which the primary source of infestation was the paternal uncle of two children. Mechanical removal proved to be quite effective in treating the disease and preventing its recurrence.

[PMID: 24556565]
Pediculosis capitis is a common parasitic infestation, whereas phthiriasis palpebrarum is an uncommon infection due to Phthirus pubis (pubic lice) inoculating the eyelashes and surrounding tissues of the eye. Emergency physicians should recognize the causes of this uncommon disease. Cases of phthiriasis palpebrarum should trigger the clinician to consider the potential for child abuse when suspected or when social history dictates the risk for abuse. A case of a pediculosis capitis and phthiriasis palpebrarum coinfection in a 4-year-old girl is presented, which was suspicious for child abuse given the patient's social history. Diagnosis, treatment, and need for vigilance when encountering cases of phthiriasis palpebrarum, especially in young children, are discussed herein. A 4-year-old girl presented with swelling and redness around her eyes. The girl had recurrent head lice infestations, however, on the day of presentation the mother noted lice appeared on the girl's eyelashes and eyelids. Head lice typically do not infect the eyes, and given the different morphology of the lice on the patient's head and eyes, a diagnosis of phthiriasis palpebrarum was made. Because phthiriasis pubis infection of the eyelids may represent sexual abuse, especially in children, child protective services was notified to ensure patient safety. Pediatric phthiriasis palpebrarum can represent child abuse, and the origins of this infection need to be carefully discerned. A thorough history can provide information to assess whether further action is needed and, if in doubt, social services should be contacted to ensure child safety.

[PMID: 22707338]
We describe a case of chronic conjunctivitis related to phthiriasis palpebrarum. A 36 year-old female presented with gradual pruritus and painless ocular hyperaemia over the previous 3 months. On examination, nasal pterygium, conjunctival hyperaemia, oedema, and mild hypertrophy of the palpebral margin were observed. A slit-lamp examination revealed numerous creamy oval structures approximately 1 mm in diameter localised in the middle area of the lashes, and bloody crusts and a semi-transparent deposit were present in the superior palpebral margin. Based on the observation of numerous nits at the base of the eyelashes and the ectoparasite in the palpebral margin, a diagnosis of phthiriasis palpebrarum was made. The patient was referred to an infectologist for evaluation of other sexually transmitted diseases and examination of other body areas. She was successfully treated with oral ivermectin, shampoo for ciliary hygiene and artificial tears. Other recommendations to avoid re-infestation were made, such as changing, washing and sterilising clothes, towels and sheets daily. This report emphasizes the importance of the correct diagnosis and management of this disease, considered as sexually transmitted.

[PMID: 23993722]
The similarities of the larval and nymph stages of the tick and louse (Pthirus pubis) may lead to misdiagnosis in rare cases of infestation of the eyelashes. The most frequent manifestations of tick in the eye are conjunctivitis, uveitis, keratitis, and vasculitis. Tick inoculation of the skin can locally lead to formation of granuloma and abscess. More concerning is the potential systemic sequelae that can result from transmission of zoonoses such as Lyme disease. P. pubis can cause pruritic eyelid margins or unusual blepharoconjunctivitis. We present a case of phthiriasis palpebrarum in a 4-year-old boy.

[PMID: 12898406]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum, caused by Phthirus pubis, is an uncommon cause of blepharoconjunctivitis; therefore, this condition is easily misdiagnosed. When diagnosed, genital involvement must be ruled out. Association with other venereal diseases is common. Affected children must be searched for sexual abuse. The number of diagnosed patients in our department has increased in recent years. We review the epidemiological, clinical and diagnostic features of phthriasis palpebrarum as well as the different treatment options to eradicate the parasite and to prevent infestations.

[PMID: 24157356]
Phthiriasis palpebrarum is an ectoparasitosis in which Phthirus pubis infest the eyelashes. It is rare and it can easily be misdiagnosed as blepharitis. The purpose of this study is to describe seven cases of phthiriasis palpebrarum so as to discuss its mode of infestation, diagnosis and treatment. This is a study of all cases of phthiriasis palpebrarum reported in our laboratory. For each patient, an ophthalmic examination and parasitological examination of the eyelashes were performed. There were five men and two women. Their ages ranged from 4 to 50years with an average of 21.57years. There were four children and three adults. The main symptom was itching of the eyelids. Clinical signs included reddish-brown crusts at the base of the eyelashes in all the cases and visible lice and nits in three cases. Biomicroscopic examination showed lice and nits anchored to the eyelashes in three cases. In the other two cases, the initial diagnosis was felt to be blepharitis. In all cases, the diagnosis of phthiriasis palpebrarum was confirmed by parasitological examination of eyelashes, which revealed the presence of adult and nit forms of Phthirus pubis. The number of adult lice ranged from 1 to 30. In all cases, treatment was based on mechanical removal of both the lice and nits. Outcomes were favorable without recurrence. In conclusion, phthiriasis palpebrarum can be easily diagnosed by close examination of the eyelashes and eyelid margins at the slit lamp and can be managed mechanically. Parasitological examination of the eyelashes can confirm the diagnosis.