[PMID: 32999027]
Infections with varicella-zoster virus (VZV) are associated with a range of clinical manifestations. Primary infection with VZV causes chicken pox. The virus remains latent in neurons, and it can reactivate later in life, causing herpes zoster (HZ). Two different vaccines have been developed to prevent HZ; one is based on a live attenuated VZV strain (Zostavax), and the other is based on adjuvanted gE recombinant protein (Shingrix). While Zostavax efficacy wanes with age, Shingrix protection retains its efficacy in elderly subjects (individuals 80 years of age and older). In this context, it is of much interest to understand if there is a role for T cell immunity in the differential clinical outcome and if there is a correlate of protection between T cell immunity and Shingrix efficacy. In this study, we characterized the Shingrix-specific <i>ex vivo</i> CD4 T cell responses in the context of natural exposure and HZ vaccination using pools of predicted epitopes. We show that T cell reactivity following natural infection and Zostavax vaccination dominantly targets nonstructural (NS) proteins, while Shingrix vaccination redirects dominant reactivity to target gE. We mapped the gE-specific responses following Shingrix vaccination to 89 different gE epitopes, 34 of which accounted for 80% of the response. Using antigen presentation assays and single HLA molecule-transfected lines, we experimentally determined HLA restrictions for 94 different donor/peptide combinations. Finally, we used our results as a training set to assess strategies to predict restrictions based on measured or predicted HLA binding and the corresponding HLA types of the responding subjects.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Understanding the T cell profile associated with the protection observed in elderly vaccinees following Shingrix vaccination is relevant to the general definition of correlates of vaccine efficacy. Our study enables these future studies by clarifying the patterns of immunodominance associated with Shingrix vaccination, as opposed to natural infection or Zostavax vaccination. Identification of epitopes recognized by Shingrix-induced CD4 T cells and their associated HLA restrictions enables the generation of tetrameric staining reagents and, more broadly, the capability to characterize the specificity, magnitude, and phenotype of VZV-specific T cells.

[PMID: 31399377]
The adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine (Shingrix) can prevent herpes zoster in older adults and autologous haemopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. We evaluated the safety and immunogenicity of this vaccine in adults with haematological malignancies receiving immunosuppressive cancer treatments. In this phase 3, randomised, observer-blind, placebo-controlled study, done at 77 centres worldwide, we randomly assigned (1:1) patients with haematological malignancies aged 18 years and older to receive two doses of the adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine or placebo 1-2 months apart during or after immunosuppressive cancer treatments, and stratified participants according to their underlying diseases. The co-primary objectives of the study were the evaluation of safety and reactogenicity of the adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine compared with placebo from the first vaccination up to 30 days after last vaccination in all participants; evaluation of the proportion of participants with a vaccine response in terms of anti-glycoprotein E humoral immune response to the adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine at month 2 in all participants, excluding those with non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; and evaluation of the anti-glycoprotein E humoral immune responses to the vaccine compared with placebo at month 2 in all participants, excluding those with non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. We assessed immunogenicity in the per-protocol cohort for immunogenicity and safety in the total vaccinated cohort. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01767467, and with the EU Clinical Trials Register, number 2012-003438-18. Between March 1, 2013, and Sept 10, 2015, we randomly assigned 286 participants to adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine and 283 to placebo. 283 in the vaccine group and 279 in the placebo group were vaccinated. At month 2, 119 (80·4%, 95% CI 73·1-86·5) of 148 participants had a humoral vaccine response to adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine, compared with one (0·8%, 0·0-4·2) of 130 participants in the placebo group, and the adjusted geometric mean anti-glycoprotein E antibody concentration was 23 132·9 mIU/mL (95% CI 16 642·8-32 153·9) in the vaccine group and 777·6 mIU/mL (702·8-860·3) in the placebo group (adjusted geometric mean ratio 29·75, 21·09-41·96; p<0·0001) in all patients, excluding those with non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Humoral and cell-mediated immune responses persisted above baseline until month 13 in all strata and, as expected, vaccine was more reactogenic than placebo (within 7 days after vaccination pain was reported by 221 [79·5%] of 278 vaccine group participants and 45 [16·4%] of 274 placebo group participants; fatigue was reported by 162 [58·3%] of 278 vaccine group participants and 102 [37·2%] of 274 placebo group participants). Incidences of unsolicited or serious adverse events, potential immune-mediated diseases, disease-related events, and fatal serious adverse events were similar between the groups. The immunocompromised adult population with haematological malignancies is at high risk for herpes zoster. The adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine, which is currently licensed in certain countries for adults aged 50 years and older, is likely to benefit this population. GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals SA.

[PMID: 33067034]
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease, especially those on immunosuppressive therapy, are at higher risk of acquiring infectious diseases (Reich et al., 2016). For this reason, immunizations are routinely recommended in comprehensive inflammatory bowel disease care. SHINGRIX, a non-live recombinant herpes zoster vaccine, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2017. Adults aged 50 and over are recommended to receive two doses of SHINGRIX. Unlike ZOSTAVAX® which is a live zoster vaccine that has been in use since 2006, SHINGRIX is safe for those on immunosuppression (Reich et al., 2016). The offside effects of SHINGRIX include injection-site erythema, tenderness, fatigue, and gastrointestinal upset. To our knowledge, blistering autoimmune skin disorders following SHINGRIX administration have not been reported. Here we discuss a case of a 74-year-old female patient with a history of ulcerative proctosigmoiditis on mesalamine who presented with a blistering skin disease after each SHINGRIX vaccination.

[PMID: 31423396]
Uveitis is a form of intraocular inflammation that can occur as a result of infection, injury, vaccination, or as a systemic manifestation of autoimmune or inflammatory diseases including sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disease that involves the formation of abnormal granulomas in multiple organ systems. The hallmark of sarcoidosis is a non-caseating granuloma seen on biopsy. Here, we present a case report of a healthy 56-year-old Caucasian female who presented with uveitis sarcoidosis that was presumably initiated after administration of the Shingrix vaccine. Shingrix is a new attenuated subunit vaccine for Varicella Zoster Virus with an AS01B adjuvant that can result in a potent immune response. The Shingrix vaccine is made using Chinese hamster ovary cells which can contaminate the final vaccination product. Together, through the process of molecular mimicry and strong induction of the immune response, administration of Shingrix may have caused or exasperated this patient's autoimmune etiology.

[PMID: 30145235]
Women ages 50 years and older are at risk for herpes zoster, a reactivated virus from varicella zoster virus (chickenpox) that causes a painful vesicular rash and can result in postherpetic neuralgia. It is estimated that one in three adults will be affected by herpes zoster in their lifetime. Research evidence points to the need to prevent herpes zoster through vaccination. Since 2006, clinicians have been vaccinating adults with zoster vaccine live (brand name Zostavax), but the efficacy of this vaccine wanes with time and advanced age. In October 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved recombinant zoster vaccine under the brand name Shingrix to prevent herpes zoster. Studies have shown significantly better efficacy of Shingrix versus Zostavax. This article summarizes new guidance regarding vaccination with Shingrix and discusses implications for women's health.

[PMID: 33163688]
Previously, secondary prevention of herpes zoster required live-attenuated vaccination, which is contraindicated in immunocompromised populations. More recently, a recombinant subunit vaccine (Shingrix, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Iatrogenic varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection is theoretically impossible as it does not contain a live virus. We present a case of acute retinal necrosis (ARN) and disseminated zoster after receiving the recombinant subunit vaccine. A 65-year-old woman with past medical history of multiple myeloma treated with a previous autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant and now with daratumumab and pomalidomide developed disseminated zoster and subsequently acute retinal necrosis weeks after receiving the zoster subunit vaccine. Molecular testing confirmed the presence of VZV, and the absence of herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis. The VZV was found to be genotypically wildtype and not related to the Oka strain used in the live-attenuated zoster vaccine. She was treated with systemic valacyclovir and intravitreal foscarnet. This is the first report of VZV infection following the zoster subunit vaccine. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) has recommended the recombinant subunit vaccine over the live-attenuated vaccine due to its superior efficacy. The off-label use of the subunit vaccine in immunocompromised populations has been supported up to this point by studies demonstrating its relative safety. Though post-vaccination VZV infection or reactivation appears to be rare, clinicians should be aware of this potential complication to the recombinant subunit vaccine.

[PMID: 32862397]
A diligent, systematic, regular review of aggregate safety data is essential, particularly early after vaccine introduction, as this is when safety signals not identified during clinical development may emerge. In October 2017, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended the adjuvanted recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV; Shingrix, GSK) as the preferred vaccine for preventing herpes zoster (HZ) and related complications in immunocompetent adults aged ≥ 50 years. Subsequently, GSK experienced an unprecedented high demand for RZV. In this methodology paper, we summarize the enhanced measures undertaken to assess RZV safety during its early post-marketing experience in the USA, Canada and Germany. In addition to the routine signal-detection methods already in place for all vaccines, GSK established tailored and enhanced safety monitoring for RZV based on aggregate data of spontaneous reports and manufacturing data. Proactive, near real-time detection and evaluation of signals was a key objective. A dedicated in-house signal-detection tool customized for RZV was employed on a weekly (rather than the routine monthly) basis, allowing for a centralized, more frequent review of data on a single web-based platform. We also identified the background incidence rates of preselected medical events of interest in the first countries to introduce RZV (USA, Canada and Germany) to perform observed-to-expected analyses. This approach may offer a solution to the challenges associated with the assessment and monitoring of vaccine safety in an efficient and timely manner in the context of high vaccine uptake.

[PMID: 31258310]
Shingrix, a new vaccine for herpes zoster.

[PMID: 30370455]
Shingrix<sup>®</sup> is a recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV) that contains a varicella zoster virus glycoprotein E antigen and the AS01<sub>B</sub> adjuvant system. The subunit vaccine is approved for the prevention of herpes zoster (HZ) [EU, USA, Japan, Canada and Australia] and postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) [EU and Australia] in adults aged ≥ 50 years. In the pivotal trials in adults aged ≥ 50 years (ZOE-50) and ≥ 70 years (ZOE-70), RZV significantly reduced the risk of HZ and PHN. Its protective efficacy waned minimally over 4 years and was well preserved in adults aged ≥ 70 years. In patients with breakthrough disease, RZV reduced HZ-related pain severity, burden of illness and burden of interference with activities of daily living. RZV was more reactogenic than placebo, with injection-site reactions, myalgia and fatigue being the most common solicited adverse reactions. However, most solicited adverse reactions were transient and were mild to moderate in severity. RZV represents a novel, highly effective and well-tolerated vaccine option for HZ and PHN in adults aged ≥ 50 years. RZV is not contraindicated in immunocompromised individuals, and is preferred over a live attenuated HZ vaccine in immunocompetent individuals, according to the US and Canadian guidelines.

[PMID: 32606264]
Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is a challenging condition for pain management specialists. The prevention of herpes zoster (HZ) and subsequent PHN in individuals aged 50 years and older, via the development of new vaccines, is an ongoing research project. The live zoster vaccine (LZV, Zostavax<sup>®</sup>) was the first proof of concept that vaccination could prevent HZ, but LZV cannot be used in various immunecompromised patients. This led to the development of a new non-live recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV, Shingrix<sup>®</sup>). This RZV has shown promising results in many clinical trials, with high reactogenicity and similar systemic adverse effects compared to those of LZV. The National Advisory Committee on Immunization has recommended LZV as a standard vaccine for HZ prevention in adults ≥ 50 years of age, but no studies directly comparing the safety and efficacy of RZV and LZV vaccines have been conducted. This article reviews the brief history, efficacy, and safety of the two vaccines and discusses the advantage of RZV over LZV based on the available literature.

[PMID: 31400911]
Zoster vaccine live (ZVL [Zostavax]) has been recommended for the prevention of herpes zoster (HZ) among immunocompetent adults ≥60 years in the United States since 2008. To examine changes in healthcare providers' perceptions and practices related to HZ disease and vaccination, we administered surveys to national networks of primary care physicians in 2005, 2008, and 2016. Ten years after ZVL was first licensed, physicians were more likely to respond that they perceived HZ as a serious disease and more strongly recommended ZVL, and were less likely to report less likely to report several major barriers to HZ vaccination such as patient cost, vaccine effectiveness and competing medical concerns. Overall, physician attitudes appear to be more favorable towards zoster vaccination after a decade of availability of a HZ vaccine. The new recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV [Shingrix]) may benefit from physician's increased perception of the importance of HZ and HZ vaccination.