[PMID: 24920586]
Ixazomib is the first investigational oral proteasome inhibitor to be studied clinically. In this phase 1 trial, 60 patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (median of 4 prior lines of therapy; bortezomib, lenalidomide, thalidomide, and carfilzomib/marizomib in 88%, 88%, 62%, and 5%, respectively) received single-agent ixazomib 0.24 to 2.23 mg/m(2) (days 1, 4, 8, 11; 21-day cycles). Two dose-limiting toxicities (grade 3 rash; grade 4 thrombocytopenia) occurred at 2.23 mg/m(2). The maximum tolerated dose was 2.0 mg/m(2), which 40 patients received in 4 expansion cohorts. Patients received a median of 4 cycles (range, 1-39); 18% received ≥12 cycles. Eighty-eight percent had drug-related adverse events, including nausea (42%), thrombocytopenia (42%), fatigue (40%), and rash (40%); drug-related grade ≥3 events included thrombocytopenia (37%) and neutropenia (17%). Grade 1/2 drug-related peripheral neuropathy occurred in 12% (no grade ≥3). Two patients died on the study (both considered unrelated to treatment). The terminal half-life of ixazomib was 3.3 to 7.4 days; plasma exposure increased proportionally with dose (0.48-2.23 mg/m(2)). Among 55 response-evaluable patients, 15% achieved partial response or better (76% stable disease or better). These findings have informed the subsequent clinical development of ixazomib in multiple myeloma. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00932698.

[PMID: 24292417]
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and computed tomography (CT) are useful imaging modalities for evaluating tumor progression and treatment responses in genetically engineered mouse models of solid human cancers, but the potential of integrated FDG-PET/CT for assessing tumor development and new interventions in transgenic mouse models of human blood cancers such as multiple myeloma (MM) has not been demonstrated. Here we use BALB/c mice that contain the newly developed iMyc(ΔEμ) gene insertion and the widely expressed H2-L(d)-IL6 transgene to demonstrate that FDG-PET/CT affords an excellent research tool for assessing interleukin-6- and MYC-driven plasma cell tumor (PCT) development in a serial, reproducible and stage- and lesion-specific manner. We also show that FDG-PET/CT permits determination of objective drug responses in PCT-bearing mice treated with the investigational proteasome inhibitor ixazomib (MLN2238), the biologically active form of ixazomib citrate (MLN9708), that is currently in phase 3 clinical trials in MM. Overall survival of 5 of 6 ixazomib-treated mice doubled compared with mice left untreated. One outlier mouse presented with primary refractory disease. Our findings demonstrate the utility of FDG-PET/CT for preclinical MM research and suggest that this method will play an important role in the design and testing of new approaches to treat myeloma.

[PMID: 24904120]
Proteasome inhibition is an effective treatment strategy for multiple myeloma. With improving survival, attention is increasingly focusing on ease of administration and toxicity profile. Ixazomib is an investigational, orally bioavailable 20S proteasome inhibitor. Sixty patients with relapsed and/or refractory multiple myeloma were enrolled on this phase 1 trial to evaluate safety and tolerability and determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of single-agent, oral ixazomib given weekly for 3 of 4 weeks. Upon MTD determination, patients were enrolled to 4 different cohorts based on relapsed/refractory status and prior bortezomib and carfilzomib exposure. The MTD was determined to be 2.97 mg/m(2). Dose-limiting toxicities were grade 3 nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea in 2 patients, and grade 3 skin rash in 1 patient. Common drug-related adverse events were thrombocytopenia (43%), diarrhea (38%), nausea (38%), fatigue (37%), and vomiting (35%). The observed rate of peripheral neuropathy was 20%, with only 1 grade 3 event reported. Nine (18%) patients achieved a partial response or better, including 8 of 30 (27%) evaluable patients treated at the MTD. Pharmacokinetic studies suggested a long terminal half-life of 3.6 to 11.3 days, supporting once-weekly dosing. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00963820.

[PMID: 24471924]
In spite of significant advances in the management of multiple myeloma (MM), the disease remains incurable and nearly all patients ultimately relapse and require salvage chemotherapy. As such, relapsed and relapsed-refractory MM remains a critical area of research pertaining to biological mechanisms of progression and chemotherapy resistance, as well as to the development of new pharmacologic agents and immunologic approaches for the disease. The immunomodulatory agents and proteasome inhibitors represent the cornerstone of treatment in this setting, with combination regimens incorporating these drugs demonstrating encouraging rates and duration of response, including the newer agents, pomalidomide and carfilzomib. In addition, novel drug classes have shown promising activity in RR MM, including the orally-administered proteasome inhibitors ixazomib and oprozomib; monoclonal antibodies such as the anti-CS1 monoclonal antibody elotuzumab and anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody daratumumab; and histone deacetylase inhibitors such as panobinostat and rocilinostat.

[PMID: 25268212]
Multiple myeloma (MM) is with an incidence of 4-6/100 000 inhabitants a fairly frequent malignancy of B cells. The incidence increases markedly with age. In this review changes in the treatment of relapsed / refractory myeloma during the last decade have been analysed. The present standard of care in the progressive or refractory myeloma was elaborated by the working group "Refractory Multiple Myeloma" using an extensive literature search for studies published between 2003 and 2013. Outside of clinical trials, high-dose therapy with stem cell transplantation is recommended in fit patients up to 75 years without significant comorbidities. Ongoing studies address the question about the least toxic and the most effective treatment. Therefore, inclusion of patients in therapeutic trials and use of novel agent combinations is highly recommended, e.g. with 3(rd) generation-IMIDs (pomalidomide), new proteasome inhibitors, such as carfilzomib, ixazomib or oprozomib, antibodies, such as elotuzumab, daratumumab or SAR650984, siltuximab, tabalumab, denosumab, romosozumab, BTK-, HSP-inhibitors and other innovative phase I/II agents. Based on new insights in the pathogenesis of the disease, treatment options for MM have changed significantly in recent years. There is a significantly larger treatment diversity, i.e. more MM-active agents and combinations are available today. Even with relapsed MM, patients with the disease often live longer and have fewer complications.

[PMID: 24486586]
MLN9708 (ixazomib citrate), which hydrolyzes to pharmacologically active MLN2238 (ixazomib), is a next-generation proteasome inhibitor with demonstrated preclinical and clinical antimyeloma activity, but yet with an unknown effect on myeloma bone disease. Here, we investigated its bone anabolic and antiresorptive effects in the myeloma setting and in comparison with bortezomib in preclinical models. The in vitro effect of MLN2238 was tested on osteoclasts and osteoclast precursors from healthy donors and patients with myeloma, and on osteoprogenitors derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells also from both origins. We used an in vivo model of bone marrow-disseminated human myeloma to evaluate MLN2238 antimyeloma and bone activities. Clinically achievable concentrations of MLN2238 markedly inhibited in vitro osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast resorption; these effects involved blockade of RANKL (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand)-induced NF-κB activation, F-actin ring disruption, and diminished expression of αVβ3 integrin. A similar range of MLN2238 concentrations promoted in vitro osteoblastogenesis and osteoblast activity (even in osteoprogenitors from patients with myeloma), partly mediated by activation of TCF/β-catenin signaling and upregulation of the IRE1 component of the unfolded protein response. In a mouse model of bone marrow-disseminated human multiple myeloma, orally administered MLN2238 was equally effective as bortezomib to control tumor burden and also provided a marked benefit in associated bone disease (sustained by both bone anabolic and anticatabolic activities). Given favorable data on pharmacologic properties and emerging clinical safety profile of MLN9708, it is conceivable that this proteasome inhibitor may achieve bone beneficial effects in addition to its antimyeloma activity in patients with myeloma.

[PMID: 24712303]
Inhibition of proteasome, a proteolytic complex responsible for the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins, has emerged as a powerful strategy for treatment of multiple myeloma (MM), a plasma cell malignancy. First-in-class agent, bortezomib, has demonstrated great positive therapeutic efficacy in MM, both in pre-clinical and in clinical studies. However, despite its high efficiency, a large proportion of patients do not achieve sufficient clinical response. Therefore, the development of a second-generation of proteasome inhibitors (PIs) with improved pharmacological properties was needed. Recently, several of these new agents have been introduced into clinics including carfilzomib, marizomib and ixazomib. Further, new orally administered second-generation PI oprozomib is being investigated. This review provides an overview of main mechanisms of action of PIs in MM, focusing on the ongoing development and progress of novel anti-proteasome therapeutics.

[PMID: 24578203]
Multiple myeloma is still an incurable disease with pattern of regression and remission followed by multiple relapses raising from the residual myeloma cells surviving even in the patients who achieve complete clinical response to treatment. New antimyeloma drugs such as thalidomide, lenalidomide, and bortezomib have dramatically changed treatment paradigm leading to both tumor reduction and tumor suppression. Much progress has been made, but still many unsolved questions remain. In the mode of sequencing treatment for patients with multiple myeloma, we are still using old drugs such as the alkylating agent melphalan, which continues to play a central role in the transplantation setting. Newer drugs are now emerging and are being tested: monoclonal antibodies, histone deacetylase (romidespsin), MLN9708 (ixazomib) a new oral proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib, signal transduction modulator perifosine. Many advances have been made, but there is still a long way to go.

[PMID: 25456369]
The combination of bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone is a highly effective therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Ixazomib is an investigational, oral, proteasome inhibitor with promising anti-myeloma effects and low rates of peripheral neuropathy. In a phase 1/2 trial we aimed to assess the safety, tolerability, and activity of ixazomib in combination with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. We enrolled patients newly diagnosed with multiple myeloma aged 18 years or older with measurable disease, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0-2, and no grade 2 or higher peripheral neuropathy, and treated them with oral ixazomib (days 1, 8, 15) plus lenalidomide 25 mg (days 1-21) and dexamethasone 40 mg (days 1, 8, 15, 22) for up to 12 28-day cycles, followed by maintenance therapy with ixazomib alone. In phase 1, we gave patients escalating doses of ixazomib (1·68-3·95 mg/m(2)) to establish the recommended dose for phase 2. The primary endpoints were maximum tolerated dose for phase 1, and the rate of very good partial response or better for phase 2. Safety analyses were done in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug; efficacy analyses were done in all patients who received at least one dose of study drug at the phase 2 dose, had measurable disease at baseline, and had at least one post-baseline response assessment. This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01217957. Between Nov 22, 2010, and Feb 28, 2012, we enrolled 65 patients (15 to phase 1 and 50 to phase 2). Four dose-limiting toxic events were noted in phase 1: one at a dose of ixazomib of 2·97 mg/m(2) and three at 3·95 mg/m(2). The maximum tolerated dose of ixazomib was established as 2·97 mg/m(2) and the recommended phase 2 dose was 2·23 mg/m(2), which was converted to a 4·0 mg fixed dose based on population pharmacokinetic results. Grade 3 or higher adverse events related to any drug were reported in 41 (63%) patients, including skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (11 patients, 17%), neutropenia (eight patients, 12%), and thrombocytopenia (five patients, 8%); drug-related peripheral neuropathy of grade 3 or higher occurred in four (6%) patients. Five patients discontinued because of adverse events. In 64 response-evaluable patients, 37 (58%, 95% CI 45-70) had a very good partial response or better. The all-oral combination of weekly ixazomib plus lenalidomide and dexamethasone was generally well tolerated and appeared active in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. These results support the phase 3 trial development of this combination for multiple myeloma. Millennium Pharmaceuticals, a wholly owned subsidiary of Takeda Pharmaceutical International Company.

[PMID: 25302026]
Proteasome inhibition represents one of the more important therapeutic targets in the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM), since by suppressing nuclear factor-κB activity, which promotes myelomagenesis, it makes plasma cells susceptible to proapoptotic signals. Bortezomib, the first proteasome inhibitor approved for MM therapy, has been shown to increase response rate and improve outcome in patients with relapsed/refractory disease and in the frontline setting, particularly when combined with immunomodulatory drugs and alkylating agents. Among second-generation proteasome inhibitors, ixazomib (MLN9708) is the first oral compound to be evaluated for the treatment of MM. Ixazomib has shown improved pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters compared with bortezomib, in addition to similar efficacy in the control of myeloma growth and prevention of bone loss. Ixazomib was found to overcome bortezomib resistance and to trigger synergistic antimyeloma activity with dexamethasone, lenalidomide, and histone deacetylase inhibitors. Phase I/II studies using ixazomib weekly or twice weekly in relapsed/refractory MM patients suggested antitumor activity of the single agent, but more promising results have been obtained with the combination of ixazomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone in newly diagnosed MM. Ixazomib has also been used in systemic amyloidosis as a single agent, showing important activity in this difficult-to-treat plasma-cell dyscrasia. More frequent side effects observed during administration of ixazomib were thrombocytopenia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, and rash, whereas severe peripheral neuropathy was rare. Here, we review the chemical characteristics of ixazomib, as well as its mechanism of action and results from preclinical and clinical trials.

[PMID: 25935605]
Proteasome inhibitors have a 20 year history in cancer therapy. The first proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib (Velcade, PS-341), a break-through multiple myeloma treatment, moved rapidly through development from bench in 1994 to first approval in 2003. Bortezomib is a reversible boronic acid inhibitor of the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome. Next generation proteasome inhibitors include carfilzomib and oprozomib which are irreversible epoxyketone proteasome inhibitors; and ixazomib and delanzomib which are reversible boronic acid proteasome inhibitors. Two proteasome inhibitors, bortezomib and carfilzomib are FDA approved drugs and ixazomib and oprozomib are in late stage clinical trials. All of the agents are potent cytotoxics. The disease focus for all the proteasome inhibitors is multiple myeloma. This focus arose from clinical observations made in bortezomib early clinical trials. Later preclinical studies confirmed that multiple myeloma cells were indeed more sensitive to proteasome inhibitors than other tumor cell types. The discovery and development of the proteasome inhibitor class of anticancer agents has progressed through a classic route of serendipity and scientific investigation. These agents are continuing to have a major impact in their treatment of hematologic malignancies and are beginning to be explored as potential treatment agent for non-cancer indications.