[PMID: 24698685]
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex I (mTORC1) is a central regulator of cellular and organismal growth, and hyperactivation of this pathway is implicated in the pathogenesis of many human diseases including cancer and diabetes. mTORC1 promotes growth in response to the availability of nutrients, such as amino acids, which drive mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, its site of activation. How amino acid levels are communicated to mTORC1 is only recently coming to light by the discovery of a lysosome-based signaling system composed of Rags (Ras-related GTPases) and Ragulator v-ATPase, GATOR (GAP activity towards Rags), and folliculin (FLCN) complexes. Increased understanding of this pathway will not only provide insight into growth control but also into the human pathologies triggered by its deregulation.

[PMID: 25263562]
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) kinase is a major regulator of cell growth that responds to numerous environmental cues. A key input is amino acids, which act through the heterodimeric Rag GTPases (RagA or RagB bound to RagC or RagD) in order to promote the translocation of mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, its site of activation. GATOR2 is a complex of unknown function that positively regulates mTORC1 signaling by acting upstream of or in parallel to GATOR1, which is a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for RagA or RagB and an inhibitor of the amino-acid-sensing pathway. Here, we find that the Sestrins, a family of poorly understood growth regulators (Sestrin1-Sestrin3), interact with GATOR2 in an amino-acid-sensitive fashion. Sestrin2-mediated inhibition of mTORC1 signaling requires GATOR1 and the Rag GTPases, and the Sestrins regulate the localization of mTORC1 in response to amino acids. Thus, we identify the Sestrins as GATOR2-interacting proteins that regulate the amino-acid-sensing branch of the mTORC1 pathway.

[PMID: 24081491]
Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, a human disease characterized by fibrofolliculomas (hair follicle tumors) as well as a strong predisposition toward the development of pneumothorax, pulmonary cysts, and renal carcinoma, arises from loss-of-function mutations in the folliculin (FLCN) gene. In this study, we show that FLCN regulates lysosome function by promoting the mTORC1-dependent phosphorylation and cytoplasmic sequestration of transcription factor EB (TFEB). Our results indicate that FLCN is specifically required for the amino acid-stimulated recruitment of mTORC1 to lysosomes by Rag GTPases. We further demonstrated that FLCN itself was selectively recruited to the surface of lysosomes after amino acid depletion and directly bound to RagA via its GTPase domain. FLCN-interacting protein 1 (FNIP1) promotes both the lysosome recruitment and Rag interactions of FLCN. These new findings define the lysosome as a site of action for FLCN and indicate a critical role for FLCN in the amino acid-dependent activation of mTOR via its direct interaction with the RagA/B GTPases.

[PMID: 22424946]
Amino acids are required for activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, which regulates protein translation, cell size, and autophagy. However, the amino acid sensor that directly couples intracellular amino acid-mediated signaling to mTORC1 is unknown. Here we show that leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LRS) plays a critical role in amino acid-induced mTORC1 activation by sensing intracellular leucine concentration and initiating molecular events leading to mTORC1 activation. Mutation of LRS amino acid residues important for leucine binding renders the mTORC1 pathway insensitive to intracellular levels of amino acids. We show that LRS directly binds to Rag GTPase, the mediator of amino acid signaling to mTORC1, in an amino acid-dependent manner and functions as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for Rag GTPase to activate mTORC1. This work demonstrates that LRS is a key mediator for amino acid signaling to mTORC1.

[PMID: 24337580]
Activation of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) by amino acids is mediated in part by the Rag GTPases, which bind the raptor subunit of mTORC1 in an amino acid-stimulated manner and promote mTORC1 interaction with Rheb-GTP, the immediate activator. Here we examine whether the ability of amino acids to regulate mTORC1 binding to Rag and mTORC1 activation is due to the regulation of Rag guanyl nucleotide charging. Rag heterodimers in vitro exhibit a very rapid, spontaneous exchange of guanyl nucleotides and an inability to hydrolyze GTP. Mutation of the Rag P-loop corresponding to Ras(Ser-17) abolishes guanyl nucleotide binding. Such a mutation in RagA or RagB inhibits, whereas in RagC or RagD it enhances, Rag heterodimer binding to mTORC1. The binding of wild-type and mutant Rag heterodimers to mTORC1 in vitro parallels that seen with transient expression, but binding to mTORC1 in vitro is entirely independent of Rag guanyl nucleotide charging. HeLa cells stably overexpressing wild-type or P-loop mutant RagC exhibit unaltered amino acid regulation of mTORC1. Despite amino acid-independent raptor binding to Rag, mTORC1 is inhibited by amino acid withdrawal as in parental cells. Rag heterodimers extracted from (32)P-labeled whole cells, or just from the pool associated with the lysosomal membrane, exhibit constitutive [(32)P]GTP charging that is unaltered by amino acid withdrawal. Thus, amino acids promote mTORC1 activation without altering Rag GTP charging. Raptor binding to Rag, although necessary, is not sufficient for mTORC1 activation. Additional amino acid-dependent steps couple Rag-mTORC1 to Rheb-GTP.

[PMID: 24095279]
The mTORC1 kinase is a master growth regulator that senses numerous environmental cues, including amino acids. The Rag GTPases interact with mTORC1 and signal amino acid sufficiency by promoting the translocation of mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, its site of activation. The Rags are unusual GTPases in that they function as obligate heterodimers, which consist of RagA or B bound to RagC or D. While the loading of RagA/B with GTP initiates amino acid signaling to mTORC1, the role of RagC/D is unknown. Here, we show that RagC/D is a key regulator of the interaction of mTORC1 with the Rag heterodimer and that, unexpectedly, RagC/D must be GDP bound for the interaction to occur. We identify FLCN and its binding partners, FNIP1/2, as Rag-interacting proteins with GAP activity for RagC/D, but not RagA/B. Thus, we reveal a role for RagC/D in mTORC1 activation and a molecular function for the FLCN tumor suppressor.

[PMID: 25567907]
The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) integrates environmental and intracellular signals to regulate cell growth. Amino acids stimulate mTORC1 activation at the lysosome in a manner thought to be dependent on the Rag small guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases), the Ragulator complex, and the vacuolar H(+)-adenosine triphosphatase (v-ATPase). We report that leucine and glutamine stimulate mTORC1 by Rag GTPase-dependent and -independent mechanisms, respectively. Glutamine promoted mTORC1 translocation to the lysosome in RagA and RagB knockout cells and required the v-ATPase but not the Ragulator. Furthermore, we identified the adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor-1 GTPase to be required for mTORC1 activation and lysosomal localization by glutamine. Our results uncover a signaling cascade to mTORC1 activation independent of the Rag GTPases and suggest that mTORC1 is differentially regulated by specific amino acids.

[PMID: 25567906]
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) protein kinase is a master growth regulator that responds to multiple environmental cues. Amino acids stimulate, in a Rag-, Ragulator-, and vacuolar adenosine triphosphatase-dependent fashion, the translocation of mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, where it interacts with its activator Rheb. Here, we identify SLC38A9, an uncharacterized protein with sequence similarity to amino acid transporters, as a lysosomal transmembrane protein that interacts with the Rag guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) and Ragulator in an amino acid-sensitive fashion. SLC38A9 transports arginine with a high Michaelis constant, and loss of SLC38A9 represses mTORC1 activation by amino acids, particularly arginine. Overexpression of SLC38A9 or just its Ragulator-binding domain makes mTORC1 signaling insensitive to amino acid starvation but not to Rag activity. Thus, SLC38A9 functions upstream of the Rag GTPases and is an excellent candidate for being an arginine sensor for the mTORC1 pathway.

[PMID: 23863162]
mTORC1 (mammalian target of rampamycin complex 1) is a highly conserved protein complex regulating cell growth and metabolism via its kinase mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin). The activity of mTOR is under the control of various GTPases, of which Rheb and the Rags play a central role. The presence of amino acids is a strict requirement for mTORC1 activity. The heterodimeric Rag GTPases localize mTORC1 to lysosomes by their amino-acid-dependent interaction with the lysosomal Ragulator complex. Rheb is also thought to reside on lysosomes to activate mTORC1. Rheb is responsive to growth factors, but, in conjunction with PLD1 (phospholipase D1), is also an integral part of the machinery that stimulates mTORC1 in response to amino acids. In the present article, we provide a brief overview of novel mechanisms by which amino acids affect the function of Rags. On the basis of existing literature, we postulate that Rheb is activated at the Golgi from where it will travel to lysosomes. Maturation of endosomes into lysosomes may be required to assure a continuous supply of GTP-bound Rheb for mTORC1 activation, which may help to drive the maturation process.

[PMID: 25936802]
mTORC1 is essential for regulating cell growth and metabolism in response to various environmental stimuli. Heterodimeric Rag GTPases are required for amino-acid-mediated mTORC1 activation at the lysosome. However, the mechanism by which amino acids regulate Rag activation remains not fully understood. Here, we identified the lysosome-anchored E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF152 as an essential negative regulator of the mTORC1 pathway by targeting RagA for K63-linked ubiquitination. RNF152 interacts with and ubiquitinates RagA in an amino-acid-sensitive manner. The mutation of RagA ubiquitination sites abolishes this effect of RNF152 and enhances the RagA-mediated activation of mTORC1. Ubiquitination by RNF152 generates an anchor on RagA to recruit its inhibitor GATOR1, a GAP complex for Rag GTPases. RNF152 knockout results in the hyperactivation of mTORC1 and protects cells from amino-acid-starvation-induced autophagy. Thus, this study reveals a mechanism for regulation of mTORC1 signaling by RNF152-mediated K63-linked polyubiquitination of RagA.

[PMID: 21981924]
The signaling adaptor p62 is a critical mediator of important cellular functions, owing to its ability to establish interactions with various signaling intermediaries. Here, we identify raptor as an interacting partner of p62. Thus, p62 is an integral part of the mTORC1 complex and is necessary to mediate amino acid signaling for the activation of S6K1 and 4EBP1. p62 interacts in an amino acid-dependent manner with mTOR and raptor. In addition, p62 binds the Rags proteins and favors formation of the active Rag heterodimer that is further stabilized by raptor. Interestingly, p62 colocalizes with Rags at the lysosomal compartment and is required for the interaction of mTOR with Rag GTPases in vivo and for translocation of the mTORC1 complex to the lysosome, a crucial step for mTOR activation.