[PMID: 20582973]
Cyclic neutropenia (CN) and severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) are disorders of neutrophil production that differ markedly in disease severity. Mutations of the ELANE gene (the symbol recently replacing ELA2) are considered largely responsible for most cases of CN and SCN, but specific mutations are typically associated with one or the other. We performed ELANE genotyping on all individuals and paternal sperm in an SCN kindred with eight SCN progeny of a sperm donor and six different mothers. One patient with CN had the same S97L ELANE mutation as seven patients with the SCN phenotype. The mutant allele was detected in the donor's spermatozoa, representing 18% of the ELANE gene pool, but not in DNA from his lymphocytes, neutrophils, or buccal mucosa, indicating gonadal mosaicism. The coexistence of CN and SCN phenotypes in this kindred with a shared paternal haplotype strongly suggests both a role for modifying genes in determination of congenital neutropenia disease phenotypes, and the classification of CN and SCN within a spectrum of phenotypes expressing varying degrees of the same disease process.

[PMID: 19057199]
Severe congenital neutropenia has been a well known hematological condition for over 50 years. Over this long period of time, the variable genetic causes and associated sequelae of the disease have been ascertained, and successful treatment strategies developed. Over the past 2 years, however, new studies have added greatly to our understanding of the molecular basis of the disease, details of which are presented in this review. Recent studies have elucidated a role for the unfolded protein response in mediating the pathogenic effects of ELA2 mutations, the most common mutation in severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) as well as cyclic neutropenia. Genetic lesions in HAX1 have also been identified in the original Kostmann pedigree representing the autosomal recessive form of SCN. An emerging theme is the convergence of these and other genetic lesions underlying SCN in enhancing neutrophil apoptosis. Other studies have revealed the importance of multiple independent mutations in these and other genes in SCN. Finally, the key role for signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 in mediating the effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor truncation mutations in the development of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia following SCN has been elucidated. As the full spectrum of molecular mutations causing neutropenia emerges, it is becoming possible to differentiate patients into subtypes with different prognoses, for whom tailored therapies are indicated.

[PMID: 12483111]
Two forms of inherited deficiency of neutrophil numbers are cyclic hematopoiesis and severe congenital neutropenia. In cyclic hematopoiesis, neutrophil counts oscillate opposite monocytes in a 3-week cycle. Severe congenital neutropenia consists of static neutropenia and a predisposition to myelodysplasia and acute myelogenous leukemia. All cases of cyclic neutropenia and most cases of severe congenital neutropenia result from heterozygous germline mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil elastase, ela2. Recent work extends the list of neutropenia genes to include WASp, Gfi-1, adaptin, and tafazzin. Studies of mosaic patients suggest that ela2 mutations act in a cell-autonomous fashion. A hypothetical feedback circuit potentially interconnects these genes. Genetic dissection of signaling in model organisms along with experimental hematology implicate C/EPBepsilon, RUNX1/AML1, Notch family members, LEF1, and Cdc42 as additional nodes in this pathway. The authors propose that neutrophil elastase acts as an inhibitor of myelopoiesis, substantiating a chalone hypothesis proposed many years ago.

[PMID: 17761833]
Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is an inborn disorder of granulopoiesis. Mutations of the ELA2 gene encoding neutrophil elastase (NE) are responsible for most cases of SCN and cyclic neutropenia (CN), a related but milder disorder of granulopoiesis. However, the mechanisms by which these mutations disrupt granulopoiesis are unclear. We hypothesize that the ELA2 mutations result in the production of misfolded NE protein, activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), and ultimately apoptosis of granulocytic precursors. Expression of mutant NE but not wild-type NE strongly induced BiP/GRP78 mRNA expression and XBP1 mRNA splicing, 2 classic markers of the UPR. The magnitude of UPR activation by a specific ELA2 mutation correlated with its associated clinical phenotype. Consistent with the UPR model, expression of mutant NE in primary human granulocytic precursors increased expression of CHOP (DDITS) and induced apoptosis in a protease-independent fashion. Most strikingly, UPR activation and decreased NE protein expression were detected in primary granulocytic precursors from SCN patients. Collectively, these data provide strong support for a UPR model of SCN disease pathogenesis and place SCN in a growing list of human diseases caused by misfolded proteins.

[PMID: 23463630]
Neutrophil elastase gene (ELANE) mutations are responsible for the majority of cases of severe congenital neutropenia (CN) and cyclic neutropenia (CyN). We screened CN (n = 395) or CyN (n = 92) patients for ELANE mutations and investigated the impact of mutations on mRNA expression, protein expression, and activity. We found 116 different mutations in 162 (41%) CN patients and 26 in 51 (55%) CyN patients, 69 of them were novel. CyN-associated mutations were predicted to be more benign than CN-associated mutations, but the mutation severity largely overlapped. The frequency of acquired CSF3R mutations, malignant transformation, and the need for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was significantly higher in CN patients with ELANE mutation than in ELANE mutation negative patients. Cellular elastase activity was reduced in neutrophils from CN/CyN patients, irrespective of the mutation status. In CN, enzymatic activity was significantly lower in patients with ELANE mutations compared with those with wild-type ELANE. Despite differences in the spectrum of mutations in CN or CyN, type or localization of mutation only partially determine the clinical phenotype. Specific ELANE mutations have limited predictive value for leukemogenesis; the risk for leukemia was correlated with disease severity rather than with occurrence of an ELANE mutation.

[PMID: 19415009]
Three familial cases of each of severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) and cyclic neutropenia (CN) in addition to 3 sporadic cases of SCN were analyzed for neutrophil elastase (Ela2) gene mutation. The contents of the neutrophil-specific granule proteins cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin were also analyzed in SCN. Genomic DNA was extracted from the patients' peripheral blood or bone marrow, and the coding sequence of the Ela2 gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and subjected to direct sequencing. The contents of antimicrobial peptides were analyzed by flow cytometry. Three cases of familial SCN (P13L, R52P, and S97L), 2 of familial CN (W212stop and P110L), and 1 of sporadic SCN (V72M) were shown to have heterozygous mutations in the Ela2 gene. W212stop found in a familial CN case was a novel mutation of Ela2. Prophylactic treatment for growth factors or antibiotic prophylaxis against bacterial infection was useful for lowering the frequency of infectious episodes. Adult patients tended to have less frequent infections compared with minors in the same family. The contents of both cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin were significantly reduced in SCN compared with healthy controls. Prophylaxis by growth factor or antibiotics is useful for decreasing risks of bacterial infections in SCN and CN. Adults were likely to have less frequent infections than children in familial cases of SCN and CN with the same mutation of Ela2.

[PMID: 11001877]
Congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia are disorders of neutrophil production predisposing patients to recurrent bacterial infections. Recently the locus for autosomal dominant cyclic neutropenia was mapped to chromosome 19p13.3, and this disease is now attributable to mutations of the gene encoding neutrophil elastase (the ELA2 gene). The authors hypothesized that congenital neutropenia is also due to mutations of neutrophil elastase. Patients with congenital neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia, or Shwachman-Diamond syndrome were referred to the Severe Chronic Neutropenia International Registry. Referring physicians provided hematologic and clinical data. Mutational analysis was performed by sequencing polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA for each of the 5 exons of the neutrophil ELA2 gene and 20 bases of the flanking regions. RNA from bone marrow mononuclear cells was used to determine if the affected patients expressed both the normal and the abnormal transcript. Twenty-two of 25 patients with congenital neutropenia had 18 different heterozygous mutations. Four of 4 patients with cyclic neutropenia and 0 of 3 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome had mutations. For 5 patients with congenital neutropenia having mutations predicted to alter RNA splicing or transcript structure, reverse transcriptase-PCR showed expression of both normal and abnormal transcripts. In cyclic neutropenia, the mutations appeared to cluster near the active site of the molecule, whereas the opposite face was predominantly affected by the mutations found in congenital neutropenia. This study indicates that mutations of the gene encoding neutrophil elastase are probably the most common cause for severe congenital neutropenia as well as the cause for sporadic and autosomal dominant cyclic neutropenia.

[PMID: 17053055]
Mutations in ELA2 encoding the neutrophil granule protease, neutrophil elastase (NE), are the major cause of the 2 main forms of hereditary neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia and severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). Genetic evaluation of other forms of neutropenia in humans and model organisms has helped to illuminate the role of NE. A canine form of cyclic neutropenia corresponds to human Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS2) and results from mutations in AP3B1 encoding a subunit of a complex involved in the subcellular trafficking of vesicular cargo proteins (among which NE appears to be one). Rare cases of SCN are attributable to mutations in the transcriptional repressor Gfi1 (among whose regulatory targets also include ELA2). The ultimate biochemical consequences of the mutations are not yet known, however. Gene targeting of ELA2 has thus far failed to recapitulate neutropenia in mice. The cycling phenomenon and origins of leukemic transformation in SCN remain puzzling. Nevertheless, mutations in all 3 genes are capable of causing the mislocalization of NE and may also induce the unfolded protein response, suggesting that there might a convergent pathogenic mechanism focusing on NE.

[PMID: 17107353]
Proteases and their serpin inhibitors are abundantly expressed in haemopoietic and peripheral blood cells. There is, however, relatively little information about the role played by serpins in the control of protease activity within these cells and in the pericellular region. The observation that mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene, which cause cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia, are associated with protease maldistribution gives some clue as to the potential importance of inhibitor proteins. To begin to address the role of protease/inhibitor balance in blood cells we used reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to examine protease and serpin gene expression in mature peripheral blood cells, differentiating haemopoietic progenitors, leukaemic blasts and haemopoietic cell lines. The results demonstrate stage-specific expression of proteases together with widespread expression of intra- and extra-cellular serpins. The elastase inhibitors monocyte neutrophil elastase inhibitor (MNEI) and antitrypsin (AT) showed overlapping expression. MNEI is predominantly expressed in early haemopoietic progenitors while antitrypsin is mainly expressed in more mature myeloid precursors, peripheral blood granulocytes and mononuclear cells. Our results give an overall picture of serpin and protease gene expression and draws attention to the potential importance of elastase regulators at all stages of myelopoiesis.

[PMID: 11543999]
Severe neutropenia disorders are characterized by extremely low levels of peripheral blood neutrophils, a maturation block of bone marrow progenitor cells and recurring severe bacterial and fungal infections. Recent reports indicated that severe neutropenia is a consequence of an impaired survival and abnormal cell cycle progression of myeloid progenitor cells in both cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia. Mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene were identified in all patients with cyclic neutropenia and most of the patients with severe congenital neutropenia. We hypothesize that expression of mutant neutrophil elastase protein results in deregulation of intracellular activity and premature cell death of myeloid-committed progenitor cells in these disorders, resulting in the lack of peripheral blood neutrophils. The potential molecular mechanisms of mutant-protein-mediated neutropenia is discussed.

[PMID: 14962902]
Heterozygous mutations of the gene encoding neutrophil elastase (ELA2) have been associated with cyclic neutropenia (CN) and severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). To date, 30 different mutations have been reported, but no correlation has been found with the degree of neutropenia. To address this issue, we analyzed the clinical, hematologic, and molecular characteristics of 81 unrelated patients with SCN (n = 54) or CN (n = 27). We identified mutations in 31 patients, two thirds of whom had sporadic forms. Familial cases were consistent with dominant inheritance. Seventeen novel mutations were identified, showing that the mutational spectrum encompasses not only the region encoding the mature enzyme but also the prodomains and promoter region. Genotype-phenotype analysis strongly suggested that ELA2 mutations correlate with more severe expression of neutropenia, specifically in patients diagnosed with SCN. This study underlines the importance of ELA2 molecular screening to identify patients who may be at particular risk of severe bacterial infections and/or acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplasia. By phenotypic analysis of affected relatives and carriers of the same ELA2 mutations, we showed that the expression of neutropenia in CN and SCN may be either homogeneous or variable according to the type of mutations, suggesting different pathogenetic mechanisms.