[PMID: 27653758]
Apixaban (Eliquis<sup>®</sup>) is an oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor that is available for use in the treatment and secondary prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Like other direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), apixaban has generally predictable pharmacological properties and does not require routine anticoagulation monitoring. In large phase III trials, oral apixaban was noninferior to subcutaneous enoxaparin sodium overlapped with and followed by oral warfarin (enoxaparin/warfarin) in the treatment of adults with acute VTE over 6 months with regard to the incidence of recurrent VTE or VTE-related death (AMPLIFY), and was significantly more effective than placebo in the prevention of recurrent VTE or all-cause mortality over 12 months in patients who had completed 6-12 months' anticoagulation treatment for VTE (AMPLIFY-EXT). Apixaban was generally well tolerated in these trials; the risks of major bleeding and the composite endpoint of major or clinically relevant nonmajor (CRNM) bleeding with apixaban were significantly lower than enoxaparin/warfarin in AMPLIFY and not significantly different from that of placebo in AMPLIFY-EXT. Similarly, in Japanese adults with acute VTE (AMPLIFY-J), apixaban was associated with a significantly lower risk of major or CRNM bleeding than unfractionated heparin plus warfarin, and no cases of recurrent VTE or VTE-related death over 24 weeks. Thus, apixaban is useful therapeutic alternative for the management of adults with VTE.

[PMID: 26095540]
In recent years, several direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOAC) have become available for use in Europe and other regions in indications related to prophylaxis and treatment of venous and arterial thromboembolism. They include the oral direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa, Boehringer Ingelheim) and the oral direct FXa inhibitors rivaroxaban (Xarelto, Bayer HealthCare), apixaban (Eliquis, Bristol-Myers Squibb), and edoxaban (Lixiana/Savaysa, Daiichi-Sankyo). The new compounds have a predictable dose response and few drug-drug interactions (unlike vitamin k antagonists), and they do not require parenteral administration (unlike heparins). However, they accumulate in patients with renal impairment, lack widely available monitoring tests for measuring its anticoagulant activity, and no specific antidotes for neutralization in case of overdose and/or severe bleeding are currently available. In this review, we describe the pharmacology of the DOAC, the efficacy, and safety data from pivotal studies that support their currently approved indications and discuss the postmarketing experience available. We also summarize practical recommendations to ensure an appropriate use of the DOAC according to existing data. Finally, we discuss relevant ongoing studies and future perspectives.

[PMID: 24624626]
The new direct oral anticoagulants directly targeting thrombin (factor IIa) or factor-Xa, are currently used for the treatment of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism (rivaroxaban, Xarelto) or for the prevention of systemic embolism in non-valvular atrial fibrillation (rivaroxaban; dabigatran, Pradaxa; Apixaban, Eliquis). Given their ease of use, it is expected that these drugs would be widely used in such long-term indications. Beyond their effectiveness, these treatments remain anticoagulant drugs, potentially responsible for bleeding complications, and specific measures should be defined in case of occurrence of such complications.

[PMID: 26369819]
There has been a revolution in the development of effective, small-molecule anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents. Numerous trypsin-like serine proteases have been under active pursuit as therapeutic targets. Important examples include thrombin, factor VIIa, factor Xa, and β-tryptase with indications ranging from thrombosis and inflammation to asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Trypsin-like serine proteases exhibit a highly similar tertiary folding pattern, especially for the region near the substrate binding pocket that includes the conserved catalytic triad consisting of histidine 57, aspartic acid 102, and serine 195. A rich collection of X-ray structures for many trypsin-like serine proteases is available, which greatly facilitated the optimization of small organic inhibitors as therapeutic agents. The present review surveyed those inhibitors disclosed in peer-reviewed scientific journals and patent publications with a special focus on structural features and protein-inhibitor interactions that implicated the inhibitor optimization process. The role played by the residue 190 of trypsin-like serine proteases is critical. While many inhibitors without a basic group have progressed into the clinic for ones with alanine 190, the task for those with serine 190 remains extremely challenging, if not impossible. In addition to warfarin, heparin, and low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs), treatment options have expanded with the development and approval of the new oral anticoagulants (NOACs). The NOACs are superior to vitamin K antagonists in terms of rapid onset, pharmacokinetics, drug/food interactions, and regular coagulation monitoring; but one serious drawback is the lack of an effective antidote at this time. Apixaban (Eliquis), rivaroxaban (Xarelto), and edoxaban (Savaysa) are the new Xa inhibitors that have been recently approved by the U.S. FDA and are in current clinical practice. These drugs bind to the active site of factor Xa (fXa) which prevents the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. In addition, dabigatran etexikate (Pradaxa), the direct thrombin inhibitor (fIIa) is also now widely prescribed.

[PMID: 25322783]
apixaban (BMS-562247) (Eliquis(®)) is a novel, orally active, selective, direct, reversible inhibitor of the coagulation factor Xa (FXa). A sensitive and reliable method was developed and validated for the measurement of apixaban (BMS-562247) and its major circulating metabolite (BMS-730823) in human citrated plasma for use in clinical testing. A 0.100 ml portion of citrated plasma sample was extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Run times were approximately 3 min. The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) was 1.00 ng/ml for BMS-562247 and 5.00 ng/ml for BMS-730823. Intra- and inter-assay precision values for replicate QC control samples were within ≤5.36% for both analytes (≤7.52% at the LLOQ). The accuracy for both analytes was within ±9.00%. The method was demonstrated to be sensitive, selective and robust, and was successfully used to support clinical studies.

[PMID: 28439702]
Patients who have undergone hip or knee replacement surgery are exposed to a high risk of developing a post-operative venous thromboembolus and so have a need for an effective, medication-based, thrombosis prophylaxis. New orally active anticoagulants have been available for a few years now. These specific substances directly block either thrombin (e.g., dabigatran etexilate) or Factor Xa (e.g., apixaban). It is not clear whether there are any efficacy differences between these two substances because there have never been any head-to-head studies carried out. We have carried out a study comparing two new orally active anticoagulants dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa<sup>®</sup>) and apixaban (Eliquis<sup>®</sup>) that were each given to two groups of 200 patients respectively, who had undergone elective hip or knee arthroplasty (100 each). Each patient was assessed for pre- and post-operative hemoglobin concentrations, post-operative blood loss, the number of transfused erythrocyte concentrates, the duration of wound secretion, clinical thromboembolic complications (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarct), as well as gastrointestinal, intracranial or wound-related bleeding complications. Dabigatran etexilate treatment led to a significant increase in the duration of wound secretion in both arthroplasty groups when compared to apixaban: wound secretion lasted 1.2 days longer on average in the dabigatran etexilate group than in the apixaban group (4.1 ± 2.1 vs. 2.9 ± 1.8 days). There were no significant differences observed between the two anticoagulant groups when comparing pre- and post-operative Hb values, post-operative blood loss and the other clinical parameters. Thus, it appears that the direct thrombin inhibitor, dabigatran etexilate, is associated with a longer period of wound secretion following the implantation of hip and knee endoprostheses than that associated with the Factor Xa inhibitor, apixaban.

[PMID: 23649961]
The current mainstay of treatment of thrombotic APS is long-term anticoagulation with oral vitamin K antagonists (VKA) such as warfarin. However, the use of warfarin is problematic, particularly in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). The new oral anticoagulants (NOAC) include dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa®), a direct thrombin inhibitor, and rivaroxaban (Xarelto®), Apixaban (Eliquis) and Edoxaban (Lixiana®), which are direct anti-Xa inhibitors. Unlike warfarin, these agents do not interact with dietary constituents and alcohol, have few reported drug interactions, and monitoring of their anticoagulant intensity is not routinely required due to their predictable anticoagulant effects. In this chapter, we discuss clinical and laboratory aspects of NOAC. These agents have been approved for several therapeutic indications based on phase III prospective randomised controlled clinical trials using warfarin at a target INR of 2.5 (i.e. range 2.0-3.0) as the comparator. However these trials may not be directly applicable to patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) where prospective clinical studies of NOAC are the way forward.

[PMID: 23677804]
The direct factor Xa inhibitor apixaban (Eliquis(®)) has predictable pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics and does not require routine anticoagulation monitoring. This article reviews the efficacy and tolerability of oral apixaban to reduce the risk of stroke or systemic embolism in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation (AF). In the ARISTOTLE (Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation) trial in patients with AF and at least one additional risk factor for stroke, apixaban recipients were significantly less likely than warfarin recipients to experience stroke or systemic embolism, major bleeding or death; the beneficial effects of treatment with apixaban versus warfarin were generally maintained across various patient subgroups. Apixaban recipients also had a significantly lower risk of intracranial haemorrhage than warfarin recipients. In the AVERROES (Apixaban Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid to Prevent Stroke in Atrial Fibrillation Patients who have Failed or are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist Therapy) trial in patients with AF and at least one additional risk factor for stroke for whom vitamin K antagonist therapy was unsuitable, apixaban was associated with a significantly lower risk of stroke or systemic embolism than aspirin, without an increase in the risk of major bleeding. In conclusion, although longer-term efficacy and safety data are needed, apixaban is an important new option for use in patients with nonvalvular AF to reduce the risk of stroke or systemic embolism.

[PMID: 24711240]
The new oral anticoagulants directly inhibit either thrombin (Dabigatran, Pradaxa®,) or activated Factor X (rivaroxaban, Xarelto®, and apixaban, Eliquis®) and have been approved for thromboprophylaxis after hip and knee replacement surgery and stroke prevention in non-valvular atrial fibrillation. Moreover, rivaroxaban has been approved for the treatment of deep venous thrombosis, prevention of pulmonary embolism and anticoagulation after acute myocardial infarction. The direct FXa-inhibitor edoxaban (Lixiana®) expects approval for the prevention of stroke in atrial fibrillation in Germany in 2014. The half lives of all direct anticoagulants range between 8 and 17 hours. Dabigatran (Pradaxa®) and rivaroxaban (Xarelto®) are mainly excreted by the kidneys, apixaban (Eliquis®) by the liver (75%) and edoxaban (Lixiana®) by the kidneys (40%) and the faeces in 60%. Prior to surgery a shorter cessation is expected compared to the vitamin k antagonists phenprocoumon (Marcumar®, Falithrom®) and warfarin (Coumadin®). For acute bleedings caused by the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran (Pradaxa®) hemodialysis is recommended to eliminate the drug from the plasma. Due to the high protein binding the direkt FXa-inhibitors rivaroxaban (Xarelto®) and apixaban (Eliquis®) can not be hemodialysed. For edoxaban (Lixiana®) no data on elimination by renal replacement therapy are available. In case of life-threatening bleeding the replacement of a prothrombin complex preparation (PCC) containing the factors II, VII, IX and X and, second line, activated factor concentrates as recombinant factor VIIa or activated prothrombin complex preparations are recommended.

[PMID: 23535530]
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an independent risk factor for ischemic stroke occurrence, severity, recurrence, and mortality. Anticoagulation therapy for the prevention of thromboembolism is critical in patients with AF who are at risk of stroke. Warfarin has been an efficacious anticoagulant for this purpose, but its use has been limited by frequent laboratory monitoring, drug interactions, unpredictable individual response, delayed onset of action, and bleeding. Apixaban is the second oral direct selective factor Xa inhibitor approved for the prevention of stroke/systemic embolism in patients with nonvalvular AF. It was significantly better than aspirin in reducing stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic) or systemic embolism without increasing the risk of major bleeding in patients with AF who were at increased risk of stroke and for whom warfarin was unsuitable. In a randomized, double-blind trial that was originally designed to test for noninferiority, apixaban was superior to warfarin (target international normalized ratio 2-3) in preventing stroke or systemic embolism, caused less bleeding, and resulted in lower mortality in patients with AF. Apixaban has a half-life of about 12 hours, and the normal dosage is 5 mg orally twice daily. However, it may be reduced to 2.5 mg twice daily based on individual factors of the patient (age, renal function, and body weight) and the concomitant use of potent dual inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4 and P-glycoprotein. Similar to other novel oral anticoagulants (dabigatran and rivaroxaban), apixaban has no reversal agent for its anticoagulant effect. Overall, apixaban is a safe and efficacious alternative for stroke prophylaxis in high-risk patients who have AF and who are unable to achieve therapeutic goals with warfarin therapy.

[PMID: 21985171]
Apixaban (Eliquis™), an oral direct factor Xa inhibitor, is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer as a therapy for the prevention and/or treatment of thrombotic disorders. Apixaban has been approved in the EU for the prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) after hip or knee replacement. A rolling submission for approval of apixaban for the prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation has also been initiated in the US. Worldwide phase III development of apixaban is underway for the prevention and treatment of VTE, and prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. Development for acute coronary syndromes has been stopped following the discontinuation of the phase III APPRAISE-II trial. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of apixaban leading to this first approval for the prevention of VTE after hip or knee replacement.