[PMID: 6461592]
Ankylosing spondylitis is a disease with clinically and radiologically very variable features. It is the intention to direct the attention from the old by orthopedists' influenced association of the stiff back to the polymorphism of the disease especially to the early stages which still frequently are recognized too late. The paper deals with the nosology, the various states of the clinical course with the numerous radiological criteria including therapeutical approaches.

[PMID: 6983935]
One hundred and twenty-two consecutive patients hospitalized for ankylosing spondylitis (AS) were reexamined. The frequency of clinical signs and results of tests for associations are presented. Psoriasis was associated with a distal pattern of peripheral arthropathy. Spinal rigidity was predominantly seen in males. Males with phalangeal arthropathy exhibited preserved spinal mobility. This was the case also when HLA B27 positives and patients who did not have psoriasis were considered separately. HLA B27 positive patients in this group had frequently experienced acute anterior uveitis. It seems possible that the disease in such males is the result of combined predisposition to ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthropathy. Hip arthropathy was frequently present in males with spinal rigidity. The associations observed confirm that AS is a heterogenous group of diseases. The term "syndrome" may be suitable for such a heterogenous group, and we prefer the term "Bechterew's syndrome" as the name of this group. When these new findings are added to the previous observations that acute anterior uveitis probably is a clinical, sex-influenced characteristic of HLA B27 positive Bechterew's syndrome, that HLA B27 negative patients with Bechterew's syndrome frequently had psoriasis and were HLA B13 and B17 negative, and that psoriasis was frequent in HLA B27 positive patients as well, we tentatively conclude that different and interacting genetic mechanisms may be involved in the etiology of Bechterew's syndrome.

[PMID: 25050151]
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) or Bechterew disease is a chronic, usually progressive, systemic inflammatory joint disease, which predominantly affects the spine and sacroiliac joints. In these joints, early inflammatory changes are followed by lumbosacral pain and progressive restriction of spinal movement associated with radiologically visible intervertebral ossification. Peripheral joint involvement occurs in 10 to 30% of patients and shows a predilection for the shoulders, knees, ankles, feet, and wrists. Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) involvement has been described, and its reported frequency varies from 11 to 35%. However, ankylosis is uncommon with a single documented case utilizing an alloplastic prosthesis for total joint replacement. A case report of bilateral ankylosis of the jaw treated with alloplastic prostheses for total TMJ replacement using a Brazilian system in a patient with AS is presented.

[PMID: 11803718]
Cervical spine changed by Bechterew's disease is severely endangered with any increased load. Even decent trauma is enough to produce a fracture with affection of spinal cord. Because of little knowledge in these special items, late diagnosis of overlooked injury is not rare, especially in two-level injuries. Neurolesions following secondary fracture dislocations may occur ("fatal pause"). From january 1990 to february 2000 12 patients underwent surgery (dorsoventral stabilisation, ventral stabilisation, laminectomy). Diagnostic procedures, levels of injury, pre- and postoperative neurostatus (following Frankel's score), operative technique, typical complications and follow-up (Ø 17.8 months) were analyzed and compared with the literature. 11 patients showed preoperative neurodeficits. They were better in five cases and disappeared at all in another five cases after surgery (83% positive neurological outcome). There was no increase of neurology failure. Two patients died (ARDS and cerebral ischemia with destruction of vertebral arteries). One patient had to be reoperated because of implant dislocation. MRI is obvious in diagnostic for these lesions. There is also an absolute need for total (both clinical and radiological) examination of the whole spinal column, because there is often injury of more than one level (three times in our study). Therapy should be operative (dorsoventral stabilisation, in certain cases only anterior procedure or laminectomy). Late diagnosis and therapy with secondary worsening after fracture dislocation is not rare because of "overlooked injury". There were four patients, that would not have suffered cervical spine fracture (minimal injury force) without Bechterew's changes. There is often pulmonary failure through limitation of thoracic movement and cerebral ischemia following rupture of vertebral arteries as typical complications. Mortality (2 cases; 16%) in our collective is less than literature's medium rates (35-57%).

[PMID: 22744304]
The term axial spondyloarthritis covers patients with established structural changes visible on x-ray in sacroiliac joints and/or in the spine (classical ankylosing spondylitis) but also patients with non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis in whom early inflammatory signs of the disease can only be visualized with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI technique plays an important role in the diagnosis of this disease and an early diagnosis is normally based on a combination of clinical, laboratory and imaging parameters. Only non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and TNF-α blockers are effective in the treatment of axial spondyloarthritis. Patients with short disease duration and elevated acute phase reactant levels demonstrate best therapy response and, therefore, should be closely followed-up and consistently treated.

[PMID: 18650743]
Although involvement of the temporomandibular joint in patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS, Bechterew disease) has been described previously, hyperplasia of the mandibular coronoid process in those patients has not been reported yet. Case notes were studied, and records were made of age, sex, clinical symptoms, radiography, and treatment in all patients with a confirmed diagnosis of coronoid hyperplasia presenting at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Bonn, between 1995 and 2007. Sixteen cases of coronoid hyperplasia were recruited, of which 12 were bilateral and 4 were unilateral. Four patients had AS, 3 of them were HLA-B27-positive. Temporomandibular joint symptoms are frequently seen in patients with AS. Nevertheless, it must be considered that a limitation of jaw mobility in those patients might also be caused by an elongation of the mandibular coronoid process.

[PMID: 32349490]
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) or else Bechterews or Marie-Strümpells disease is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease affecting preferentially the spine in the form of sacroileitis and spondylitis [1,2]. Due to acquired skeletal fragility, compared to healthy spine there is a significantly different response of the organism to the mechanical load [3] and therefore in patients with AS, spinal trauma is much more dangerous. Unlike predominantly elastic injuries in healthy cervical spine in AS patients this elasticity is lost and the spine then behaves like a tubular bone [4,5]. A simple X-ray picture is often insufficient because these fractures are difficult to be found in the field of extensive bone alterations typical for AS [6,7,8]. We present a case report of cervical spondylogenic myelopathy in posttraumatic pseudoarthrosis with a prolapse of C6/7 in the field of an old fracture in an AS patient with a typical initial underestimation of diagnosis in minor trauma. The patient therefore experienced a typical late deterioration of the neurological condition. At our department, we have completed the diagnosis and proceeded to perform the surgery with which we have the greatest experience. Although slightly at variance with established procedures, the surgery provides a sufficient solution for the patient also in postoperative follow-up.

[PMID: 3923615]
The results of tests for associations among radiographic findings of the dorsolumbar spine, peripheral joints, tendon insertions and the pubic symphysis are presented. Ankylosis of sacro-iliac joints, ankylosis of apophyseal joints, bridging syndesmophytes, ossified interspinous ligament, block vertebrae, arthritis of the pubic symphysis and new bone formation of the ischium were strongly mutually associated. They probably belong to the same subgroup of disease. Such findings were negatively associated with distal peripheral joint arthritis. Mixed osteophytes, parasyndesmophytes or shining corners (anterior spondylitis) showed associations suggesting that the etiology may be mixed. A late stage of sacro-iliitis, regressive changes, characterized by narrow joint spaces without extensive ankylosis and with minimal sclerosis (grade IV sacro-iliitis) was associated with distal peripheral joints arthritis, but negatively associated with signs of ankylosing processes of the dorsolumbar spine. On the basis of the radiographic findings, distinct subgroups of AS could be identified. These results confirm our previous results of an association pattern between clinical findings. We would also recommend that the grading system of sacro-iliitis put forward by Dale be adopted, since it turned out that this grading system often distinguished between distinct subgroups of this heterogeneous condition(s).

[PMID: 29101454]
Ankylosing spondylitis is an inflammatory rheumatic disease that is often associated with back pain and restricted spinal movement. In the later stages of the disease, complete ossification of the entire spine and severe deformity can occur, often resulting in a marked reduction in quality of life and an increased risk of loss of independence due to diminished visual field. Patients with ankylosing spondylitis are at greater risk of spinal fractures. These are generally complex fractures associated with high morbidity and mortality; in addition, neurological deficits are not unusual. Conventional radiological diagnosis is often insufficient to establish a diagnosis. Conservative treatment of fractures of the spine in this patient group is unsatisfactory. Surgical procedures, if necessary combined with decompression, are often the preferred treatment of choice in the fractured or malaligned ankylosed spine. Rebalancing of the sagittal profile with normalization of the visual axis and an improvement of quality of life is achieved through corrective osteotomies. Despite the high rate of complications, long-term results following spinal surgery in patients with ankylosing spondylitis are good. Minimally invasive surgery is appropriate for a further reduction in the complication rate. Meticulous preoperative planning is essential in the treatment of patients with ankylosing spondylitis.

[PMID: 2233790]
The authors have used the modified method of the direct gene cloning suggested by Nichols et al to isolate HLA-B27 gene from a patient suffering from ankylosing spondylitis. Five restriction enzymes (ClaI, HindIII, SnaBI, PvuI, SalGI) which had no recognition sites within the 6.0 kb EcoRI-BamHI-DNA fragment supposedly containing the HLA-B27 gene have been chosen by blotting-hybridization of the restriction fragments of the patients DNA with HLA-B27-specific probe. The 6.0 +/- 0.5 kb DNA fragments were isolated and cloned after the DNA treatment by 300 micrograms of all of these restriction enzymes. The obtained mini-library containing 280 recombinants has been screened with the use of HLA-B27 specific oligonucleotide probe. The clone PB27-2 has been isolated the restriction map of which is identical to HLA-B27k. The authors are planning to determine the sequence of the isolated gene in order to find a possible structural defect in it.

[PMID: 22085520]
Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is an umbrella term for a group of rheumatic diseases characterised by inflammation of the sacroiliac (SI) joints and vertebral column; today, differentiation is made between axial SpA and peripheral SpA. Ankylosing spondylitis (Bechterew's disease) is the most typical form of axial SpA whereby sacroiliitis can be found on X-rays of the SI joints. Axial SpA can, however, also be present without radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis. A range of SpA-related symptoms can also manifest themselves outside the musculoskeletal system, for example, uveitis, psoriasis and inflammatory intestinal diseases. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitors play an important role in the treatment of SpA. New classification criteria have recently been established in which MRI of the SI joints and the presence of the HLA-B27 tissue antigen are key. Axial and peripheral SpA should be recognized early in order to be able to successfully treat these conditions.