[PMID: 23590147]
Acute lung injury is a life-threatening condition characterized by surfactant dysfunction and raised secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) activity. Varespladib is a sPLA2 inhibitor shown to be effective in animal models of acute lung injury. We aimed at investigating the effect of co-administration of surfactant and varespladib on sPLA2 activity. Alveolar macrophages were cultured and stimulated with lipopolysaccharide and then treated with either varespladib, surfactant, varespladib followed by surfactant or nothing. sPLA2 activity, free fatty acids, tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and protein concentrations were measured in culture supernatants. Treatment with varespladib (p=0.019) and varespladib + surfactant (p=0.013), reduced the enzyme activity by approximately 15% from the basal level measured in the untreated cultures. Surfactant, varespladib and varespladib + surfactant, respectively decreased free fatty acids by -45% (p=0.045), - 62% (p=0.009) and -48% (p=0.015), from the baseline concentration of the untreated cultures. Varespladib and poractant- α co-administration reduces sPLA2 activity and free fatty acids release in cultured rat alveolar macrophages, although a clear drug synergy was not evident. Since co-administration may be useful to reduce inflammation and surfactant inactivation in acute lung injury, further in vivo studies are warranted to verify its clinical usefulness.

[PMID: 19697278]
Varespladib methyl is an oral secretory phospholipase A2 inhibitor that is being developed by Anthera Pharmaceuticals Inc for the potential treatment of coronary artery disease, acute coronary syndrome and inflammation. Varespladib methyl is a prodrug that is rapidly metabolized to varespladib, and both compounds are able to potently inhibit the enzymes of the human secretory phospholipase groups IIa, V and X, which play a pivotal role in atherosclerotic disease and inflammation. Phase II clinical trials of varespladib methyl in patients with coronary artery disease, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma and ulcerative colitis revealed that the drug was well tolerated. Varespladib methyl did not demonstrate a good efficacy profile in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, asthma and ulcerative colitis, whereas in patients with coronary artery disease, varespladib methyl consistently reduced LDL-cholesterol levels (elevated LDL-cholesterol levels are a marker of increased cardiovascular risk). At the time of publication, phase II trials were ongoing in patients with acute coronary syndrome and in patients undergoing elective percutaneous coronary intervention, and a phase III trial in patients with acute coronary syndrome was planned. Varespladib methyl could represent a novel therapy for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, although the efficacy, safety profile and advantages of this drug compared with existing therapeutic options would need to be established in upcoming phase III trials.

[PMID: 24115030]
High circulating levels of group IIA secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2-IIA) activity and mass are independent cardiovascular risk factors. Therefore, inhibition of sPLA2-IIA may be a target for the treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The present study evaluated the effects of sPLA2-IIA inhibition with varespladib acid in a novel mouse model, human apolipoprotein B (apoB)/human cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)/human sPLA2-IIA triple transgenic mice (TTT) fed a Western-type diet. sPLA2-IIA expression increased atherosclerotic lesion formation in TTT compared with human apoB/human CETP double transgenic mice (P<0.01). Varespladib acid effectively inhibited plasma sPLA2-IIA activity. Surprisingly, however, administration of varespladib acid to TTT had no impact on atherosclerosis, which could be attributed to a proatherogenic plasma lipoprotein profile that appears in response to sPLA2-IIA inhibition because of increased plasma CETP activity. In the TTT model, sPLA2-IIA decreased CETP activity by reducing the acceptor properties of sPLA2-IIA-modified very low-density lipoproteins specifically because of a significantly lower apoE content. Increasing very low-density lipoprotein-apoE content by means of adenovirus-mediated gene transfer in sPLA2-IIA transgenic mice restored the acceptor properties for CETP. These data show that in a humanized triple transgenic mouse model with hypercholesterolemia, sPLA2-IIA inhibition increases CETP activity via increasing the very low-density lipoprotein-apoE content, resulting in a proatherogenic lipoprotein profile.

[PMID: 24247616]
Secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) generates bioactive phospholipid products implicated in atherosclerosis. The sPLA2 inhibitor varespladib has favorable effects on lipid and inflammatory markers; however, its effect on cardiovascular outcomes is unknown. To determine the effects of sPLA2 inhibition with varespladib on cardiovascular outcomes. A double-blind, randomized, multicenter trial at 362 academic and community hospitals in Europe, Australia, New Zealand, India, and North America of 5145 patients randomized within 96 hours of presentation of an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) to either varespladib (n = 2572) or placebo (n = 2573) with enrollment between June 1, 2010, and March 7, 2012 (study termination on March 9, 2012). Participants were randomized to receive varespladib (500 mg) or placebo daily for 16 weeks, in addition to atorvastatin and other established therapies. The primary efficacy measure was a composite of cardiovascular mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI), nonfatal stroke, or unstable angina with evidence of ischemia requiring hospitalization at 16 weeks. Six-month survival status was also evaluated. At a prespecified interim analysis, including 212 primary end point events, the independent data and safety monitoring board recommended termination of the trial for futility and possible harm. The primary end point occurred in 136 patients (6.1%) treated with varespladib compared with 109 patients (5.1%) treated with placebo (hazard ratio [HR], 1.25; 95% CI, 0.97-1.61; log-rank P = .08). Varespladib was associated with a greater risk of MI (78 [3.4%] vs 47 [2.2%]; HR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.16-2.39; log-rank P = .005). The composite secondary end point of cardiovascular mortality, MI, and stroke was observed in 107 patients (4.6%) in the varespladib group and 79 patients (3.8%) in the placebo group (HR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.02-1.82; P = .04). In patients with recent ACS, varespladib did not reduce the risk of recurrent cardiovascular events and significantly increased the risk of MI. The sPLA2 inhibition with varespladib may be harmful and is not a useful strategy to reduce adverse cardiovascular outcomes after ACS. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01130246.

[PMID: 23349189]
Several secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s), including group IIA, III, V, and X, have been linked to the development of atherosclerosis, which led to the clinical testing of A-002 (varespladib), a broad sPLA2 inhibitor for the treatment of coronary artery disease. Group X sPLA2 (PLA2G10) has the most potent hydrolyzing activity toward phosphatidylcholine and is believed to play a proatherogenic role. Here, we show that Ldlr(-/-) mice reconstituted with bone marrow from mouse group X-deficient mice (Pla2g10(-/-)) unexpectedly display a doubling of plaque size compared with Pla2g10(+/+) chimeric mice. Macrophages of Pla2g10(-/-) mice are more susceptible to apoptosis in vitro, which is associated with a 4-fold increase of plaque necrotic core in vivo. In addition, chimeric Pla2g10(-/-) mice show exaggerated T lymphocyte (Th)1 immune response, associated with enhanced T-cell infiltration in atherosclerotic plaques. Interestingly, overexpression of human PLA2G10 in murine bone marrow cells leads to significant reduction of Th1 response and to 50% reduction of lesion size. PLA2G10 expression in bone marrow cells controls a proatherogenic Th1 response and limits the development of atherosclerosis. The results may provide an explanation for the recently reported inefficacy of A-002 (varespladib) to treat patients with coronary artery disease. Indeed, A-002 is a nonselective sPLA2 inhibitor that inhibits both proatherogenic (groups IIA and V) and antiatherogenic (group X) sPLA2s. Our results suggest that selective targeting of individual sPLA2 enzymes may be a better strategy to treat cardiovascular diseases.

[PMID: 22281412]
Inflammation plays an important role in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and endothelial dysfunction, and occurs after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). We evaluated whether endothelial function is attenuated after PCI and if inhibition of secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) activity augments endothelial function and coronary flow reserve (CFR) in these patients. In the sPLA2 Inhibition to Decrease Enzyme Release After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (SPIDER-PCI) study, patients undergoing elective PCI were randomized to receive Varespladib (Anthera Pharmaceuticals Inc, San Mateo, CA), an inhibitor of sPLA2, or placebo 3-5 days prior to PCI and for 5 days after PCI. In this substudy, endothelial function was assessed in 31 patients by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) before treatment and on the day after PCI, while taking study medication. During the PCI procedure, CFR was assessed using a Doppler guide wire. Baseline and procedural characteristics were comparable in both groups and sPLA2 activity was similar at baseline. After PCI, sPLA2 activity decreased only in the Varespladib group (2.9 ± 0.9 to 0.5 ± 0.4 ng/mL), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) increased by more than 100% in both groups. FMD at baseline was 3.66 ± 2.45% (Varespladib) and 3.37 ± 1.73% (placebo) with nonsignificant increase in both groups after PCI. The effect of Varespladib on FMD, adjusted for pre-PCI FMD by linear regression, was -1.16 ± 1.68%; P = 0.5. CFR was 2.45 ± 0.66 and 2.77 ± 0.85 in the Varespladib and placebo groups, respectively (P = 0.36). Systemic endothelial function is not reduced after elective PCI despite eliciting acute inflammatory response. Acute inhibition of sPLA2 activity with Varespladib does not affect endothelial or microvascular function after PCI.

[PMID: 21098449]
Secretory phospholipase A(2) (sPLA(2)) may play a role in myonecrosis after elective percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Inhibition of this enzyme may have a beneficial effect. The central hypothesis of this study was that treatment with varespladib, a small-molecule inhibitor of sPLA(2) would reduce postprocedural release of cardiac biomarkers after elective percutaneous coronary intervention. Between October 2007 and June 2009, 144 stable patients were randomized in a phase II trial to receive varespladib 500 mg PO BID or placebo 3 to 5 days before and for 5 days after elective percutaneous coronary intervention. The primary end point was elevation of troponin I or creatine kinase-MB above the upper limit of normal at 6 to 8 or 18 to 24 hours after percutaneous coronary intervention. Mean age was 63±10 and 64±10 years, with 38% and 42% with diabetes mellitus and 29% and 28% with prior myocardial infarction for the varespladib and placebo groups, respectively. The primary end point occurred in 75% of varespladib and 63% of placebo patients (P=0.14). Troponin I 3 times the upper limit of normal was observed in 57% and 50% (P=0.39) and creatine kinase-MB 2 times the upper limit of normal in 14% and 3% (P=0.018). Median (first and third quartiles) change in high-sensitivity C-reactive protein in these 2 groups was 0.65 mg/L (-0.18 and 1.48) and 0.70 mg/L (0.00 and 1.50) at 18 to 24 hours (P=0.81) and 0.20 mg/L (-0.70 and 1.40) and 0.60 mg/L (-0.12 and 1.72) at 3 to 5 days (P=0.23), whereas change in sPLA(2) activity at 3 to 5 days in a subset was -2.85 ng/ml (-3.40 and -1.85) and 0.25 ng/ml (-0.20 and 0.85) (P<0.001). Inhibition of sPLA(2) by varespladib administered for 3 to 5 days before the procedure does not reduce periprocedural myonecrosis associated with elective percutaneous coronary intervention. URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT00533039.

[PMID: 25533115]
Phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) are enzymes that hydrolyze the ester bond of glycerophospholipids releasing free fatty acids and lysophospholipids, including the arachidonic acid, the precursor of the eicosanoids and the inflammatory cascades. PLA(2) are present in the atherosclerotic plaques and their direct involvement in the proatherogenic inflammatory response is well documented. Epidemiological and genetic studies have demonstrated the correlation of the PLA(2) mass and enzymatic activity with the incidence of cardiovascular diseases. The potential pro-atherogenic role of PLA(2) led to the development of two small molecules, varespladib, a reversible sPLA(2) inhibitor, and darapladib, a selective Lp-PLA(2) inhibitor. Both molecules have demonstrated antiatherosclerotic properties in animal models, and positive effects on atherosclerotic plaque composition evaluated in phase 2 clinical trials. On these grounds, the results of three phase 3 studies have recently been published: the VISTA-16 study with varespladib in patients with acute coronary syndrome, and the STABILITY and SOLID-TIMI 52 studies with darapladib in patients with stable coronary heart disease and acute coronary syndrome, respectively. Unexpectedly, both studies did not demonstrate an additional protective action of PLA 2 inhibitors over the standard of care treatment with statins, antiplatelet drugs, and coronary revascularization. In the present article, the enzymatic properties and the involvement of sPLA(2) and Lp-PLA(2) in atherogenesis are reviewed, with a focus on the results of experimental studies and clinical studies with both varespladib and darapladib inhibitors.

[PMID: 24864079]
Atherothrombosis is no longer considered solely a disorder of lipoprotein accumulation in the arterial wall. Rather, the initiation and progression of atherosclerotic lesions is currently understood to have major inflammatory influences that encompass components of both the innate and acquired immune systems. Promising clinical data for 'upstream' biomarkers of inflammation such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) as well as 'downstream' biomarkers such as C-reactive protein, observations regarding cholesterol crystals as an activator of the IL-1β generating inflammasome, and recent Mendelian randomization data for the IL-6 receptor support the hypothesis that inflammatory mediators of atherosclerosis may converge on the central IL-1, tumour necrosis factor (TNF-α), IL-6 signalling pathway. On this basis, emerging anti-inflammatory approaches to vascular protection can be categorized into two broad groups, those that target the central IL-6 inflammatory signalling pathway and those that do not. Large-scale Phase III trials are now underway with agents that lead to marked reductions in IL-6 and C-reactive protein (such as canakinumab and methotrexate) as well as with agents that impact on diverse non-IL-6-dependent pathways (such as varespladib and darapladib). Both approaches have the potential to benefit patients and reduce vascular events. However, care should be taken when interpreting these trials as outcomes for agents that target IL-6 signalling are unlikely to be informative for therapies that target alternative pathways, and vice versa. As the inflammatory system is redundant, compensatory, and crucial for survival, evaluation of risks as well as benefits must drive the development of agents in this class.

[PMID: 24419257]
The VISTA-16 trial of varespladib, a secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) inhibitor, in patients with an acute coronary syndrome was terminated prematurely owing to futility and a signal towards harm. Despite these discouraging results, therapies that target inflammation to modify pathways in atherogenesis remain an area of active investigation.

[PMID: 21602519]
Secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2), which links surfactant catabolism and lung inflammation, is associated with lung stiffness, surfactant dysfunction, and degree of respiratory support in acute respiratory distress syndrome and in some forms of neonatal lung injury. Varespladib potently inhibits sPLA2 in animal models. The authors investigate varespladib ex vivo efficacy in different forms of neonatal lung injury. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was obtained from 40 neonates affected by hyaline membrane disease, infections, or meconium aspiration and divided in 4 aliquots added with increasing varespladib or saline. sPLA2 activity, proteins, and albumin were measured. Dilution was corrected with the urea ratio. Varespladib was also tested in vitro against pancreatic sPLA2 mixed with different albumin concentration. Varespladib was able to inhibit sPLA2 in the types of neonatal lung injury investigated. sPLA2 activity was reduced in hyaline membrane disease (P < .0001), infections (P = .003), and meconium aspiration (P = .04) using 40 µM varespladib; 10 µM was able to lower enzyme activity (P = .001), with an IC(50) of 87 µM. An inverse relationship existed between protein level and activity reduction (r = 0.5; P = .029). The activity reduction/protein ratio tended to be higher in hyaline membrane disease. Varespladib efficacy was higher in vitro than in lavage fluids obtained from neonates (P < .001).