[PMID: 23432975]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder (prevalence 1:125,000) characterised by broad thumbs and halluces, facial dysmorphism, psychomotor development delay, skeletal defects, abnormalities in the posterior fossa and short stature. The known genetic causes are point mutations or deletions of the cAMP-response element binding protein-BP (CREBBP) (50-60% of the cases) and of the homologous gene E1A-binding protein (EP300) (5%). We describe, for the first time in literature, a RTS Caucasian girl, 14-year-old, with growth hormone (GH) deficiency, pituitary hypoplasia, Arnold Chiari malformation type 1, double syringomyelic cavity and a novel CREBBP mutation (c.3546insCC). We hypothesize that CREBBP mutation we have identified in this patient could be responsible also for RTS atypical features as GH deficiency and pituitary hypoplasia.

[PMID: 16359492]
Mutations in the CREBBP (CREB-binding protein gene) cause Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). At present, however, genetic testing of CREBBP is not commonly applied in clinical settings because the currently available assays are technically and financially demanding, mainly because of the size of the gene. In the present study, we took advantage of a highly sensitive and specific, automated denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) technique. First, we developed a DHPLC-based protocol to analyze the entire coding region of CREBBP. Second, we analyzed genetic samples from 21 RSTS patients using DHPLC. The coding region was amplified by 41 primer pairs, all of which have the same cycling conditions, aliquoted on a 96-well format PCR plate. In this manner, all the exons were simultaneously amplified using a single block in a PCR machine. We then wrote a computer script to analyze all the PCR amplicons generated from various portions of the CREBBP gene in a serial manner at optimized conditions determined individually for each amplicon. Heterozygous CREBBP mutations were identified in 12 of the 21 patients: five frameshift mutations, three nonsense mutations, two splice-site mutations, and two missense mutations. The resulting detection rate of 57% was comparable to the outcome of previous studies. The relatively high detection rate in the present study demonstrates the enhanced sensitivity of the DHPLC-based mutation analysis, as exemplified by mutation analyses of other genes. The implementation of similar methodologies for other dysmorphic syndromes will help medical geneticists to confirm their clinical impressions and to provide accurate genetic counseling for patients and their families.

[PMID: 15706485]
CREB-binding protein and p300 function as transcriptional coactivators in the regulation of gene expression through various signal-transduction pathways. Both are potent histone acetyl transferases. A certain level of CREB-binding protein is essential for normal development, since inactivation of one allele causes Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). There is a direct link between loss of acetyl transferase activity and RSTS, which indicates that the disorder is caused by aberrant chromatin regulation. We screened the entire CREB-binding protein gene (CBP) for mutations in patients with RSTS by using methods that find point mutations and larger rearrangements. In 92 patients, we were able to identify a total of 36 mutations in CBP. By using multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification, we found not only several deletions but also the first reported intragenic duplication in a patient with RSTS. We extended the search for mutations to the EP300 gene and showed that mutations in EP300 also cause this disorder. These are the first mutations identified in EP300 for a congenital disorder.

[PMID: 20684013]
Familial Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is very rare. Here we report on the 6th and 7th case of inherited RTS. Family 1 presents with incomplete or mild RTS over three generations; a 13-year-old girl (proband 1) with mild but typical facial features and learning disabilities, her very mildly affected mother (proband 2), and the maternal grandmother (proband 3). Family 2 includes three females with classical RTS (probands 4-6) and their father (proband 7) with broad thumbs and halluces. Proband 5 also had a brain tumor (ganglioglioma) at the age of 3 years. In probands 1-3, direct sequencing identified a novel CREBBP missense mutation, c.2728A > G (predicting p.Thr910Ala), that was absent in non-affected family members. The p.Thr910Ala variant is outside the crucial histone acetyltransferase domain, and this may explain the mild and variable phenotype. In probands 4-7 we identified another novel CREBBP mutation, c.4134G > T, which alters the consensus splice sequence at position 1 of exon 25. The c.4134G > T mutation was transmitted from the very mildly affected father who displayed somatic mosaicism (with 38% mutated alleles in blood and 31% in buccal smear DNA) to his three daughters. Our findings emphasize that variable expression (family 1) and somatic mosaicism (family 2) contribute to the phenotypic variability of RTS. Somatic mosaicism may be more frequent in RTS than previously assumed. Accumulating data suggest a recurrence risk of approximately 0.5-1% for parents of a child with RTS, exceeding the so far estimated risk of approximately 0.1% for siblings.

[PMID: 18773673]
We report on a six-year-old boy with typical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) phenotype. Clinical findings included mental and motor retardation, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), undescended testes, hirsutism, broad thumbs with radial angulation and broad toes, and inguinal hernia. His karyotype was normal (46, XY) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed no deletion of the CREBBP [cAMP response element-binding (CREB) binding protein] gene on chromosome 16p13.3. CREBBP gene sequencing also revealed normal results. We wish to present this case because this patient had typical RSTS phenotype, but normal FISH and CREBBP gene sequencing results. It could be possible that genetic heterogeneity is related with novel mutations in other genes. With the publication of such cases, their significance will be brought to the attention of researchers in this field.

[PMID: 22991675]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome or Broad Thumb-Hallux syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by facial dysmorphism, growth retardation, and mental deficiency. A seven-year-old girl had come to the Department of Pedodontics, Istanbul Medipol University, Faculty of Dentistry, Turkey, with a complaint of caries and bleeding of gingivae. The patient was mentally retarded. Extraoral features revealed distinctive facial appearance with a broad fore head, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, and beaked nose. Intraoral features observed were talons cusps in the upper lateral incisors, carious teeth, and plaque accumulation. Since the patient was mentally retarded, the dental treatment was done under GA. The treatment plan and dental management of this patient are discussed in this case report.

[PMID: 7630403]
The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a well-defined syndrome with facial abnormalities, broad thumbs, broad big toes and mental retardation as the main clinical features. Many patients with RTS have been shown to have breakpoints in, and microdeletions of, chromosome 16p13.3 (refs 4-8). Here we report that all these breakpoints are restricted to a region that contains the gene for the human CREB binding protein (CBP), a nuclear protein participating as a co-activator in cyclic-AMP-regulated gene expression. We show that RTS results not only from gross chromosomal rearrangements of chromosome 16p, but also from point mutations in the CBP gene itself. Because the patients are heterozygous for the mutations, we propose that the loss of one functional copy of the CBP gene underlies the developmental abnormalities in RTS and possibly the propensity for malignancy.

[PMID: 14974086]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a well-defined syndrome characterized by facial abnormalities, broad thumbs, broad big toes, and growth and mental retardation as the main clinical features. RTS was shown to be associated with disruption of the CREB-binding protein gene CBP (CREBBP), either by gross chromosomal rearrangements or by point mutations. Translocations and inversions involving chromosome band 16p13.3 form the minority of CBP mutations, whereas microdeletions occur more frequently (about 10%). Most deletion studies in RTS are performed by FISH analysis, and five cosmids must be used to cover the whole of the CBP gene, which spreads over 150 kb. Here we report the design of gene dosage assays by real-time quantitative PCR that are targeted on three exons located respectively at the 5' end (exon 2), in the middle (exon 12), and at the 3' end (exon 30) of the CBP gene. This technique proved to be efficient and powerful in finding deletions and complementary to the other available techniques, since it allowed us to identify deletions at the 3' end of the gene that had been missed by FISH analysis, and to refine some deletion breakpoints. Our results therefore suggest that real-time quantitative PCR is a useful technique to be included in the deletion search in RTS patients.

[PMID: 20689175]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS), a developmental disorder comprising abnormalities that include mental retardation, an unusual facial appearance, broad thumbs and big toes is frequently associated with molecular lesions in the CREB-binding protein gene, CREBBP. The objective of the present study was to identify and analyse CREBBP mutations in Indian RSTS patients on which there are no data. Direct sequencing of CREBBP performed in 13 RSTS patients identified the three zinc fingers (CH1, CH2, CH3) and HAT domain as mutational hotspots in which ten novel pathogenic mutations were localized. Functional analysis revealed that three of these mutations affecting amino acids Glu1459, Leu1668 and Glu1724 were critical for histone acetyltransferase activity. Twenty-eight novel CREBBP single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were also identified in the Indian population. Linkage disequilibrium studies revealed associations between (i) SNP (rs129974/c.3836-206G greater than C) and mutation (p.Asp1340Ala); (ii) (rs130002) with mutation (p.Asn435Lys) and (iii) SNPs rs129974, rs130002 and SNP (c.3836-206G greater than C) signifying a disease affection status. In conclusion, the present study reports the highest detection rate of CREBBP mutations (76.9%) in RSTS patients to date, of which ten are predicted to be pathogenic and three critical for histone acetyltransferase activity. Moreover, identification of the association of CREBBP polymorphisms with disease susceptibility could be an important risk factor for the pathogenesis of RSTS.

[PMID: 22303793]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder and is characterized by mental retardation, distinctive facial features, broad and often angulated thumbs and great toes. We report on a 7 year old boy with classical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. His facial and clinical features were very typical, including broad thumbs with radial angulation and broad great toes. Rigorous genetic analysis of the CREBBP and EP300 genes using DNA sequencing and multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) revealed no causative mutation in this boy, only a hitherto unreported but paternally inherited heterozygous sequence alteration, c.506 1+9C>T in IVS 30-31, which most likely represents a normal variant (NetGene 2 splice prediction software). We question if this boy could have a hitherto undetectable mutation type.

[PMID: 22269667]
Chromosomal aberrations of chromosome 16 are uncommon and submicroscopic deletions have rarely been reported. At present, a cytogenetic or molecular abnormality can only be detected in 55% of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients, leaving the diagnosis in 45% of patients to rest on clinical features only. Interestingly, this microdeletion of 16 p13.3 was found in a young child with an unexplained syndromic condition due to an indistinct etiological diagnosis. To the best of our knowledge, no evidence of a microdeletion of 16 p13.3 with contiguous gene deletion, comprising cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response element-binding protein and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1 genes, has been described in typical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. We present the case of a three-year-old Malaysian Chinese girl with a de novo microdeletion on the short arm of chromosome 16, identified by oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic hybridization. Our patient showed mild to moderate global developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, bilateral broad thumbs and great toes, a moderate size atrial septal defect, hypotonia and feeding difficulties. A routine chromosome analysis on 20 metaphase cells showed a normal 46, XX karyotype. Further investigation by high resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization revealed a 120 kb microdeletion on chromosomal band 16 p13.3. A mutation or abnormality in the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response element-binding protein has previously been determined as a cause of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. However, microdeletion of 16 p13.3 comprising cyclic adenosine monophosphate-response element-binding protein and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1 genes is a rare scenario in the pathogenesis of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Additionally, due to insufficient coverage of the human genome by conventional techniques, clinically significant genomic imbalances may be undetected in unexplained syndromic conditions of young children. This case report demonstrates the ability of array-based comparative genomic hybridization to offer a genome-wide analysis at high resolution and provide information directly linked to the physical and genetic maps of the human genome. This will contribute to more accurate genetic counseling and provide further insight into the syndrome.