[PMID: 26206992]
Clathrin-independent endocytosis (CIE) is the process of cellular uptake of various particles, including pathogens, without the coat protein clathrin. It occurs commonly in mammalian cells and is regulated by protein-lipid composition of the cell membranes. Understanding of different routes of CIE allowed the identification of novel molecular mechanisms involved in uptake of molecules and cell signaling and explained their role in pathological processes. In this paper we characterize diseases associated with genetic defects of proteins involved in CIE and the relationship between expression of these proteins and pathology of atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes and neoplasia. The role of CIE in bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoal infections is also presented. In the second part we describe the plausible use of clathrin-independent endocytosis in increasing drug absorption, their penetration through biological membranes, and the design of specific nanocarriers for selective cell uptake.

[PMID: 2475643]
Clathrin plays an important role in many cellular processes, including endocytosis, secretion, and sorting of membranous organelles. Both the neuronal cell body and presynaptic terminals contain numerous coated vesicles, but few are detectable in the axonal regions that connect these two regions of the neuron. Clathrin heavy chains, light chains, and assembly proteins have all been shown to be axonally transported as part of slow component b (SCb). However, the paucity of coated vesicles present in the axon indicates the existence of a mechanism regulating clathrin coated assembly in vivo. A clathrin uncoating ATPase has been described that binds in stoichiometric amounts to clathrin and dissociates clathrin coats from vesicles in the presence of ATP in vitro. This clathrin uncoating ATPase is a major cytosolic protein of Mr 70 kD in bovine brain, forming 1% of soluble brain protein, and appears to be homologous with a constitutively expressed 70 kd heat shock protein (HSC70). We report here that a major 70 kD protein present in the SCb rate component of axonal transport is identical with HSC70 by both biochemical and immunochemical criteria. The cotransport of HSC70 with clathrin in SCb of axonal transport is consistent with a role for HSC70 in vivo in the regulation of clathrin function during axonal transport.

[PMID: 28814502]
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a major regulator of cell-surface protein internalization. Clathrin and other proteins assemble into small invaginating structures at the plasma membrane termed clathrin-coated pits (CCPs) that mediate vesicle formation. In addition, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is regulated by its accumulation within CCPs. Given the diversity of proteins regulated by clathrin-mediated endocytosis, how this process may distinctly regulate specific receptors is a key question. We examined the selective regulation of clathrin-dependent EGFR signaling and endocytosis. We find that perturbations of phospholipase Cγ1 (PLCγ1), Ca<sup>2+</sup>, or protein kinase C (PKC) impair clathrin-mediated endocytosis of EGFR, the formation of CCPs harboring EGFR, and EGFR signaling. Each of these manipulations was without effect on the clathrin-mediated endocytosis of transferrin receptor (TfR). EGFR and TfR were recruited to largely distinct clathrin structures. In addition to control of initiation and assembly of CCPs, EGF stimulation also elicited a Ca<sup>2+</sup>- and PKC-dependent reduction in synaptojanin1 recruitment to clathrin structures, indicating broad control of CCP assembly by Ca<sup>2+</sup> signals. Hence EGFR elicits PLCγ1-calcium signals to facilitate formation of a subset of CCPs, thus modulating its own signaling and endocytosis. This provides evidence for the versatility of CCPs to control diverse cellular processes.

[PMID: 28117435]
Endocytosis is a crucial cellular process in eukaryotic cells which involves clathrin and/or adaptor proteins, lipid kinases, phosphatases and the actin cytoskeleton. Verprolin proteins, such as Vrp1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, are conserved family proteins that regulate actin binding and endocytosis. Here, we identified and characterized MoVrp1 as the yeast Vrp1 homolog in Magnaporthe oryzae. Deletion of the MoVRP1 gene resulted in defects in vegetative growth, asexual development, and infection of the host plant. The ∆Movrp1 mutants also exhibited decreased extracellular peroxidase and laccase activities and showed defects in colony pigmentation, hyphal surface hydrophobicity, cell wall integrity, autophagy, endocytosis, and secretion of avirulent effector. Our studies provided new evidences that MoVrp1 involved in actin cytoskeleton is important for growth, morphogenesis, cellular trafficking, and fungal pathogenesis.

[PMID: 27028652]
Endocytosis mediated by clathrin, a cellular process by which cells internalize membrane receptors and their extracellular ligands, is an important component of cell signaling regulation. Actin polymerization is involved in endocytosis in varying degrees depending on the cellular context. In yeast, clathrin-mediated endocytosis requires a pulse of polymerized actin and its regulators, which recruit and activate the Arp2/3 complex. In this article, we seek to identify the main protein-protein interactions that 1) cause actin and its regulators to appear in pulses, and 2) determine the effects of key mutations and drug treatments on actin and regulator assembly. We perform a joint modeling/experimental study of actin and regulator dynamics during endocytosis in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We treat both a stochastic model that grows an explicit three-dimensional actin network, and a simpler two-variable Fitzhugh-Nagumo type model. The models include a negative-feedback interaction of F-actin onto the Arp2/3 regulators. Both models explain the pulse time courses and the effects of interventions on actin polymerization: the surprising increase in the peak F-actin count caused by reduced regulator branching activity, the increase in F-actin resulting from slowing of actin disassembly, and the increased Arp2/3 regulator lifetime resulting from latrunculin treatment. In addition, they predict that decreases in the regulator branching activity lead to increases in accumulation of regulators, and we confirmed this prediction with experiments on yeast harboring mutations in the Arp2/3 regulators, using quantitative fluorescence microscopy. Our experimental measurements suggest that the regulators act quasi-independently, in the sense that accumulation of a particular regulator is most strongly affected by mutations of that regulator, as opposed to the others.

[PMID: 6310570]
Receptor-mediated endocytosis proceeds by transfer of receptor-ligand complexes from clathrin-coated pits at the cell surface to uncoated endocytic vesicles termed receptosomes (or endosomes). These vesicles have now been purified more than 37-fold based on their content of newly internalized epidermal growth factor. 125I-labeled EGF was bound to human KB carcinoma cells at 4 degrees C, and then the cells were warmed to 37 degrees C for 8 min and disrupted. The purification scheme involved density gradient centrifugation on colloidal silica and sucrose and gel filtration on Sephacryl S-1000. Relative to homogenate, receptosomes are enriched 4.3-fold in their cholesterol content and depleted in enzyme markers for plasma membranes (2- to 3-fold) and lysosomes (9-fold). Receptosomes have a polypeptide composition that is different from plasma membrane, lysosome, and other homogenate fractions. They are enriched in transferrin receptors (30-fold) and in unidentified Mr 70,000-75,000 glycoprotein(s); they contain phosphomannosyl receptors. They do not contain detectable amounts of clathrin.

[PMID: 23384308]
Endocytosis is an essential cellular process in eukaryotic cells that involves concordant functions of clathrin and adaptor proteins, various protein and lipid kinases, phosphatases and the actin cytoskeleton. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Ark1p is a member of the serine/threonine protein kinase (SPK) family that affects profoundly the organization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton. To study the function of MoArk1, an Ark1p homologue identified in Magnaporthe oryzae, we disrupted the MoARK1 gene and characterized the ΔMoark1 mutant strain. The ΔMoark1 mutant exhibited various defects ranging from mycelial growth and conidial formation to appressorium-mediated host infection. The ΔMoark1 mutant also exhibited decreased appressorium turgor pressure and attenuated virulence on rice and barley. In addition, the ΔMoark1 mutant displayed defects in endocytosis and formation of the Spitzenkörper, and was hyposensitive to exogenous oxidative stress. Moreover, a MoArk1-green fluorescent protein (MoArk1-GFP) fusion protein showed an actin-like localization pattern by localizing to the apical regions of hyphae. This pattern of localization appeared to be regulated by the N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) proteins MoSec22 and MoVam7. Finally, detailed analysis revealed that the proline-rich region within the MoArk1 serine/threonine kinase (S_TKc) domain was critical for endocytosis, subcellular localization and pathogenicity. These results collectively suggest that MoArk1 exhibits conserved functions in endocytosis and actin cytoskeleton organization, which may underlie growth, cell wall integrity and virulence of the fungus.

[PMID: 19793827]
Clathrin is involved in the endocytosis and exocytosis of cellular proteins and the process of virus infection. We have previously demonstrated that large hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg-L) functions as a clathrin adaptor, but the detailed mechanisms of clathrin involvement in the morphogenesis of hepatitis delta virus (HDV) are not clear. In this study, we found that clathrin heavy chain (CHC) is a key determinant in the morphogenesis of HDV. HDAg-L with a single amino acid substitution at the clathrin box retained nuclear export activity but failed to interact with CHC and to assemble into virus-like particles. Downregulation of CHC function by a dominant-negative mutant or by short hairpin RNA reduced the efficiency of HDV assembly, but not the secretion of hepatitis B virus subviral particles. In addition, the coexistence of a cell-permeable peptide derived from the C terminus of HDAg-L significantly interfered with the intracellular transport of HDAg-L. HDAg-L, small HBsAg, and CHC were found to colocalize with the trans-Golgi network and were highly enriched on clathrin-coated vesicles. Furthermore, genotype II HDV, which assembles less efficiently than genotype I HDV does, has a putative clathrin box in its HDAg-L but interacted only weakly with CHC. The assembly efficiency of the various HDV genotypes correlates well with the CHC-binding activity of their HDAg-Ls and coincides with the severity of disease outcome. Thus, the clathrin box and the nuclear export signal at the C terminus of HDAg-L are potential new molecular targets for HDV therapy.

[PMID: 6888541]
When many ligands bind to cell-surface receptors, ligand-receptor complexes are internalized via clathrin coated pits by a process called receptor-mediated endocytosis. The cytoplasmic fate of ligands internalized within endocytic vesicles or endosomes is variable. For example, maternal immunoglobulins are transported through the cytoplasm of neonatal intestinal epithelial cells and are exocytosed at the basolateral surface. However, other ligands are degraded as a result of their delivery to the lysosomal compartment of cells. Although the translocation of endosomes to the Golgi region in the cell centre seems to be a general phenomenon presumably coupled to ligand degradation by lysosomes and endosomes and lysosomes undergo saltatory movements within the cytoplasm, the spatial control of interaction between the two structures is not understood. To address this problem we have begun to examine the spatial and temporal intracellular distribution of endosomes and lysosomes. Utilizing a new fluorescent microscopic approach, we have now been able simultaneously to visualize endosome and lysosome populations in living cells. Our results suggest that a specific relocation of lysosomes is rapidly induced upon binding of different types of ligands to the cell surface; this migration of lysosomes to the Golgi region of the cell precedes the translocation of endosomes into the same area.

[PMID: 29035746]
The nano-sized poly(lactic acid)-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLA-PEG) particles with core-shell structure were efficiently prepared by using coaxial tri-capillary electrospray-template removal method. The cellular uptake mechanism, intracellular distribution and exocytosis in A549 cell model of electrosprayed PLA-PEG nanoparticles were systemically studied. The drug release behavior of electrosprayed PLA-PEG nanoparticles were also investigated. Our results showed that PLA-PEG nanoparticles can be endocytosed quickly by A549 cells. The cellular uptake of PLA-PEG nanoparticles was an energy dependent endocytosis process. Caveolae-mediated endocytosis was only one of endocytosis pathways in A549 cells for PLA-PEG nanoparticles, while clathrin mediated endocytosis was not involved in the endocytosis process. The endocytosed PLA-PEG nanoparticles enriched in the head of A549 cells and only a small amount of them was transported into lysosome after 24h incubation. These findings provided insights into the application of electrosprayed PLA-PEG nanoparticles in nano drug delivery field.

[PMID: 29511054]
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) is a cellular trafficking process in which cargoes and lipids are internalized from the plasma membrane into vesicles coated with clathrin and adaptor proteins. CME is essential for many developmental and physiological processes in plants, but its underlying mechanism is not well characterized compared with that in yeast and animal systems. Here, we searched for new factors involved in CME in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> by performing tandem affinity purification of proteins that interact with clathrin light chain, a principal component of the clathrin coat. Among the confirmed interactors, we found two putative homologs of the clathrin-coat uncoating factor auxilin previously described in non-plant systems. Overexpression of AUXILIN-LIKE1 and AUXILIN-LIKE2 in Arabidopsis caused an arrest of seedling growth and development. This was concomitant with inhibited endocytosis due to blocking of clathrin recruitment after the initial step of adaptor protein binding to the plasma membrane. By contrast, <i>auxilin-like1/2</i> loss-of-function lines did not present endocytosis-related developmental or cellular phenotypes under normal growth conditions. This work contributes to the ongoing characterization of the endocytotic machinery in plants and provides a robust tool for conditionally and specifically interfering with CME in Arabidopsis.