[PMID: 34474834]
Malaria is the most common parasitic disease around the world, especially in tropical and sub-tropical regions. This parasitic disease can have a rapid and severe evolution. It is transmitted by female anopheline mosquitoes. There is no reliable vaccine or diagnostic test against malaria; instead, Artesunate is used for the treatment of severe malaria and Artemisinin is used for uncomplicated falciparum malaria. However, these treatments are not efficient against severe malaria and improvements are needed. Primaquine (PQ) is one of the most widely used antimalarial drugs. It is the only available drug to date for combating the relapsing form of malaria. Nevertheless, it has severe side effects. Particle drug-delivery systems present the ability to enhance the therapeutic properties of drugs and decrease their side effects. Here, we report the development of Polymeric Primaquine Microparticles (PPM) labeled with 99mTc for therapeutic strategy against malaria infection. The amount of primaquine encapsulated into the PPM was 79.54%. PPM presented a mean size of 929.47 ± 37.72 nm, with a PDI of 0.228 ± 0.05 showing a homogeneous size for the microparticles and a monodispersive behavior. Furthermore, the biodistribution test showed that primaquine microparticles have a high liver accumulation. In vivo experiments using mice show that the PPM treatments resulted in partial efficacy and protection against the development of the parasite compared to free Primaquine. These results suggest that microparticles drug delivery systems of primaquine could be a possible approach for malaria prevention and treatment.

[PMID: 34216464]
The effect of primaquine in preventing Plasmodium vivax relapses from dormant stages is well established. For Plasmodium ovale, the relapse characteristics and the use of primaquine is not as well studied. We set to evaluate the relapsing properties of these 2 species, in relation to primaquine use among imported malaria cases in a nonendemic setting. We performed a nationwide retrospective study of malaria diagnosed in Sweden 1995-2019, by reviewing medical records of 3254 cases. All episodes of P. vivax (n = 972) and P. ovale (n = 251) were selected for analysis. First time relapses were reported in 80/857 (9.3%) P. vivax and 9/220 (4.1%) P. ovale episodes, respectively (P < .01). Without primaquine, the risk for relapse was higher in P. vivax, 20/60 (33.3%), compared to 3/30 (10.0%) in P. ovale (hazard ratio [HR] 3.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.0-12.0). In P. vivax, patients prescribed primaquine had a reduced risk of relapse compared to episodes without relapse preventing treatment, 7.1% vs 33.3% (HR 0.2, 95% CI .1-.3). In P. ovale, the effect of primaquine on the risk of relapse did not reach statistical significance, with relapses seen in 2.8% of the episodes compared to 10.0% in patients not receiving relapse preventing treatment (HR 0.3, 95% CI .1-1.1). The risk of relapse was considerably lower in P. ovale than in P. vivax infections indicating different relapsing features between the two species. Primaquine was effective in preventing P. vivax relapse. In P. ovale, relapse episodes were few, and the supportive evidence for primaquine remains limited.

[PMID: 4625625]
The growth of a strain of Bacillus megaterium was prevented by a minimal inhibitory concentration of primaquine of 52 mug/ml or 2 x 10(-4)m. When exponentially growing cultures received the drug at 6 x 10(-4)m, the rate of growth was drastically reduced and no further growth occurred after 15 min of exposure. At this concentration, primaquine was bactericidal, causing a 50% reduction in the viable population after one doubling time of 45 min. Supplying primaquine to cultures 30 min after adding radioactive-labeled phenylalanine, thymidine, uracil, or diaminopimelic acid produced an immediate and complete inhibition of protein biosynthesis but no inhibition of deoxyribonucleic acid biosynthesis for at least 15 min, and caused the formation of ribonucleic acid and cell wall polymer to proceed linearly at rates similar to those established prior to the addition of drug. This pattern of inhibition of macromolecular biosyntheses suggests that the major in vivo action of primaquine in B. megaterium is to block protein synthesis.

[PMID: 1475854]
It has been shown elsewhere that the epidermal growth factor (EGF) in A431 cells can recycle in receptor-bound state (Teslenko et al., 1987; Sorkin et al., 1989, 1991). Present study deals with the action of primaquine, a lysosomotropic agent, on EGF-receptor complexes (EGF-RC). By the method of indirect immunofluorescence with anti-EGF-R monoclonal antibody it is found that following a 1 h incubation of cells at 37 degrees C in the presence of EGF a bright staining of endosomes appears in the intranuclear region, while after incubation of the cells at 4 degrees only margins of cells are stained. Such a pattern of fluorescence is peculiar of endocytosis in A431 cells. When the cells were incubated in the presence of a 0.3 mM primaquine for 1 h, the immunostaining is changed: bright compact spot in the para-Golgi region appeared. The effect of primaquine is reversible. When the cells after preincubation with EGF were incubated in the absence of EGF for 3 h at 37 degrees C, the staining of cell margins could be observed again, demonstrating the recycling of EGF-RC. Under similar conditions of cell incubation, but in the presence of primaquine, the staining of the para-Golgi region was not changed. In the experiments with 125I-EGF it was shown that intracellular accumulations of 125I-EGF were maintained when the cells were incubated in the presence of 0.3 mM primaquine. It is concluded that primaquine inhibits the recycling of EGF-R in A431 cells.

[PMID: 34546758]
Hemolytic toxicity caused by primaquine (PQ) is a high-risk condition that hampers the wide use of PQ to treat liver-stage malaria. This study demonstrated that phospholipid-free small unilamellar vesicles (PFSUVs) composed of Tween80 and cholesterol could encapsulate and deliver PQ to the hepatocytes with reduced exposure to the red blood cells (RBCs). Nonionic surfactant (Tween80) and cholesterol-forming SUVs with a mean diameter of 50 nm were fabricated for delivering PQ. Drug release/retention, drug uptake by RBCs, pharmacokinetics, and liver uptake of PFSUVs-PQ were evaluated in <i>in</i><i>vitro</i> and <i>in</i><i>vivo</i> models in comparison to free drugs. Additionally, the stress effect on RBCs induced by free PQ and PFSUVs-PQ was evaluated by examining RBC morphology. PFSUVs provided >95% encapsulation efficiency for PQ at a drug-to-lipid ratio of 1:20 (w/w) and stably retained the drug in the presence of serum. When incubated with RBCs, PQ uptake in the PFSUVs group was reduced by 4- to 8-folds compared to free PQ. As a result, free PQ induced significant RBC morphology changes, while PFSUVs-PQ showed no such adverse effect. Intravenously (i.v.) delivered PFSUVs-PQ produced a comparable plasma profile as free PQ, given i.v. and orally, while the liver uptake was increased by 4.8 and 1.6-folds, respectively, in mice. Within the liver, PFSUVs selectively targeted the hepatocytes, with no significant blood or liver toxicity in mice. PFSUVs effectively targeted PQ to the liver and reduced RBC uptake compared to free PQ, leading to reduced RBC toxicity. PFSUVs exhibited potential in improving the efficacy of PQ for treating liver-stage malaria.

[PMID: 34257648]
Primaquine (PQ) not only eliminates <i>P. falciparum</i> gametocytes but also kills liver dormant forms of <i>P. vivax</i> and <i>P. ovale</i>. Owing to these unique therapeutic properties, it is an essential drug. Although PQ has been used for over 70 years, its toxicological database has gaps such as the absence of studies on its reproductive and developmental toxicity and kinetics in pregnancy. This study investigated the transplacental transfer of PQ and the effects of intrauterine exposure on the postnatal growth, survival, and neurobehavioral development of the offspring. PQ kinetics and transplacental transfer were investigated in rats treated orally (40 mg.kg·bw<sup>-1</sup>) on gestation day (GD) 21. PQ was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography with diode array ultraviolet detection. To evaluate effects of intrauterine exposure on postnatal development, dams were treated orally with PQ (20 mg.kg·bw<sup>-1</sup>·d<sup>-1</sup>) or water (controls) on GD 0-21. Postnatal survival, body weight gain, somatic maturation, and reflex acquisition were evaluated. The open field test (OF) was conducted on PND 25. PQ concentration in the fetal plasma was nearly half that in maternal plasma. Except for increase in pregnancy loss, no effects of PQ were noted at term pregnancy and first days of life. Prenatal PQ did not affect postnatal weight gain nor did it impair somatic and neurologic development of the offspring. Pups born to PQ-treated dams showed reduced exploration and enhanced emotionality in the OF. PQ given in pregnancy, at doses greater than those recommended for malaria therapy, may affect pup postnatal survival and emotional behavior.

[PMID: 1657920]
The lysosomotropic amine primaquine has previously been shown to inhibit both secretory and recycling processes of cells in culture. We have used a cell-free assay that reconstitutes glycoprotein transport through the Golgi apparatus to investigate the mechanism of action of primaquine. In this assay, primaquine inhibits protein transport at a half-maximal concentration of 50 microM, similar to the concentration previously reported to disrupt protein secretion in cultured cells. Kinetic analysis of primaquine inhibition indicates that its point of action is at an early step in the vesicular transport mechanism. Primaquine does not inhibit the fusion of vesicles already attached to their target membranes. Primaquine irreversibly inactivates the membranes that form transport vesicles (donor), but not the membranes that are the destination of those vesicles (acceptor). Morphological data indicate that primaquine inhibits the budding of vesicles from the donor membranes. Once formed, the vesicles are refractile to primaquine action, and their attachment to and fusion with acceptor membranes proceeds unimpeded. In addition to illuminating the mechanism of action of primaquine, this study suggests that the selective action of this agent will make it a useful tool in the study of the formation of transport vesicles.

[PMID: 31217011]
The challenge in anti-malarial chemotherapy is based on the emergence of resistance to drugs and the search for medicines against all stages of the life cycle of Plasmodium spp. as a therapeutic target. Nowadays, many molecules with anti-malarial activity are reported. However, few studies about the cellular and molecular mechanisms to understand their mode of action have been explored. Recently, new primaquine-based hybrids as new molecules with potential multi-acting anti-malarial activity were reported and two hybrids of primaquine linked to quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide (PQ-QdNO) were identified as the most active against erythrocytic, exoerythrocytic and sporogonic stages. To further understand the anti-malarial mode of action (MA) of these hybrids, hepg2-CD81 were infected with Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL and treated with PQ-QdNO hybrids during 48 h. After were evaluated the production of ROS, the mitochondrial depolarization, the total glutathione content, the DNA damage and proteins related to oxidative stress and death cell. In a preliminary analysis as tissue schizonticidals, these hybrids showed a mode of action dependent on peroxides production, but independent of the activation of transcription factor p53, mitochondrial depolarization and arrest cell cycle. Primaquine-quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide hybrids exert their antiplasmodial activity in the exoerythrocytic phase by generating high levels of oxidative stress which promotes the increase of total glutathione levels, through oxidation stress sensor protein DJ-1. In addition, the role of HIF1a in the mode of action of quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide is independent of biological activity.

[PMID: 698128]
Four amphipathic drugs, primaquine, propranolol, chlorpromazine and tetracaine, were used to cause endocytosis in glucose-depleted red cells, and the relative reduction of membrane surfaces was measured by the toluidine blue (TB) method. The TB measurements correlated well with the observed electron microscopic alterations. In vitro blood storage studies indicated loss of cell membrane during storage correlated with decreasing uptake of TB by the red cells. Regeneration of cellular ATP with adenosine did not always restore TB uptake by the cells. Loss of red blood cell membrane either by exocytosis or endocytosis may occur during normal in vivo or in vitro ageing, and may be increased in pathological states or by the action of drugs.

[PMID: 28289025]
Low-dose primaquine is recommended to prevent <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> malaria transmission in areas threatened by artemisinin resistance and areas aiming for malaria elimination. Community treatment campaigns with artemisinin-based combination therapy in combination with the gametocytocidal primaquine dose target all age groups, but no studies thus far have assessed the pharmacokinetics of this gametocytocidal drug in African children. We recruited 40 children participating in a primaquine efficacy trial in Burkina Faso to study primaquine pharmacokinetics. These children received artemether-lumefantrine and either a 0.25- or a 0.40-mg/kg primaquine dose. Seven blood samples were collected from each participant for primaquine and carboxy-primaquine plasma levels determinations: one sample was collected before primaquine administration and six after primaquine administration according to partially overlapping sampling schedules. Physiological population pharmacokinetic modeling was used to assess the impact of weight, age, and <i>CYP2D6</i> genotype on primaquine and carboxy-primaquine pharmacokinetics. Despite linear weight normalized dosing, the areas under the plasma concentration-time curves and the peak concentrations for both primaquine and carboxy-primaquine increased with age and body weight. Children who were CYP2D6 poor metabolizers had higher levels of the parent compound, indicating a lower primaquine CYP2D6-mediated metabolism. Our data indicate that primaquine and carboxy-primaquine pharmacokinetics are influenced by age, weight, and <i>CYP2D6</i> genotype and suggest that dosing strategies may have to be reconsidered to maximize the transmission-blocking properties of primaquine. (This study has been registered at ClinicalTrials.gov under registration no. NCT01935882.).

[PMID: 10501629]
The cytoadherence of four Plasmodium falciparum malaria isolates (FCR-3, RSA-14, 15 and 17) to monocytes was used as a measure of the expression of monocyte receptors after the monocytes had been exposed to seven antimalarial drugs. Quinine, chloroquine, primaquine, pyrimethamine, artemesinin, mefloquine and proguanil all down-regulated the expression of monocyte receptors by 40% or greater at the therapeutic concentrations of each drug. Each malaria isolate had a unique adherence profile for drug induced changes in monocytes. Each drug appeared to alter the expression of more than one monocyte receptor. The most effective drugs were quinine, pyrimethamine and palludrin and the least effective were artemether and mefloquine. The results suggest a previously undetected immunomodulatory action of antimalarial drugs.