[PMID: 18482556]
With the introduction of cervical screening programs, the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer has been drastically reduced. Techniques such as the traditional Papanicolaou test and the newer liquid-based cytology allow for the early detection of cervical abnormalities prior to the development of invasive cervical cancer. As oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is necessary for cervical cancer, HPV-DNA testing has also been proposed as a routine screening method for the general population. Screening limitations, such as adherence, test sensitivity and specificity, access, and cost-effectiveness are reflected in current screening guidelines. The development of prophylactic cervical cancer vaccines is a major milestone in cervical cancer prevention. These vaccines protect against the initial infection of certain oncogenic HPV types, and therefore prevent the development of cervical dysplasia, precancerous lesions, and cervical cancer. Considering routine cervical cancer vaccination in adolescent girls, screening guidelines must adapt in order to retain efficient and cost-effective prevention measures. Although the true epidemiological and economic impact of cervical cancer vaccines cannot be immediately realized, mathematical models predict various scenarios in which vaccination, in addition to cervical screening, will be cost-effective and further reduce cervical cancer disease.

[PMID: 19901442]
Cervical cancer is the second-most common cancer in women worldwide causing most cancer related deaths in women in developing countries including India. The most predominant etiological factor for cervical cancer is persistent infection of certain high-risk types of human papillomaviruses (HR-HPVs), while low-risk types are associated with benign cervical lesions and genital warts. In India, the most common (98%) oncogenic types are HPV types 16 and 18 with HPV 16 exclusively (80-90%) prevalent. Two recently developed virus-like particle (VLP) based prophylactic HPV vaccines, quadrivalent Gardasil (HPV 16/18/6/11) and Cervarix (HPV 16/18) offer great promise. Several other therapeutic vaccines are also in clinical trials and are yet to establish their efficacy. The use of already developed VLP vaccines in resource-poor regions is limited by several factors, most importantly the high cost of the vaccine. Therefore efforts are being made in India to develop cost-effective second-generation vaccines. Besides cost, there are several socio-cultural and ethical issues involved with the implementation of already developed vaccines including the acceptability of HPV vaccination by preadolescent girls and their parents in India.

[PMID: 19901441]
Four-fifths of the cervical cancer burden in the world is experienced in developing countries. HPV genotypes 16 and 18 account for 70 per cent of cervical cancers and currently available vaccines targeting these two types confer a high degree of protection against HPV 16/18 infection and related cervical precancerous lesions. However, widespread implementation of HPV vaccination programs are challenged by the unaffordable high costs of the vaccines and the lack of effective vaccine delivery platforms for sexually naïve girls. Other unresolved issues include long-term protection, cross-protection against HPV types not included in the vaccine and whether booster doses will be needed. Sensitivities associated with a vaccine preventing a sexually transmitted infection in girls, lack of awareness, public demand and political will, lack of coordination between cancer control, sexual and reproductive health and vaccine delivery services are additional challenges. Reduced costs, simple vaccine regimes and strengthening vaccine delivery platforms for adolescents should eventually facilitate HPV vaccine introduction in developing countries.

[PMID: 18055075]
We examined the potential health outcomes and cost-effectiveness of quadrivalent human papillomavirus (HPV) 6/11/16/18 vaccination strategies in the Mexican population using a multi-HPV type dynamic transmission model. Assuming similar cervical screening practices, with or without vaccination, we examined the incremental cost-effectiveness of vaccination strategies for 12 year-old females, with or without male vaccination, and temporary age 12-24 catch-up vaccination for females or both sexes. The most effective strategy therein was vaccination of 12-year-olds, plus a temporary 12-24-year-old catch-up program covering both sexes; whereby HPV 6/11/16/18-related cervical cancer, high-grade cervical precancer, and genital wart incidence was reduced by 84-98% during year 50 following vaccine introduction. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios in the primary analyses ranged from approximately 3000 dollars (U.S.) per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained for female vaccination strategies to approximately 16000 dollars /QALY for adding male vaccination with catch-up.

[PMID: 21245659]
The discovery that the Human PapillomaVirus (HPV) is the necessary cause of cervical cancer has led to the development of prophylactic vaccines. Cervical cancer is the second most common cause of death from cancer among young women in Europe: mortality is still high, despite its important reduction due to screening programs for early detection. Besides cervical cancer, HPV is responsible for a significant proportion of other anogenital cancers and an increasing number of oropharyngeal cancers, representing together an at least equal burden compared to cervical cancer. HPV is also responsible for conditions such as condyloma acuminata (genital warts) and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis. Organized vaccination programs against HPV have the potential to prevent about 70% of cervical cancers and the vast majority of the other HPV-related conditions. Recommendations for HPV vaccination of at least one cohort of females have been issued in nearly all western European countries, and national/regional publicly funded vaccination programs have been introduced in most of them. Different approaches have been chosen for the implementation of HPV vaccination, based on the organization of each country's health care system. A brief outline of these programs in Europe is presented. As for all preventive public health interventions, high coverage of the target population with HPV vaccines pre-exposure is essential to achieve maximum reduction of cases: therefore, in order to obtain the maximum and most equitable coverage and future benefit, programs targeting adolescents before exposure to HPV should be preferred and population-based. Catch-up programs should also be implemented wherever possible, in order to deliver more and even earlier benefits, and effective communication strategies need to be adopted.

[PMID: 17318575]
Prophylactic HPV vaccination provides an opportunity to profoundly affect cervical cancer incidence worldwide. The quadrivalent HPV VLP 6, 11, 16, 18 vaccine (Gardasil) and the bivalent HPV VLP 16, 18 vaccine (Cervarix) are effective for prevention of HPV infection and cervical precancerous lesions. The quadrivalent vaccine is also effective for prevention of vulvar and vaginal lesions and genital warts. With the introduction of the vaccines general issues have to be raised such as optimal age for vaccination, duration of protection after vaccination, impact on cervical cancer screening, vaccination of males and feasibility of application to developing countries. The prospects of a vaccine which will protect against the most common viral sexually transmitted infection and thereby, protect against the complications of HPV infection such as cervical cancer is extremely appealing. The success of HPV vaccination as a major public health prevention opportunity, however, will entirely depend on efficient infrastructures to deliver the vaccines and on the acceptance by individuals, parents and health care providers.

[PMID: 20593935]
Cervical cancers (CC) demonstrate the second highest incidence of female cancers in Malaysia. The costs of chronic management have a high impact on nation's health cost and patient's quality of life that can be avoided by better screening and HPV vaccination. Respondents were interviewed from six public Gynecology-Oncology hospitals. Methods include experts' panel discussions to estimate treatment costs by severity and direct interviews with respondents using costing and SF-36 quality of life (QOL) questionnaires. Three options were compared i.e. screening via Pap smear; quadrivalent HPV Vaccination and combined strategy (screening plus vaccination). Scenario based sensitivity analysis using screening population coverage (40-80%) and costs of vaccine (RM 300-400/dose) were calculated. 502 cervical pre invasive and invasive cervical cancer (ICC) patients participated in the study. Mean age was 53.3 +/- 11.2 years, educated till secondary level (39.4%), Malays (44.2%) and married for 27.73 +/- 12.1 years. Life expectancy gained from vaccination is 13.04 years and average Quality Adjusted Life Years saved (QALYs) is 24.4 in vaccinated vs 6.29 in unvaccinated. Cost/QALYs for Pap smear at base case is RM 1,214.96/QALYs and RM 1,100.01 at increased screening coverage; for HPV Vaccination base case is at RM 35,346.79 and RM 46,530.08 when vaccination price is higher. In combined strategy, base case is RM 11,289.58; RM 7,712.74 at best case and RM 14,590.37 at worst case scenario. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) showed that screening at 70% coverage or higher is highly cost effective at RM 946.74 per QALYs saved and this is followed by combined strategy at RM 35,346.67 per QALYs saved. Vaccination increase life expectancy with better QOL of women when cancer can be avoided. Cost effective strategies will include increasing the Pap smear coverage to 70% or higher. Since feasibility and long term screening adherence is doubtful among Malaysian women, vaccination of young women is a more cost effective strategy against cervical cancers.

[PMID: 18716299]
The cost-effectiveness of prophylactic vaccination against human papillomavirus types 16 (HPV-16) and 18 (HPV-18) is an important consideration for guidelines for immunization in the United States. We synthesized epidemiologic and demographic data using models of HPV-16 and HPV-18 transmission and cervical carcinogenesis to compare the health and economic outcomes of vaccinating preadolescent girls (at 12 years of age) and vaccinating older girls and women in catch-up programs (to 18, 21, or 26 years of age). We examined the health benefits of averting other HPV-16-related and HPV-18-related cancers, the prevention of HPV-6-related and HPV-11-related genital warts and juvenile-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis by means of the quadrivalent vaccine, the duration of immunity, and future screening practices. On the assumption that the vaccine provided lifelong immunity, the cost-effectiveness ratio of vaccination of 12-year-old girls was $43,600 per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained, as compared with the current screening practice. Under baseline assumptions, the cost-effectiveness ratio for extending a temporary catch-up program for girls to 18 years of age was $97,300 per QALY; the cost of extending vaccination of girls and women to the age of 21 years was $120,400 per QALY, and the cost for extension to the age of 26 years was $152,700 per QALY. The results were sensitive to the duration of vaccine-induced immunity; if immunity waned after 10 years, the cost of vaccination of preadolescent girls exceeded $140,000 per QALY, and catch-up strategies were less cost-effective than screening alone. The cost-effectiveness ratios for vaccination strategies were more favorable if the benefits of averting other health conditions were included or if screening was delayed and performed at less frequent intervals and with more sensitive tests; they were less favorable if vaccinated girls were preferentially screened more frequently in adulthood. The cost-effectiveness of HPV vaccination will depend on the duration of vaccine immunity and will be optimized by achieving high coverage in preadolescent girls, targeting initial catch-up efforts to women up to 18 or 21 years of age, and revising screening policies.

[PMID: 23016781]
It will likely be more than 20 years before there is unequivocal evidence available that HPV vaccination decreases the incidence of invasive cervical cancer. However, existing data strongly suggests that as many as 440,000 cervical cancer cases and 220,000 deaths due to this malignancy will be prevented with the establishment of an effective worldwide HPV immunization program.

[PMID: 19200838]
Cervical screening has resulted in a major reduction in the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer in the UK and other developed countries. Nevertheless approximately 2700 women present with cervical cancer in the UK each year with mortality in excess of 1000 cases. Prophylactic HPV vaccination against HPV 16 and 18 has been shown to be highly effective in preventing HPV related malignancy in clinical trials. Newly introduced HPV vaccination programmes in the UK and elsewhere are ultimately likely to result in a further significant reduction in the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer. These vaccination programmes will be most effective in early adolescence when prevalence of HPV infection is low. Consequently, vaccination programmes in the UK have been initially targeted at 12 to 13-year olds. In Australia favourable estimates of cost effectiveness have supported funding of a 'catch-up' programme to 26 years. In the UK the catch up programme has for the present been restricted to 18 years for cost effectiveness reasons. In addition the value of HPV vaccination beyond 26 years has not yet been fully clarified. Nevertheless women up to 45 years of age have been shown to exhibit strong immune responses to the bivalent HPV vaccine which might be expected to reduce the risk of HPV re-infection and address the second peak of HPV related malignancy in later life, evident over 45 years of age. Early data from randomised trials testing the quadrivalent HPV vaccine in women over 25 years has suggested high vaccine efficacy comparable to younger women. This paper will explore the evidence supporting HPV vaccination in HPV naïve and HPV exposed sexually active women up to 26 years and beyond this age group.

[PMID: 21289891]
Essential precondition for the development of cervical cancer is a persistent human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. The majority - approximately 70% - of cervical carcinomas is caused by two high-risk HPV types (16 and 18). Recently, two vaccines have been approved to the German market with the potential to induce protection against HPV 16 and HPV 18 among additional low-risk virus types. To analyse whether HPV vaccination is effective with regard to the reduction of cervical cancer and precursors of cervical carcinoma (CIN), respectively? Does HPV vaccination represent a cost-effective alternative or supplement to present screening practice? Are there any differences concerning cost-effectiveness between the two available vaccines? Should HPV vaccination be recommended from a health economic point of view? If so, which recommendations can be conveyed with respect to a (re)organization of the German vaccination strategy? Which ethical, social and legal implications have to be considered? Based on a systematic literature review, randomized controlled trials (RCT) looking at the effectiveness of HPV vaccination for the prevention of cervical carcinoma and its precursors - cervical intraepithelial neoplasia - have been identified. In addition, health economic models were identified to address the health economic research questions. Quality assessment of medical and economic literature was assured by application of general assessment standards for the systematic and critical appraisal of scientific studies. Vaccine efficacy in prevention of CIN 2 or higher lesions in HPV 16 or HPV 18 negative women, who received all vaccination doses, ranges between 98% and 100%. Side effects of the vaccination are mainly associated with injection site reactions (redness, turgor, pain). No significant differences concerning serious complications between the vaccination- and the placebo-groups were reported. Results of base case scenarios in the identified health economic modeling analyses range from approximately 3,000 Euro to 40,000 Euro per additional QALY (QALY = Quality-adjusted life year) and approximately 9,000 Euro to 65,000 Euro per additional life year (LYG), respectively. The included studies show that both available HPV vaccines are effective in preventing HPV 16 and HPV 18 infections and probable resulting premalignant lesions of the cervix. However, the duration of protection is currently unclear. With regard to side effects, the vaccination can be considered as secure. Nevertheless, the number of cases within the clinical studies is not sufficient to determine the occurrence of rarely occurring (severe) adverse events in a reliable way. A reduction in the incidence and induced mortality through cervical cancer in Germany is not only depending on the vaccine's clinical efficacy. Effects of the new technology on the overall participation rate in screening programs and the resulting vaccination rate and immunization status are also important factors. The results of identified health economic models vary substantially due to the heterogeneity of methodological approaches as well as chosen input parameters. However, almost all model-based analyses reached the conclusion that the implementation of a vaccination with lifelong protection can be considered as cost-effective, if the present screening practice continues. A comparison of the two vaccines shows, that the cost effectiveness ratios are more favorable with the quadrivalent vaccine than with the bivalent alternative when considering QALY as primary outcome parameter. The reason for this finding might be that in the case of the quadrivalent vaccine the prevention of genital warts can also be incorporated into the analysis. Variations of the duration of protection as well as the discounting rate were identified as the primary influencing factors of cost-effectiveness results. Implementation of HPV vaccination might lead to a reduction of cervical cancer in immunized women. However, uptake of immunization should be accompanied by further studies in order to assess long-term effectiveness and safety aiming at an optimization of possible implementation processes. High numbers of participants are of particular importance regarding immunization. This has to be backed up by programs to optimize early detection - as this affects even those women who already underwent immunization. Since cost-effectiveness evidence might be significantly affected by the unclear duration of protective benefits, a final verdict on the vaccination's cost-effectiveness in the German setting is not possible. Hence, risk-sharing-agreements between third-party payers and manufacturers would pose an option to balance the consequences of uncertainty towards the duration of protection on cost-effectiveness.