[PMID: 16651657]
Topoisomerase II (Topo II) performs topological modifications on double-stranded DNA molecules that are essential for chromosome condensation, resolution, and segregation. In mammals, G2 and metaphase cell cycle delays induced by Topo II poisons have been proposed to be the result of checkpoint activation in response to the catenation state of DNA. However, the apparent lack of such controls in model organisms has excluded genetic proof that Topo II checkpoints exist and are separable from the conventional DNA damage checkpoint controls. But here, we define a Topo II-dependent G2/M checkpoint in a genetically amenable eukaryote, budding yeast, and demonstrate that this checkpoint enhances cell survival. Conversely, a lack of the checkpoint results in aneuploidy. Neither DNA damage-responsive pathways nor Pds1/securin are needed for this checkpoint. Unusually, spindle assembly checkpoint components are required for the Topo II checkpoint, but checkpoint activation is not the result of failed chromosome biorientation or a lack of spindle tension. Thus, compromised Topo II function activates a yeast checkpoint system that operates by a novel mechanism.

[PMID: 23935120]
Eukaryotic topoisomerase II (topo II) is the essential decatenase of newly replicated chromosomes and the main relaxase of nucleosomal DNA. Apart from these general tasks, topo II participates in more specialized functions. In mammals, topo IIα interacts with specific RNA polymerases and chromatin-remodeling complexes, whereas topo IIβ regulates developmental genes in conjunction with chromatin remodeling and heterochromatin transitions. Here we show that in budding yeast, topo II regulates the expression of specific gene subsets. To uncover this, we carried out a genomic transcription run-on shortly after the thermal inactivation of topo II. We identified a modest number of genes not involved in the general stress response but strictly dependent on topo II. These genes present distinctive functional and structural traits in comparison with the genome average. Yeast topo II is a positive regulator of genes with well-defined promoter architecture that associates to chromatin remodeling complexes; it is a negative regulator of genes extremely hypo-acetylated with complex promoters and undefined nucleosome positioning, many of which are involved in polyamine transport. These findings indicate that yeast topo II operates on singular chromatin architectures to activate or repress DNA transcription and that this activity produces functional responses to ensure chromatin stability.

[PMID: 7932731]
Eukaryotic DNA topoisomerase II is an abundant nuclear enzyme that is essential for cell proliferation. This homodimeric enzyme catalyzes the cleavage and re-ligation of double-stranded DNA required to separate replicated sister chromatids. Both biochemical and genetic studies show that its catalytic activity is required for chromosome condensation and segregation, and that its decatenation activity can be stimulated by a variety of protein kinases in vitro. In budding yeast, topoisomerase II is most highly phosphorylated in metaphase, and casein kinase II (CKII) was shown to be the major kinase modifying topoisomerase II. We have investigated the effects of phosphorylation of yeast topoisomerase II by CKII in vitro, by means of gel-retardation and filter binding assays. The phosphorylation of the C terminus of topoisomerase II by CKII appears to increase the stability of the complex formed with linear DNA fragments, while dephosphorylation has the opposite effect. Rephosphorylation of phosphatase-treated topoisomerase II by chicken casein kinase II restores a stable protein-DNA complex using a linear DNA fragment. The enhanced stability of the topoisomerase II-DNA complex is also observed with relaxed circular DNA, but not with supercoiled minicircles, in agreement with published results using topoisomerase II from Drosophila. Limited proteolysis and probing with domain-specific antibodies shows that, with the exception of a weakly modified residue between amino acid residues 660 and 1250, all residues modified by casein kinase II are in the last 180 amino acid residues of yeast topoisomerase II.

[PMID: 2840207]
Studies with yeast DNA topoisomerase mutants indicate that neither topoisomerase I nor II appears to be essential for transcription by RNA polymerase II. However, plasmids carrying transcriptionally active genes are found to be extremely negatively supercoiled when isolated from mutants lacking topoisomerase I. Supercoiling occurs during transcriptional elongation rather than during transcriptional activation. It takes place in the absence of topoisomerase I and does not seem to be dependent on topoisomerase II since it can occur at the nonpermissive temperature in a top1-top2 ts mutant. Whether this change in linking number is due to an unusual form of topoisomerase II or whether it is due to a new enzyme has yet to be determined. The results suggest that topoisomerase I is normally required to relax transcriptionally induced supercoils. A model is discussed which considers the role of topoisomerases in the movement of RNA polymerase along the DNA template.

[PMID: 1332607]
The gene encoding topoisomerase II in yeast is unique and essential, required for both mitotic and meiotic proliferation. The use of temperature-sensitive mutants in topoisomerase II have demonstrated roles in the relaxation of tortional stress, reduction of recombination rates, and in the separation of sister chromatids after replication. In vertebrate cells, topoisomerase II was shown to be the most abundant component of the metaphase chromosomal scaffold, and has been shown to play a role in chromosome condensation in vitro. The cell cycle control of chromosome condensation may well require phosphorylation of topoisomerase II, since the enzyme is more highly phosphorylated in metaphase than in G1. Recent studies have identified casein kinase II as the major enzyme phosphorylating topoisomerase II in intact yeast cells. The target sites of CKII are exclusively in the C-terminal 400 amino acids of topoisomerase II, the region that is most divergent among the eukaryotic type II enzymes and which is absent in the bacterial gyrase homologues.

[PMID: 18570880]
Type II topoisomerases are essential for resolving topologically entwined double-stranded DNA. Although anti-topoisomerase 2 (Top2) drugs are clinically important antibiotics and chemotherapies, to our knowledge, the mechanisms of cell killing by Top2 depletion and inactivation have never been directly compared. We show that depletion of Top2 protein from budding yeast cells prevents DNA decatenation during S phase. Cells complete DNA replication and enter the ensuing mitosis on schedule, suffering extensive chromosome missegregation. Cytokinesis through incompletely segregated chromosomes causes lethal DNA damage. By contrast, expression of catalytically inactive Top2 causes a stable G2 arrest requiring an intact DNA damage checkpoint. Checkpoint activation correlates with an inability to complete DNA replication, resulting in hypercatenated, gapped daughter DNA molecules. Thus, Top2 depletion and inactivation kill cells by different mechanisms, which has implications for understanding the nature of the catenation checkpoint, how DNA replication terminates, how anti-Top2 drugs work, and how new drugs might be designed.

[PMID: 6090122]
We have isolated mutants defective in DNA topoisomerases and an endonuclease from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe by screening individual extracts of mutagenized cells. Two type I topoisomerase mutants (top1) and three endonuclease mutants (end1) were all viable. The double mutant top1 end1 was also viable and, in its extract, Mg2+- and ATP- dependent type II activity could be detected. Three temperature-sensitive (ts-) mutants having heat-sensitive (hs-) type II enzymes were isolated, and the ts- marker cosegregated with the hs- type II activity. All the ts- mutations fell in one gene (top2) tightly linked to leul in chromosome II. The nuclear division of single top2 mutants was blocked at the restrictive temperature, but the formation of a septum was not inhibited so that the nucleus was cut across with the cell plate. In contrast, the double top1 top2 mutants were rapidly arrested at various stages of the cell cycle, showing a strikingly altered nuclear chromatin region. The type II topoisomerase may have an essential role in the compaction and/or segregation of chromosomes during the nuclear division but also complement the defect of the type I enzyme whose major function is the maintenance of chromatin organization throughout the cell cycle.

[PMID: 2842762]
Since DNA topoisomerase II (EC 5.99.1.3) is an essential enzyme in yeast, heterologous topoisomerase II gene expression in yeast cells can provide a system for analyzing the structure and function of topoisomerase II genes from other species. A series of yeast expression plasmids was constructed in which segments of the cDNA sequences encoding Drosophila DNA topoisomerase II were inserted under the transcriptional control of yeast GAL1 promoter. Expression of the functional form of Drosophila topoisomerase II cDNA can complement conditionally lethal, temperature-sensitive mutations in the yeast topoisomerase II gene (TOP2), as well as mutations in which the TOP2 locus was disrupted. The survival of these yeast cells depends upon the continuous expression of Drosophila topoisomerase II. Repression of Drosophila gene expression by glucose causes these yeast cells to cease dividing after a few generations. In addition to these genetic complementation data, the expression of the Drosophila topoisomerase II gene in yeast cells with a disruption in TOP2 can also be detected by immunochemical methods with an antibody specific for Drosophila topoisomerase II.

[PMID: 21767457]
DNA topoisomerases are specialized nuclear enzymes that perform topological modifications on double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and hence are essential for DNA metabolism such as replication, transcription, recombination, condensation and segregation. In a genetic screen, we identified a temperature-sensitive mutant allele of topoisomerase 2 that exhibits conditional synthetic lethality with a chk1 knockout strain. The mutant allele of topoisomerase 2 is defective in chromosome segregation at a non-permissive temperature and there was increase in chromosome segregation defects in the double mutant of top2-10 and chk1 delete at a non-permissive temperature. More importantly, topoisomearse 2 mutant cells mildly delay the mitotic progression at non-permissive temperature that is mediated by checkpoint protein kinase Chk1. Additionally, top2-10 mutant cells also activate the Chk1 at a non-permissive temperature and this activation of Chk1 takes place at the time of mitosis. Interestingly, top2-10 mutant cells retain their viability at a non-permissive temperature if the cells are not allowed to enter into mitosis. Taking together our results, we speculate that in the top2-10 mutant, the segregation of entangled chromatids during mitosis could result in delaying the mitotic progression through the activation of Chk1 kinase.

[PMID: 6323017]
The gene TOP2 encoding yeast topoisomerase II has been cloned by immunological screening of a yeast genomic library constructed in the phage lambda expression vector, lambda gt11. The ends of the message encoded by the cloned DNA fragment were delimited by the Berk and Sharp procedure (S1 nuclease mapping) for the 5' end and mapping of the polyA tail portion of a cDNA fragment for the 3' end. The predicted size of the message agrees with the length of the message as determined by Northern blot hybridization analysis. The identity of the gene was confirmed by expressing the gene in E. coli from the E. coli promoter lac UV5 to give catalytically active yeast DNA topoisomerase II. Disruption of one copy of the gene in a diploid yeast creates a recessive lethal mutation, indicating that the single DNA topoisomerase II gene of yeast has an essential function.

[PMID: 12888496]
Topoisomerase II is a ubiquitous enzyme that removes knots and tangles from the genetic material by generating transient double-strand DNA breaks. While the enzyme cannot perform its essential cellular functions without cleaving DNA, this scission activity is inherently dangerous to chromosomal integrity. In fact, etoposide and other clinically important anticancer drugs kill cells by increasing levels of topoisomerase II-mediated DNA breaks. Cells rely heavily on recombination to repair double-strand DNA breaks, but the specific pathways used to repair topoisomerase II-generated DNA damage have not been defined. Therefore, Saccharomyces cerevisiae was used as a model system to delineate the recombination pathways that repair DNA breaks generated by topoisomerase II. Yeast cells that expressed wild-type or a drug-hypersensitive mutant topoisomerase II or overexpressed the wild-type enzyme were examined. Based on cytotoxicity and recombination induced by etoposide in different repair-deficient genetic backgrounds, double-strand DNA breaks generated by topoisomerase II appear to be repaired primarily by the single-strand invasion pathway of homologous recombination. Non-homologous end joining also was triggered by etoposide treatment, but this pathway was considerably less active than single-strand invasion and did not contribute significantly to cell survival in S.cerevisiae.

[PMID: 1316274]
The decatenation activity of DNA topoisomerase II is essential for viability as eukaryotic cells traverse mitosis. Phosphorylation has been shown to stimulate topoisomerase II activity in vitro. Here we show that topoisomerase II is a phosphoprotein in yeast and that the level of incorporated phosphate is significantly higher at mitosis than in G1. Comparison of tryptic phosphopeptide maps reveals that the major phosphorylation sites in vivo are targets for casein kinase II. Incorporation of phosphate into topoisomerase II is nearly undetectable at the non-permissive temperature in a conditional casein kinase II mutant. The sites modified by casein kinase II are located in the extreme C-terminal domain of topoisomerase II. This domain is absent in prokaryotic and highly divergent among eukaryotic type II topoisomerases, and may serve to regulate functions of topoisomerase II that are unique to eukaryotic cells.