[PMID: 28427155]
Prognostic studies of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor(IGF-1R) inhibitors in cancer therapy had promising results in infratests, which exhibited that IGF-1R signalling was crucial in cancer cells growth. However, the conclusion of later clinical trials revealed a dim future for IGF-1R inhibitors to treat cancer. We conducted this analysis to figure out how IGF-1R inhibitors acted in clinical cancer therapy. We searched up-to-date studies about the single agent of IGF-1R inhibitors or combination with other therapies in solid tumor. Five IGF-1R anti-agents were involved. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS). The secondary endpoint was overall survival (OS). 17studies were enrolled. The results was not significant in overall survival (I2=37.1%, P=0.080, HR=1.08, 95% CI=0.97-1.21) and in progression-free survival (I2=0.0%, P=0.637, HR=1.05, 95% CI=0.98-1.12). OS for dalotuzumab, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and PFS for prostate cancer even indicated harmful effects. So far, anti-IGF-1R mono-antibodies did not make significant differences in solid tumor prognosis. On the contrary, pessimistic effects were shown in the dalotuzumab, breast cancer, colorectal cancer and prostate cancer subgroups. Further studies of IGF-1R anti-agents were needed, but unwarranted in unselected patients by predictive biomarkers.

[PMID: 26287404]
CD34(+) fibrocytes are bone marrow-derived monocyte progenitor cells that traffic to sites of tissue injury and repair. They putatively infiltrate the orbit in thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy where they appear to transition into CD34(+) orbital fibroblasts (OFs) that interact with residential CD34(-) fibroblasts. A unique phenotypic attribute of fibrocytes and CD34(+) OFs is their expression of the functional thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) and other "thyroid-specific" proteins. When activated through TSHR, fibrocytes express a number of cytokines and other inflammatory genes. Here we sought to determine whether pentraxin-3 (PTX-3), an acute-phase protein involved in inflammation and autoimmunity, might be induced by TSH in fibrocytes and OFs. These cells were collected from patients with Graves disease and healthy individuals. PTX-3 mRNA levels were determined by real-time PCR, protein was determined by ELISA and Western blot, and PTX-3 gene promoter activity was assessed with reporter assays. PTX-3 expression was induced by TSH in both cell types, regardless of the health status of the donor and was a consequence of increased steady-state PTX-3 mRNA levels. M22, a TSHR-activating monoclonal antibody, also induced PTX-3. The induction could be attenuated by dexamethasone and by IGF-I receptor-blocking antibodies, teprotumumab and 1H7. TSH effects were mediated through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT, mammalian target of rapamycin/p70(s6k), Janus tyrosine kinase 2 pathways, and enhanced PTX-3 mRNA stability. These findings indicate that PTX-3 is a TSH target gene, the expression of which can be induced in fibrocytes and OFs. They suggest that PTX-3 might represent a previously unidentified nexus between the thyroid axis and the mechanisms involved in tissue remodeling.

[PMID: 24878056]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is the component of Graves' disease characterized by orbital inflammation and connective tissue remodeling. The IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and TSH receptor (TSHR) form a physical and functional complex in orbital fibroblasts. A subset of these fibroblasts is derived from infiltrating CD34(+) fibrocytes. Teprotumumab (RV 001, R1507) is a human monoclonal anti-IGF-1R blocking antibody currently undergoing a phase 2 clinical trial in patients with active TAO. To determine whether teprotumumab inhibits the induction by TSH of IL-6 and IL-8 in fibrocytes. Fibrocytes were treated without or with teprotumumab in combination with IGF-1 or TSH. IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA expression and protein production were analyzed by real-time PCR and Luminex, respectively. Phosphorylated Akt (S473) levels were analyzed by Western blot. TSHR and IGF-1R display was assessed by flow cytometry. Fibrocyte display of IGF-1R and TSHR was reduced with teprotumumab, as were IGF-1- and TSH-dependent phosphorylated Akt levels. TSH induction of IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA and protein was also reduced by the monoclonal antibody. Teprotumumab attenuates the actions of both IGF-1 and TSH in fibrocytes. Specifically, it blocks the induction of proinflammatory cytokines by TSH. These results provide, at least in part, the molecular rationale for interrogating the therapeutic efficacy of this antibody in TAO.

[PMID: 26087256]
Fibrocytes (FC) are bone marrow-derived progenitor cells that are more abundant and infiltrate the thyroid and orbit in Graves orbitopathy (GO). FCs express high levels of thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R). These receptors are physically and functionally associated, but their role in GO pathogenesis is not fully delineated. Treatment of FCs with thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) or M22 (activating antibody to TSHR) induces the production of numerous cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα). Teprotumumab (TMB) is a human monoclonal IGF-1R blocking antibody currently in clinical trial for GO and inhibits TSHR-mediated actions in FCs. To characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying TSH-induced TNFα production by FCs, and the role of IGF-1R blockade by TMB. FCs from healthy and GD patients were treated with combinations of TSH, M22, MG132 and AKTi (inhibitors of NF-κB and Akt, respectively), and TMB. TNFα protein production was measured by Luminex and flow cytometry. Messenger RNA expression was quantified by real time PCR. Treatment with TSH/M22 induced TNFα protein and mRNA production by FCs, both of which were reduced when FCs were pretreated with MG132 and AKTi (p<0.0001). TMB decreased TSH-induced TNFα protein production in circulating FCs from mean fluorescent index (MFI) value of 2.92 to 1.91, and mRNA expression in cultured FCs from 141- to 52-fold expression (p<0.0001). TMB also decreased M22-induced TNFα protein production from MFI of 1.67 to 1.12, and mRNA expression from 6- to 3-fold expression (p<0.0001). TSH/M22 stimulates FC production of TNFα mRNA and protein. This process involves the transcription factor NF-κB and its regulator Akt. Blocking IGF-1R attenuates TSH/M22-induced TNFα production. This further delineates the interaction of TSHR and IGF1-R signaling pathways. By modulating the proinflammatory properties of FCs such as TNFα production, TMB may be a promising therapeutic agent for GO.

[PMID: 29273685]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a vexing and poorly understood autoimmune process involving the upper face and tissues surrounding the eyes. In TAO, the orbit can become inflamed and undergo substantial remodeling that is disfiguring and can lead to loss of vision. There are currently no approved medical therapies for TAO, the consequence of its uncertain pathogenic nature. It usually presents as a component of the syndrome known as Graves' disease where loss of immune tolerance to the thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) results in the generation of activating antibodies against that protein and hyperthyroidism. The role for TSHR and these antibodies in the development of TAO is considerably less well established. We have reported over the past 2 decades evidence that the insulin-like growth factorI receptor (IGF1R) may also participate in the pathogenesis of TAO. Activating antibodies against IGF1R have been detected in patients with GD. The actions of these antibodies initiate signaling in orbital fibroblasts from patients with the disease. Further, we have identified a functional and physical interaction between TSHR and IGF1R. Importantly, it appears that signaling initiated from either receptor can be attenuated by inhibiting the activity of IGF1R. These findings underpin the rationale for therapeutically targeting IGF1R in active TAO. A recently completed therapeutic trial of teprotumumab, a human IGF1R inhibiting antibody, in patients with moderate to severe, active TAO, indicates the potential effectiveness and safety of the drug. It is possible that other autoimmune diseases might also benefit from this treatment strategy.

[PMID: 30575804]
Thyroid eye disease is a disabling autoimmune disease associated with orbital inflammation and tissue remodeling which can result in significant proptosis, leading to visual alterations and is potentially sight threatening. Current evidence indicates that autoantibodies to the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), along with the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), mediate the pathogenesis in susceptible individuals. Teprotumumab, a monoclonal IGF-1R antagonist, has demonstrated previously in a 24 week, randomized, controlled trial to produce significant changes in composite outcomes of proptosis and clinical activity score as compared with placebo. Further examination of the proptosis results reported here, indicate that the proptosis outcome (≥ 2 mm reduction) was met in 71.4% of the teprotumumab-treated patients as compared with 20% of the placebo-treated patients (p < 0.001). Additionally, the proptosis benefit was observed early in the trial (study week 6), and all individual patients demonstrated some benefit at week 24. Improvement was noted among smokers, non-smokers, men and women, and particularly those with higher levels of proptosis at baseline. The level of proptosis reduction with teprotumumab reported here is similar to that seen with decompression surgery. If these results are confirmed in the ongoing Phase 3 trial, teprotumumab will offer an alternative to surgery and its associated complications.

[PMID: 28467880]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, a condition commonly associated with Graves' disease, remains inadequately treated. Current medical therapies, which primarily consist of glucocorticoids, have limited efficacy and present safety concerns. Inhibition of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) is a new therapeutic strategy to attenuate the underlying autoimmune pathogenesis of ophthalmopathy. We conducted a multicenter, double-masked, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to determine the efficacy and safety of teprotumumab, a human monoclonal antibody inhibitor of IGF-IR, in patients with active, moderate-to-severe ophthalmopathy. A total of 88 patients were randomly assigned to receive placebo or active drug administered intravenously once every 3 weeks for a total of eight infusions. The primary end point was the response in the study eye. This response was defined as a reduction of 2 points or more in the Clinical Activity Score (scores range from 0 to 7, with a score of ≥3 indicating active thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy) and a reduction of 2 mm or more in proptosis at week 24. Secondary end points, measured as continuous variables, included proptosis, the Clinical Activity Score, and results on the Graves' ophthalmopathy-specific quality-of-life questionnaire. Adverse events were assessed. In the intention-to-treat population, 29 of 42 patients who received teprotumumab (69%), as compared with 9 of 45 patients who received placebo (20%), had a response at week 24 (P<0.001). Therapeutic effects were rapid; at week 6, a total of 18 of 42 patients in the teprotumumab group (43%) and 2 of 45 patients in the placebo group (4%) had a response (P<0.001). Differences between the groups increased at subsequent time points. The only drug-related adverse event was hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes; this event was controlled by adjusting medication for diabetes. In patients with active ophthalmopathy, teprotumumab was more effective than placebo in reducing proptosis and the Clinical Activity Score. (Funded by River Vision Development and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01868997 .).

[PMID: 29744034]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO), a localized periocular manifestation of the autoimmune syndrome known as Graves' disease, remains incompletely understood. Discussions of its pathogenesis are generally focused on the thyrotropin receptor, the proposed role for which is supported by substantial evidence. Considerations of any involvement of the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) in the disease are frequently contentious. In this brief, topically focused review, I have attempted to provide a balanced perspective based entirely on experimental results that either favor or refute involvement of IGF-IR in TAO. Discussion in this matter seems particularly timely since the currently available treatments of this disfiguring and potentially sight-threatening disease remain inadequate. Importantly, no medical therapy has thus far received approval from the US Food and Drug Administration. Results from a very recently published clinical trial assessing the safety and efficacy of teprotumumab, an inhibitory human anti-IGF-IR monoclonal antibody, in active, moderate to severe TAO are extremely encouraging. That double-masked, placebo-controlled study involved 88 patients and revealed unprecedented clinical responses in the improvement of proptosis and clinical activity as well as a favorable safety profile. Should those results prove reproducible in an ongoing phase III trial, therapeutic inhibition of IGF-IR could become the basis for paradigm-shifting treatment of this vexing disease.

[PMID: 30215690]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a complex disease process presumed to emerge from autoimmunity occurring in the thyroid gland, most frequently in Graves disease (GD). It is disfiguring and potentially blinding, culminating in orbital tissue remodeling and disruption of function of structures adjacent to the eye. There are currently no medical therapies proven capable of altering the clinical outcome of TAO in randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter trials. The orbital fibroblast represents the central target for immune reactivity. Recent identification of fibroblasts that putatively originate in the bone marrow as monocyte progenitors provides a plausible explanation for why antigens, the expressions of which were once considered restricted to the thyroid, are detected in the TAO orbit. These cells, known as fibrocytes, express relatively high levels of functional TSH receptor (TSHR) through which they can be activated by TSH and the GD-specific pathogenic antibodies that underpin thyroid overactivity. Fibrocytes also express insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) with which TSHR forms a physical and functional signaling complex. Notably, inhibition of IGF-IR activity results in the attenuation of signaling initiated at either receptor. Some studies suggest that IGF-IR-activating antibodies are generated in GD, whereas others refute this concept. These observations served as the rationale for implementing a recently completed therapeutic trial of teprotumumab, a monoclonal inhibitory antibody targeting IGF-IR in TAO. Results of that trial in active, moderate to severe disease revealed dramatic and rapid reductions in disease activity and severity. The targeting of IGF-IR with specific biologic agents may represent a paradigm shift in the therapy of TAO.

[PMID: 27346786]
Graves' ophthalmopathy is defined as autoimmune inflammation of extraocular muscles and orbital fat or connective tissue, usually in patients with Graves' disease. About one in 20 patients with Graves' hyperthyroidism has moderate-to-severe Graves' ophthalmopathy. Corticosteroids have been the mainstay of treatment, but new evidence about immune mechanisms has provided a basis to explore other drug classes. Intravenous methylprednisolone pulses are more effective and better tolerated than oral prednisone in the treatment of active, moderate-to-severe Graves' ophthalmopathy. Rituximab has also been suggested as a possible replacement for intravenous corticosteroids. Two randomised controlled trials of rituximab reached seemingly contradictory conclusions-rituximab was not better with respect to the primary outcome (clinical activity score) than placebo in one trial (which, however, was confounded by rather long Graves' ophthalmopathy duration), but was slightly better than intravenous methylprednisolone pulses in the other (disease flare-ups occurred only in the latter group). On the basis of evidence published so far, rituximab cannot replace intravenous methylprednisolone pulses, but could have a role in corticosteroid-resistant cases. Open-label studies of tumour-necrosis-factor-α blockade had limited efficacy, but other studies showed that interleukin-6 receptor antibodies were effective. Results of randomised controlled trials investigating the efficacy of the IGF-1 receptor antibody teprotumumab and the interleukin-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab are expected shortly. Approaches that target the causal mechanism of Graves' ophthalmopathy (antibodies or antagonists that block thyroid-stimulating-hormone receptors) also look promising.

[PMID: 29847668]
Orbital fibroblasts from patients with Graves' disease (GD-OF) express many different cytokines when treated with bovine thyrotropin (bTSH). The present study aimed to determine why TNF-α cannot be induced by bTSH in GD-OF. Fibrocytes and GD-OFs were cultivated from donors who were patients in a busy academic medical center practice. Real-time PCR, Western blot analysis, reporter gene assays, cell transfections, mRNA stability assays, ELISA, and flow cytometry were performed. We found that bTSH induces TNF-α dramatically in fibrocytes but is undetectable in GD-OF. The induction in fibrocytes is a consequence of increased TNF-α gene promoter activity and is independent of ongoing protein synthesis. It could be attenuated by dexamethasone and the IGF-1 receptor inhibiting antibody, teprotumumab. When separated into pure CD34+ OF and CD34- OF subsets, TNF-α mRNA became highly inducible by bTSH in CD34+ OF but remained undetectable in CD34- OF. Conditioned medium from CD34- OF inhibited induction of TNF-α in fibrocytes. Our data indicate that CD34- OF appear to release a soluble(s) factor that downregulates expression and induction by bTSH of TNF-α in fibrocytes and their derivative CD34+ OF. We proffer that CD34- OF produce an unidentified modulatory factor that attenuates TNF-α expression in GD-OF and may do so in the TAO orbit.

[PMID: 25105999]
In recent years, immunosuppressive therapy, as an alternative to corticosteroids, has been proposed as novel agents which target the various antigens involved in the pathogenesis of Graves' ophthalmopathy. Although the lack of randomized and controlled studies suggests caution in generalizing results, some data show interesting results. Potential targets for immune therapy in Graves' ophthalmopathy are the antigens expressed on the target organ of inflammation, namely the receptor and the insulin growth factor -1 receptor on fibroblasts, inflammatory cytokines, and B and T cells. The most promising results are observed with small thyroid stimulating hormone receptor molecules interacting with the receptor on thyrocytes and fibroblasts and with the anti-IGF-1 receptor antibody teprotumumab. A recent open study with tocilizumab, an anti-soluble interleukin-6 receptor, has shown inactivation of Graves' ophthalmopathy. Consistent reports on the efficacy of rituximab will have to be confirmed by randomized controlled trials, which are now in progress. Current clinical practice for Graves' ophthalmopathy will greatly benefit from the availability of immunosuppressors that act as disease-modifying drugs, as compared to steroids, the current standard treatment for Graves' ophthalmopathy. Rituximab seems to be a good candidate, as preliminary results from ongoing randomized trials suggest good efficacy with a relative well tolerated profile.