[PMID: 17296606]
Herpes simplex virus has a linear double-stranded DNA genome with directly repeated terminal sequences needed for cleavage and packaging of replicated DNA. In infected cells, linear genomes rapidly become endless. It is currently a matter of discussion whether the endless genomes are circles supporting rolling circle replication or arise by recombination of linear genomes forming concatemers. Here, we have examined the role of mammalian DNA ligases in the herpes simplex virus, type I (HSV-1) life cycle by employing RNA interference (RNAi) in human 1BR.3.N fibroblasts. We find that RNAi-mediated knockdown of DNA ligase IV and its co-factor XRCC4 causes a hundred-fold reduction of virus yield, a small plaque phenotype, and reduced DNA synthesis. The effect is specific because RNAi against DNA ligase I or DNA ligase III fail to reduce HSV-1 replication. Furthermore, RNAi against DNA ligase IV and XRCC4 does not affect replication of adenovirus. In addition, high multiplicity infections of HSV-1 in human DNA ligase IV-deficient cells reveal a pronounced delay of production of infectious virus. Finally, we demonstrate that formation of endless genomes is inhibited by RNAi-mediated depletion of DNA ligase IV and XRCC4. Our results suggests that DNA ligase IV/XRCC4 serves an important role in the replication cycle of herpes viruses and is likely to be required for the formation of the endless genomes early during productive infection.

[PMID: 10627574]
Herpesviruses have large double-stranded linear DNA genomes that are formed by site-specific cleavage from complex concatemeric intermediates. In this process, only one of the two genomic ends are formed on the concatemer. Although the mechanism underlying this asymmetry is not known, one explanation is that single genomes are cleaved off of concatemer ends in a preferred direction. This implies that cis elements control the direction of packaging. Two highly conserved cis elements named pac1 and pac2 lie near opposite ends of herpesvirus genomes and are important for cleavage and packaging. By comparison of published reports and by analysis of two additional herpesviruses, we found that pac2 elements lie near the ends formed on replicative concatemers of four herpesviruses: herpes simplex virus type 1, equine herpesvirus 1, guinea pig cytomegalovirus, and murine cytomegalovirus. Formation of pac2 ends on concatemers depended on terminal cis sequences, since ectopic cleavage sites engineered into the murine cytomegalovirus genome mediated formation of pac2 ends on concatemers regardless of the orientation of their insertion. These findings are consistent with a model in which pac2 elements at concatemer ends impart a directionality to concatemer packaging by binding proteins that initiate insertion of concatemer ends into empty capsids.

[PMID: 26121674]
The innate immune system pattern recognition receptors (PRR) are the first line of host defenses recognizing the various pathogen- or danger-associated molecular patterns and eliciting defenses by regulating the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-18 or interferon β (IFN-β). NOD-like receptors (NLRs) and AIM2-like receptors (ALRs) are cytoplasmic inflammasome sensors of foreign molecules, including DNA. IFI16, a sequence-independent nuclear innate sensor ALR, recognizes episomal dsDNA genomes of herpes viruses such as KSHV, EBV, and HSV-1 in the infected cell nuclei, forms an inflammasome complex with ASC and procaspase1, and relocates into the cytoplasm leading into Caspase-1 and IL-1β generation. IFI16 also induces IFN-β during HSV-1 infection via the cytoplasmic STING-TBK1-IRF3 pathway. Thus far, whether IFI16 recognizes foreign DNA directly or utilizes other host protein(s) is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that BRCA1, a DNA damage repair sensor and transcription regulator, is in complex with IFI16 in the host cell nucleus, and their association increases in the presence of nuclear viral genomes during de novo KSHV, EBV and HSV-1 infection, and in latent KSHV or EBV infection, but not by DNA damage responses (DDR) induced by bleomycin and vaccinia virus cytoplasmic dsDNA. BRCA1 is a constituent of the triggered IFI16-inflammasome and is translocated into the cytoplasm after genome recognition along with the IFI16-inflammasome. The absence of BRCA1 abrogated IFI16-viral genome association, inflammasome assembly, IFI16 cytoplasmic localization, and Caspase-1 and IL-1β production. The absence of BRCA1 also abolished the cytoplasmic IFI16-STING interaction, downstream IRF3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation of pIRF3 and IFN-β production during de novo KSHV and HSV-1 infection. These findings highlight that BRCA1 plays a hitherto unidentified innate immunomodulatory role by facilitating nuclear foreign DNA sensing by IFI16, subsequent assembly and cytoplasmic distribution of IFI16-inflammasomes leading into IL-1β formation and the induction of IFN-β via cytoplasmic signaling through IFI16-STING, TBK1 and IRF3.

[PMID: 16160176]
For many years, the generally accepted model for the replication of the double-stranded DNA genome of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) incorporated initial circularization of linear molecules in the cell nucleus. Ensuing DNA synthesis resulted in the generation of head-to-tail concatemers which were subsequently cleaved into monomeric units and packaged into the nascent viral capsid. Recently, however, it has been proposed that circularization of HSV-1 genomes does not occur at the onset of lytic infection and moreover that this event is specifically inhibited by the HSV-1 transcriptional transactivator, ICP0 (S.A. Jackson and N.A. DeLuca, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:7871-7876, 2003). To further investigate genome circularization, we have generated HSV-1 derivatives in which the viral a sequences, which contain the cleavage-packaging signals, have been replaced by a minimal packaging element located in the thymidine kinase gene. In contrast to wild-type HSV-1, fusion of the genomic termini of these viruses produces a novel fragment in circular or concatemeric DNA which can be detected by Southern blot hybridization. Utilizing these viruses, we demonstrate that fusion of the genomic termini occurred rapidly upon infection and in the presence of inhibitors of viral DNA or protein synthesis. We provide evidence indicating that the end joining represented circularization rather than concatemerization of input molecules and that circularized molecules functioned as templates for replication. Since the termini of these viruses lack direct repeats, our findings indicate that circularization can be mediated by direct end-to-end ligation of linear input genomes.

[PMID: 12716057]
Herpesviruses are large double stranded DNA animal viruses with the distinguishing ability to establish latent, life-long infections. To date, eight human herpesviruses that exhibit distinct biological and corresponding pathological/clinical properties have been identified. During their life cycles, herpesviruses execute an intricate chain of events geared towards optimizing their replication. This sets an interesting paradigm to study fundamental biological processes. This review summarizes recent developments in herpesvirus research with emphasis on genome transactions, particularly with respect to the prototypic herpes simplex virus type-1.

[PMID: 21390711]
Herpes simplex viruses types 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2) are doublestranded DNA viruses with a genome size of 152 kbp. The genome consists of two unique regions, U(L) (long) and U(s) (short), flanked by repeated sequences (Fig. 1; for review, see ref. 1). The two viruses are closely related, and both infect humans, producing mucocutaneous sores that are predominantly facial in the case of HSV-1 and genital in the case of HSV-2.

[PMID: 22020814]
To launch an effective antiviral immune response, cells must recognize the virus, activate a cytokine response, and initiate inflammatory processes. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2 are nuclear-replicating viruses composed of a double-stranded DNA genome plus glycoproteins that are incorporated into a lipid bilayer envelope that surrounds an icosahedral capsid. Several novel receptors that mediate innate recognition of HSV and that activate the innate immune response have been identified in recent years. The host-virus interactions that lead to type I interferon (IFN), type III IFN, and cytokine production include cellular recognition of viral envelope and structural proteins, recognition of viral genomic DNA and recognition of virus-derived double-stranded RNAs. Such RNAs can interact with cellular pattern-recognition receptors, including Toll-like receptors and a number of cytoplasmic and nuclear receptors for virus DNA and virus-derived RNAs. In this review, I present a systematic overview of innate cellular recognition of HSV infection that leads to immune activation, and I discuss the implications of the known cell-host interactions. In addition, I discuss the use of innate stimulation to improve anti-HSV treatment and vaccine response and I discuss future research aims.

[PMID: 10774200]
The Herpesviridae are a family of viruses which have a large genome of linear, double-stranded DNA (> 120 kb). It has been quite difficult to clone and modify herpesvirus genomes because of their large sizes. Recently, several groups of investigators demonstrated successful cloning of infectious herpesvirus genomes as bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs). In this review, I describe the recent development of methods to modify the cloned viral genomes. The methods are: (i) homologous recombination in E. coli which allows targeted mutagenesis of any specific viral sequence, and (ii) mutagenesis which allows random modification of entire viral genomes. Both methods should facilitate both the study of herpes viruses and the development of herpesvirus-based vector system.

[PMID: 21491367]
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a double-stranded DNA virus with the largest genome (~235 kb) of the known human herpes viruses. The coding potential and transcript structures of most HCMV predicted genes have not been identified. New or unknown genes could exist in clinical strains. The SMART (switching mechanism at 5' end of RNA template of reverse transcriptase) technique was used to construct a full-length cDNA library of an HCMV clinical strain in the late expression phase. Randomly selected clones were sequenced. The sequenced expressed sequence tags were used to identify the expression and transcript structures of some predicted and unpredicted genes of HCMV. The transcripts of the UL99, TRL5/IRL5, UL73 to UL75, UL4, and UL115 genes, which were previously detected, were obtained with full-length structures from this library. Some novel transcripts, including several transcripts of UL/b' genes and three antisense transcripts of UL83, UL87 and UL31 were found. The novel transcripts that were found, particularly the antisense transcripts of UL83, UL87 and UL31, showed that the transcription of HCMV genes is more complex than previously predicted. Our study highlights the usefulness of the full-length cDNA library for discovering new genes and transcripts of HCMV.

[PMID: 1652278]
Vectors derived from herpes simplex virus provide a means of gene delivery to postmitotic neurons. The virus is readily taken up at nerve terminals, passes by rapid retrograde and anterograde transport within neurons, and is selectively transferred across synapses, thus allowing it entry from the periphery into the brain. This virus can enter a state of latency in some neurons, where it exists as an episomal element in the nucleus and is transcriptionally active to a reduced extent. In this state, the virus is apparently benign and can effect stable expression of foreign genes. The large (150 kb) genome of this double-stranded virus has been completely sequenced. Many of its 70 genes can be replaced while still allowing the virus to replicate in at least some cultured cells. Some mutations in the viral genome can compromise the toxicity of the virus and reduce or eliminate its ability to replicate within neurons. Many uses for herpes vectors can be envisioned, including evaluation of neuronal promoter elements and functions of neural proteins in culture and in vivo, as well as therapeutic delivery of genes to modulate nerve function and for gene replacement therapy in vivo.

[PMID: 9514102]
Varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus 3; VZV) is one of eight herpes viruses that routinely infect humans. It is classified as a member of the genus Varicellovirus, subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, family Herpesviridae. Of the other human herpes viruses it is most closely related to the herpes simplex viruses (also members of the Alphalerpesvirinae). Like all herpes viruses, the virus has a large double-stranded DNA genome within an icosahedral nucleocapsid. This is surrounded by a proteinaceous tegument and a trilaminar membrane derived from host-cell membranes into which the viral glycoproteins are inserted. The structure of the virion is summarized in Fig. 1.

[PMID: 18687114]
Herpes Simplex virus types 1 and 2 are enveloped viruses with a linear dsDNA genome of approximately 120-200 kb. Genital infection with HSV-2 has been denoted as a major risk factor for acquisition and transmission of HIV-1. Developing biomedical strategies for HSV-2 prevention is thus a central strategy in reducing global HIV-1 prevalence. This paper details the protocol for the isolation of restriction endunucleases (REases) with potent activity against the HSV-2 genome and models two biomedical interventions for preventing HSV-2. Using the whole genome of HSV-2, 289 REases and the bioinformatics software Webcutter2; we searched for potential recognition sites by way of genome wide palindromics. REase application in HSV-2 biomedical therapy was modeled concomitantly. Of the 289 enzymes analyzed; 77(26.6%) had potential to cleave the HSV-2 genome in > 100 but < 400 sites; 69(23.9%) in > 400 but < 700 sites; and the 9(3.1%) enzymes: BmyI, Bsp1286I, Bst2UI, BstNI, BstOI, EcoRII, HgaI, MvaI, and SduI cleaved in more than 700 sites. But for the 4: PacI, PmeI, SmiI, SwaI that had no sign of activity on HSV-2 genomic DNA, all 130(45%) other enzymes cleaved < 100 times. In silico palindromics has a PPV of 99.5% for in situ REase activity (2) Two models detailing how the REase EcoRII may be applied in developing interventions against HSV-2 are presented: a nanoparticle for microbicide development and a "recombinant lactobacillus" expressing cell wall anchored receptor (truncated nectin-1) for HSV-2 plus EcoRII. Viral genome slicing by way of these bacterially- derived R-M enzymatic peptides may have therapeutic potential in HSV-2 infection; a cofactor for HIV-1 acquisition and transmission.