[PMID: 19034656]
Even though there are many drugs for the treatment of gastric ulcers, these drugs sometimes cannot succeed. Since the 1950s, antidepressant drugs have been used for several non-psychiatric indications. A lot of antidepressant drugs have been shown experimentally to produce antiulcer activity in various ulcer models. This study aimed to investigate the antiulcer effects of mirtazapine and to determine its relationship with antioxidant mechanisms. The antiulcer activities of 15, 30, and 60 mg/kg mirtazapine have been investigated on indomethacin-induced ulcers in rats, and the results have been compared with that of the control group. Mirtazapine decreased the indomethacin-induced ulcers significantly at all doses used. Mirtazapine significantly increased the glutathione (GSH) level, which decreased in the control group given only indomethacin. All doses of mirtazapine significantly decreased the catalase (CAT) level in stomach tissue compared to the control. Additionally, all doses of mirtazapine reversed the decrease in the superoxide dismutase (SOD) level in the stomach tissue of control rats. And finally, all doses of mirtazapine decreased malondialdehyde (MDA) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) levels significantly compared to the control. In conclusion, the activation of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant mechanisms and the inhibition of some toxic oxidant mechanisms play a role in the antiulcer effect mechanism of mirtazapine. This new indication of mirtazapine will make it the first-choice drug in depressive patients with gastric ulcers.

[PMID: 19412502]
Fibromyalgia syndrome is a chronic disease of widespread and debilitating pain whose cause is unknown and whose risk factors are poorly understood. It is often comorbid with rheumatoid and other pain disorders as well as psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and depression. Although they are not officially approved for this indication, antiepileptics and antidepressants are often used to treat fibromyalgia. The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), particularly amitriptyline, are among the most common treatment strategies. Because of the poor tolerability of the tricyclics, the newer antidepressants have been widely tested in fibromyalgia. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors do not seem to be particularly helpful. The serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), duloxetine and milnacipran, on the other hand, have been shown in placebo-controlled trials to offer significant relief to patients suffering from fibromyalgia. Although no direct comparative studies have been performed, these compounds appear to be as effective as the TCAs but much better tolerated. The effectiveness of the SNRIs as well as other dual acting antidepressants, such as mirtazapine, but not the SSRIs, implies that a dysfunction of both serotonin and norepinephrine neurotransmission probably exists in fibromyalgia. The effectiveness of antidepressants appears to be independent of their effect on comorbid depression.

[PMID: 21810375]
The aim of this study was to establish the relative safety and balance of risks for antidepressant treatment in older people. The study objectives were to (1) determine relative and absolute risks of predefined adverse events in older people with depression, comparing classes of antidepressant drugs [tricyclic and related antidepressants (TCAs), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and other antidepressants] and commonly prescribed individual drugs with non-use of antidepressant drugs; (2) directly compare the risk of adverse events for SSRIs with TCAs; (3) determine associations with dose and duration of antidepressant medication; (4) describe patterns of antidepressant use in older people with depression; and (5) estimate costs of antidepressant medication and primary care visits. A cohort study of patients aged 65 years and over diagnosed with depression. The study was based in 570 general practices in the UK supplying data to the QResearch database. Patients diagnosed with a new episode of depression between the ages of 65 and 100 years, from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2007. Participants were followed up until 31 December 2008. The exposure of interest was treatment with antidepressant medication. Antidepressant drugs were grouped into the major classes and commonly prescribed individual drugs were identified. There were 13 predefined outcome measures: all-cause mortality, sudden cardiac death, suicide, attempted suicide/self-harm, myocardial infarction, stroke/transient ischaemic attack (TIA), falls, fractures, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, epilepsy/seizures, road traffic accidents, adverse drug reactions and hyponatraemia. In total, 60,746 patients were included in the study cohort. Of these, 54,038 (89.0%) received at least one prescription for an antidepressant during follow-up. The associations with the adverse outcomes were significantly different between the classes of antidepressant drugs for seven outcomes. SSRIs were associated with the highest adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) for falls [1.66, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.58 to 1.73] and hyponatraemia (1.52, 95% CI 1.33 to 1.75), and the group of other antidepressants was associated with the highest HRs for all-cause mortality (1.66, 95% CI 1.56 to 1.77), attempted suicide/self-harm (5.16, 95% CI 3.90 to 6.83), stroke/TIA (1.37, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.55), fracture (1.63, 95% CI 1.45 to 1.83) and epilepsy/seizures (2.24, 95% CI 1.60 to 3.15) compared with when antidepressants were not being used. TCAs did not have the highest HR for any of the outcomes. There were also significantly different associations between the individual drugs for seven outcomes, with trazodone, mirtazapine and venlafaxine associated with the highest rates for several of these outcomes. The mean incremental cost (for all antidepressant prescriptions) ranged between £51.58 (amitriptyline) and £641.18 (venlafaxine) over the 5-year post-diagnosis period. This study found associations between use of antidepressant drugs and a number of adverse events in older people. There was no evidence that SSRIs or drugs in the group of other antidepressants were associated with a reduced risk of any of the adverse outcomes compared with TCAs; however, they may be associated with an increased risk for certain outcomes. Among individual drugs trazodone, mirtazapine and venlafaxine were associated with the highest rates for some outcomes. Indication bias and residual confounding may explain some of the study findings. The risks of prescribing antidepressants need to be weighed against the potential benefits of these drugs. The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.

[PMID: 21071407]
The procedure of drug approval is time-consuming, costly and risky. Accidental findings regarding multi-specificity of approved drugs led to block-busters in new indication areas. Therefore, the interest in systematically elucidating new areas of application for known drugs is rising. Furthermore, the knowledge, understanding and prediction of so-called off-target effects allow a rational approach to the understanding of side-effects. With PROMISCUOUS we provide an exhaustive set of drugs (25,000), including withdrawn or experimental drugs, annotated with drug-protein and protein-protein relationships (21,500/104,000) compiled from public resources via text and data mining including manual curation. Measures of structural similarity for drugs as well as known side-effects can be easily connected to protein-protein interactions to establish and analyse networks responsible for multi-pharmacology. This network-based approach can provide a starting point for drug-repositioning. PROMISCUOUS is publicly available at http://bioinformatics.charite.de/promiscuous.

[PMID: 17440145]
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued warnings that use of antidepressant medications poses a small but significantly increased risk of suicidal ideation/suicide attempt for children and adolescents. To assess the efficacy and risk of reported suicidal ideation/suicide attempt of antidepressants for treatment of pediatric major depressive disorder (MDD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and non-OCD anxiety disorders. PubMed (1988 to July 2006), relevant US and British regulatory agency reports, published abstracts of important scientific meetings (1998-2006), clinical trial registries, and information from authors. Studies were published and unpublished randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trials of second-generation antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, nefazodone, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine) in participants younger than 19 years with MDD, OCD, or non-OCD anxiety disorders. Information was extracted on study characteristics, efficacy outcomes, and spontaneously reported suicidal ideation/suicide attempt. Twenty-seven trials of pediatric MDD (n = 15), OCD (n = 6), and non-OCD anxiety disorders (n = 6) were selected, and risk differences for response and for suicidal ideation/suicide attempt estimated by random-effects methods. Pooled risk differences in rates of primary study-defined measures of responder status significantly favored antidepressants for MDD (11.0%; [95% confidence interval {CI}, 7.1% to 14.9%]), OCD (19.8% [95% CI, 13.0% to 26.6%), and non-OCD anxiety disorders (37.1% [22.5% to 51.7%]), corresponding to a number needed to treat (NNT) of 10 (95% CI, 7 to 15), 6 (4 to 8), and 3 (2 to 5), respectively. While there was increased risk difference of suicidal ideation/suicide attempt across all trials and indications for drug vs placebo (0.7%; 95% CI, 0.1% to 1.3%) (number needed to harm, 143 [95% CI, 77 to 1000]), the pooled risk differences within each indication were not statistically significant: 0.9% (95% CI, -0.1% to 1.9%) for MDD, 0.5% (-1.2% to 2.2%) for OCD, and 0.7% (-0.4% to 1.8%) for non-OCD anxiety disorders. There were no completed suicides. Age-stratified analyses showed that for children younger than 12 years with MDD, only fluoxetine showed benefit over placebo. In MDD trials, efficacy was moderated by age, duration of depression, and number of sites in the treatment trial. Relative to placebo, antidepressants are efficacious for pediatric MDD, OCD, and non-OCD anxiety disorders, although the effects are strongest in non-OCD anxiety disorders, intermediate in OCD, and more modest in MDD. Benefits of antidepressants appear to be much greater than risks from suicidal ideation/suicide attempt across indications, although comparison of benefit to risk varies as a function of indication, age, chronicity, and study conditions.

[PMID: 15052512]
A considerable number of new drugs were introduced over the last few years. In this report we analyze to what extent they have come to be used in clinical practice and what changes in drug use have resulted from the availability of the new compounds. For this purpose, data on drug use in 1995 and 2001 assessed at two reference days per year and per hospital within the drug safety program AMSP were compared for 10 hospitals that had been participating in both years. Atypical neuroleptics (NL) were used in 59.9 % of patients on NLs in 2001 (16.7 % in 1995), most frequently olanzapine, risperidone, clozapine, and quetiapine, in this order. Thirty-nine percent of patients still received typical NLs in antipsychotic indication (77.1 % in 1995), and 30.8 % received typical hypnosedative NLs (38.1 % in 1995). SSRIs, other new ADs, and TCAs were used in similar rates in 2001, i. e., in 40.5 %, 37.9 %, and 34.8 % of AD patients, respectively (1995 : 24.2 %, 6.2 %, and 72.3 %, respectively). Mirtazapine was the most common AD in 2001, followed by citalopram, sertraline, and doxepin. Hypnotics were prescribed more frequently in 2001 (17.6 % vs. 11.7 %), mostly BZD agonists at that time, whereas overall anxiolytic use (in approximately 30 %) hardly changed over time. Mood stabilizers and anti-dementia drugs were given comparatively rarely, even in pertinent diagnoses. Polypharmacy was observed in about three-quarters of patients on psychotropic drugs, with a trend towards increasing use over time. Combinations of two NLs, of NL + AD, and of NLs + anxiolytic were most common in both years. Twenty percent of patients on atypical NLs received typical antipsychotic NLs additionally; typical hypnosedative NLs were used along with typical antipsychotics and atypical NLs in 20 % and 22 % of patients, respectively. TCAs and either SSRIs or other new ADs were still the most common AD combinations in 2001. Data were also analyzed according to the main diagnostic categories.

[PMID: 16280409]
Linezolid was initially discovered as an antidepressant because of its effect on blocking intracellular metabolism of serotonin, norepinephrine, and other biogenic amines. As time passed, it was realized that linezolid possessed antibacterial activity, and linezolid has been developed and marketed as such. In medicine we are quick to categorize drugs into specific classes as a mechanism to recall indication and use. By classifying linezolid as an antibacterial, it is common to forget about its antidepressant roots. A case report involving linezolid with citalopram and mirtazepine in the precipitation of serotonin syndrome in a critically ill bone marrow transplant patient is described in this article.

[PMID: 21810886]
To investigate the association between antidepressant treatment and risk of several potential adverse outcomes in older people with depression and to examine risks by class of antidepressant, duration of use, and dose. Cohort study of people aged 65 and over diagnosed as having depression. 570 general practices in the United Kingdom supplying data to the QResearch primary care database. 60,746 patients diagnosed as having a new episode of depression between the ages of 65 and 100 years from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2007 and followed up until 31 December 2008. Hazard ratios associated with antidepressant use for all cause mortality, attempted suicide/self harm, myocardial infarction, stroke/transient ischaemic attack, falls, fractures, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, epilepsy/seizures, road traffic accidents, adverse drug reactions, and hyponatraemia, adjusted for a range of potential confounding variables. Hazard ratios were calculated for antidepressant class (tricyclic and related antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, other antidepressants), dose, and duration of use and for commonly prescribed individual drugs. 54,038 (89.0%) patients received at least one prescription for an antidepressant during follow-up. A total of 1,398,359 antidepressant prescriptions were issued: 764,659 (54.7%) for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 442,192 (31.6%) for tricyclic antidepressants, 2203 (0.2%) for monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and 189,305 (13.5%) for the group of other antidepressants. The associations with the adverse outcomes differed significantly between the antidepressant classes for seven outcomes. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were associated with the highest adjusted hazard ratios for falls (1.66, 95% confidence interval 1.58 to 1.73) and hyponatraemia (1.52, 1.33 to 1.75) compared with when antidepressants were not being used. The group of other antidepressants was associated with the highest adjusted hazard ratios for all cause mortality (1.66, 1.56 to 1.77), attempted suicide/self harm (5.16, 3.90 to 6.83), stroke/transient ischaemic attack (1.37, 1.22 to 1.55), fracture (1.64, 1.46 to 1.84), and epilepsy/seizures (2.24, 1.60 to 3.15), compared with when antidepressants were not being used. Tricyclic antidepressants did not have the highest hazard ratio for any of the outcomes. Significantly different associations also existed between the individual drugs for the same seven outcomes; trazodone (tricyclic antidepressant), mirtazapine, and venlafaxine (both in the group of other antidepressants) were associated with the highest rates for some of these outcomes. Absolute risks over 1 year for all cause mortality were 7.04% for patients while not taking antidepressants, 8.12% for those taking tricyclic antidepressants, 10.61% for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and 11.43% for other antidepressants. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and drugs in the group of other antidepressants were associated with an increased risk of several adverse outcomes compared with tricyclic antidepressants. Among individual drugs, trazodone, mirtazapine, and venlafaxine were associated with the highest risks for some outcomes. As this is an observational study, it is susceptible to confounding by indication, channelling bias, and residual confounding, so differences in characteristics between patients prescribed different antidepressant drugs that could account for some of the associations between the drugs and the adverse outcomes may remain. Further research is needed to confirm these findings, but the risks and benefits of different antidepressants should be carefully evaluated when these drugs are prescribed to older people.

[PMID: 12908614]
Major depression is a serious disease with various systemic effects, including dysfunction of the immune response. Taurine has been known to be related to certain modifications of the immune system. The aim of this study was to determine the taurine concentration in lymphocytes of patients with major depression and to evaluate the influence of the antidepressant treatment with mirtazapine for six weeks on the levels of taurine. Gamma-aminobutyric acid, aspartate, glutamate and glutamine were also determined. Taurine, aspartate and glutamine levels were increased in the lymphocytes of depressed patients before mirtazapine treatment compared to the control group, and were normalized after treatment. Gamma-aminobutyric acid and glutamate did not differ between patients and controls. There was a significant and positive correlation between the severity of the disorder, measured by the Hamilton Rating Scale, and the concentration of taurine in the lymphocytes of depressed patients before treatment. This correlation was not observed after treatment and neither was there a correlation observed for the other amino acids. The present observations could be an indication of the relevance of taurine as a protective agent in the lymphocytes of patients with severe depression, and could be the result of modifications of taurine transport or efflux processes.

[PMID: 15520364]
The "long/short"polymorphism (5HTTLPR) in the promoter of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) has been proposed as a pharmacogenetic marker for antidepressant efficacy. Some but not all studies have found that the short form of 5HTTLPR (S allele) results in decreased efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. To determine if the 5HTTLPR polymorphism influences the efficacy and tolerability of mirtazapine and paroxetine hydrochloride, 2 frequently prescribed antidepressants with differing pharmacologic profiles, in geriatric depression. Double-blind, randomized 8-week study. Eighteen academic and private outpatient clinics. We evaluated 246 cognitively intact patients 65 years or older with major depression. Antidepressant therapy with 15 to 45 mg/d of mirtazapine (n = 124) or 20 to 40 mg/d of paroxetine (n = 122). The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale-17 and Geriatric Depression Scale, severity of adverse events and dosing compliance indexes, and discontinuations due to adverse events. Outcome measures were stratified according to 5HTTLPR genotypes. Geriatric Depression Scale scores indicated that S allele carriers treated with paroxetine showed a small impairment in antidepressant response. Among mirtazapine-treated patients, there was little indication that the 5HTTLPR genotype affected antidepressant efficacy. However, the 5HTTLPR polymorphism had a dramatic effect on adverse events. Among paroxetine-treated subjects, S allele carriers experienced more severe adverse events during the course of the study, achieved significantly lower final daily doses, and had more discontinuations at days 14, 21, 28, 42, and 49. Surprisingly, among mirtazapine-treated subjects, S allele carriers had fewer discontinuations due to adverse events, experienced less severe adverse events, and achieved higher final daily doses. These results support the hypothesis that the S allele of 5HTTLPR at the SLC6A4 locus is associated with a poor outcome after treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. However, the major effect was on the tolerability of these drugs rather than efficacy. Results from mirtazapine-treated patients indicate that the effect of this polymorphism on outcome may depend on the mechanism of antidepressant action.

[PMID: 19016570]
The popularity of antidepressants in the treatment of insomnia is not supported by a large amount of convincing data, but rather by opinions and beliefs of the prescribing physicians on the advantages of these agents compared with drugs acting on the benzodiazepine receptor or other drugs used for the treatment of insomnia. The existing data do not allow for clear-cut, evidence-based recommendations concerning the use of antidepressants in insomnia. Our conclusions result from a few short-term studies on single agents, clinical experience and inferences from knowledge on the effect of antidepressants in other indications. At present, prescribing antidepressants for short-term treatment of insomnia can be useful if there is some amount of concomitant depressive symptomology or a history of depression, raising the impression that the present insomnia may be a prodromal sign for a new depressive episode. In all other cases, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, especially the nonbenzodiazepines among them (the so-called 'z drugs') should be the drugs of choice. For long-term treatment, antidepressants are among the pharmacological options, in addition to other groups of psychotropics. Off-label use of antidepressants may be considered for chronic insomnia if there is a concomitant depressive symptomalogy (which is not so pronounced that an antidepressant treatment with adequate higher doses would be required) and if there is no specific indication for one of the other groups of psychotropics (e.g. dementia-related nocturnal agitation, in which case an antipsychotic would be preferred, or circadian problems, in which case melatonin or a melatonin agonist would be favoured). If antidepressants are used to treat insomnia, sedating ones should be preferred over activating agents such as serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In general, drugs lacking strong cholinergic activity should be preferred. Drugs blocking serotonin 5-HT2A or 5-HT2C receptors should be preferred over those whose sedative property is caused by histamine receptor blockade only. The dose should be as low as possible (e.g. as an initial dose: doxepin 25 mg, mirtazapine 15 mg, trazodone 50 mg, trimipramine 25 mg). Regarding the lack of substantial data allowing for evidence-based recommendations, we are facing a clear need for well designed, long-term, comparative studies to further define the role of antidepressants versus other agents in the management of insomnia.

[PMID: 23018612]
Since antidepressants are prescribed for multiple indications, the use of an antidepressant cannot be equated with a diagnosis of depression. The objective of this study was to examine the quality of antidepressant prescribing in Belgian nursing homes, with a critical evaluation of indications and dosages, to see whether depression was appropriately treated in terms of drug choice, the indications for which antidepressants were being prescribed and whether there was underdosing. This analysis was based on data obtained in the Prescribing in Homes for the Elderly in Belgium (PHEBE) study, a cross-sectional, descriptive study of a representative, stratified, random sample of 1,730 residents from 76 Belgian nursing homes. The PHEBE study investigated overall drug utilization in Belgian nursing homes in 2006. Clinical and medication data for the present study were obtained from this study. A 28-item checklist of clinical conditions was designed ad hoc for the PHEBE study and sent to the residents' general practitioners (GPs) to collect clinical information. We copied the residents' medication charts, classified the drugs using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system codes and transferred the drug names and dosages into a database. Information on indications was retrospectively obtained from the GPs, so that we could link the indication to each medication. Minimum effective doses (MEDs) of antidepressants to treat major depression were obtained from the literature to assess underdosing. The overall use of antidepressants in nursing homes was 39.5 % (95 % CI 37.2, 41.8). The physicians classified 34.2 % (95 % CI 32.0, 36.4) of the residents as having depression, and 80.9 % of these patients were treated with an antidepressant. Indications among the single antidepressant users (n = 551) were depression (66.2 %), insomnia (13.4 %), anxiety (6.2 %) and neuropathic pain (1.6 %). In the indication of depression, 74.8 % used a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), predominantly citalopram, sertraline and escitalopram. Venlafaxine was used by 10.7 % of the residents. Dosages for these antidepressants were equal to or higher than the MED. But when trazodone, amitriptyline or mirtazapine were used to treat depression, respectively, 92.3, 55.5 and 44.5 % of prescribed dosages were below the MED. In the indication of insomnia, most of the time, trazodone (90.5 %) or mirtazapine (5.4 %) were used, and in lower dosages than those required for depression treatment (<MED). Tricyclic antidepressants were predominantly used for the treatment of neuropathic pain and were also used at lower dosages. Of all the residents receiving a medication for anxiety, only 13.9 % received an antidepressant (mostly an SSRI), and the remaining received a benzodiazepine. The number one indication for the use of an antidepressant was depression. Within this indication, mostly the recommended SSRIs were used, in dosages equal to or higher than the MED. Furthermore, we noticed that there was substantial use of sedative antidepressants for insomnia and that the physicians preferred to prescribe benzodiazepines over the recommended SSRIs to treat anxiety chronically.