[PMID: 29760163]
▼ Safinamide (Xadago - Zambon S.p.A) is a monoamine-oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitor licensed as add-on therapy for people with idiopathic Parkinson's disease who are experiencing motor fluctuations with levodopa.<sup>1</sup> Currently there is no cure for Parkinson's disease and drugs are used to reduce motor symptoms and improve daily activities.<sup>2,3</sup> Here, we review the evidence for this MAO-B inhibitor.

[PMID: 29670409]
Heterogeneous expression of neurotransmitter deficits results from onset and progression of Parkinson's disease. Intervals, characterized by reappearance of motor and associated certain nonmotor symptoms, determine the end of good tolerability and efficacy of oral levodopa therapy. These "OFF" states result from levodopa pharmacokinetics and disease progression-related deterioration of the central buffering capacity for fluctuations of dopamine levels. This review discusses safinamide as an add-on therapeutic agent in orally levodopa-treated patients with "OFF" phenomena. Safinamide provided beneficial effects on "OFF" symptoms in pivotal trials with doses of 50 or 100 mg once daily. Safinamide reversibly inhibits mono-amine oxidase B and declines abnormal glutamate release by modulation of potassium- and sodium ion channels. An ideal candidate for combination with safinamide is opicapone. This inhibitor of peripheral catechol-O-methyltransferase supports continuous brain delivery of levodopa and, thus, the continuous dopaminergic stimulation concept. Both compounds with their once-daily application and good tolerability may complement each other by reduction of necessary oral levodopa intakes and "OFF" times. Thus, a promising, future option will be combination of safinamide and opicapone in one formulation. It will reduce adherence issues and may complement levodopa treatment. It will probably cause less nausea and edema than a dopamine agonist/levodopa regimen.

[PMID: 28110399]
Safinamide (Xadago<sup>®</sup>) is an orally active, selective, reversible monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor with both dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic (glutamatergic) properties. In the EU, safinamide is approved for the treatment of mid- to late-stage fluctuating Parkinson's disease (PD) as add-on therapy to a stable dose of levodopa alone or in combination with other PD medications. Safinamide 50-100 mg/day administered as a fixed or flexible dose significantly increased daily 'on' time without dyskinesia (primary endpoint) in patients with mid- to late-stage PD with motor fluctuations in 24-week, placebo-controlled clinical trials. Other outcomes, including motor function, overall clinical status and health-related quality of life, were also generally improved with safinamide. Furthermore, in an 18-month extension of one study, although dyskinesia (primary endpoint) was not significantly improved with safinamide relative to placebo, treatment benefits in other outcomes were generally sustained over 24 months of treatment. Safinamide was generally well tolerated in clinical trials; dyskinesia was the most common adverse event. Although further studies are needed, including comparative and long-term studies, current evidence indicates that safinamide extends the treatment options available for use as add-on therapy to levodopa and other PD medications in patients with mid- to late-stage PD experiencing motor fluctuations.

[PMID: 30271159]
Safinamide (Xadago<sup>®</sup>) is a novel medication with both dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic effects, approved first by the European Commission and more recently by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as an adjunctive treatment to carbidopa/levodopa in patients with mid- to late-stage Parkinson's disease (PD) and motor fluctuations. It works through multiple mechanisms, namely as a reversible selective monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor and through modulation of glutamate release. Safinamide is extensively metabolized via oxidation to several inactive metabolites that are excreted primarily through the urine. Several large Phase III clinical trials of patients with advanced PD with motor fluctuations have shown that safinamide, administered orally at doses of 50-100 mg daily, increased ON time with no or non-troublesome dyskinesia, decreased daily OFF time, improved overall motor function (as measured by Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale [UPDRS] part III total score), and quality of life (as measured by Clinical Global Impression-Change and 39-item Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire). In large clinical trials of patients with early PD on a single dopamine agonist, safinamide administered orally at a dose of 100 mg daily improved overall motor function as measured by UPDRS part III total score; however, some of the results reported were exploratory. Safinamide is generally well-tolerated and safe, with few to no treatment-related adverse events. Safinamide does not cause new or worsening dyskinesia and may be able to reduce this symptom in patients reporting it at baseline. Evidence suggests that safinamide is a good option for add-on therapy to carbidopa/levodopa in patients with advanced PD with motor complications, but there is still insufficient evidence to recommend it as monotherapy or add-on therapy in patients with early PD.

[PMID: 30142650]
Safinamide (Xadago<sup>®</sup>) is a newly approved selective MAO-B inhibitor for the treatment of Parkinson's Disease (PD). The X-TRA study investigated the efficacy and tolerability of the substance under clinical practice conditions. Prospective, observational study in unselected patients in line with safinamide product specifications. Of the 299 patients included (65.9 % males, age 72.7 ± 9.0 years, duration of disease 7.8 ± 5.9 years), at the beginning of the documentation 229 patients (81.2 %) received L-dopa, 108 (39.3 %) combination drugs containing L-dopa, 172 (59.3 %) a dopamine agonist and 23 (8.3 %) a COMT inhibitor. Of these, 203 patients were followed-up over a period of 6 months. The MDS-UPDRS Part III score for motor symptoms decreased from a baseline value of 48.2 ± 22.1 points by 6.8 ± 14.5 points at the end of the study. The Non-Motor Symptoms Scale score indicating the presence or absence of motor symptoms decreased from a baseline value of 57.6 ± 42.1 by 9.3 ± 2.1 points, the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Score from 4.6 ± 5.8 points by 0.9 ± 2.7 points.The Parkinson's Disease Score (PDQ-8) for assessing quality of life decreased from a baseline value of 39.4 ± 18.2 points by 4.3 ± 13.7 points, reflecting an improvement. In total, 300 adverse events were classified as related to safinamide in 132 patients (44.1 %). Fifty-three events were serious (in 15 patients; 5 %). Seventy-four patients (24.7 %) discontinued safinamide therapy because of adverse drug reactions. Safinamide therapy improved the motor and non-motor symptoms as well as the quality of life in PD. Most patients tolerated the therapy well. The only side effects that occurred are those described in the patient information leaflet.

[PMID: 27802242]
Pain, a frequent non-motor symptom in Parkinson's Disease (PD), significantly impacts on quality of life. Safinamide is a new drug with dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic properties, approved in Europe as adjunct therapy to levodopa for the treatment of fluctuating PD patients. Results from two 24-month, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies demonstrated that safinamide has positive effects on both motor functions and quality of life in PD patients. To investigate the effects of safinamide on pain management in PD patients with motor fluctuations using pooled data from studies 016 and SETTLE. This post-hoc analysis evaluated the reduction of concomitant pain treatments and the changes in the scores of the items related to pain of the Parkinson's Disease Quality of Life Questionnaire (PDQ-39). A path analysis was performed in order to examine direct and indirect associations between safinamide and PDQ-39 pain-related items assessed after 6-months of treatment. The percentage of patients with no pain treatments at the end of the trials was significantly lower in the safinamide group compared to the placebo group. Safinamide 100 mg/day significantly reduced on average the individual use of pain treatments by ≈24% and significantly improved two out of three PDQ-39 pain-related items of the "Bodily discomfort" domain.Path analysis showed that the direct effect of safinamide on pain accounted for about 80% of the total effect. These results suggest that safinamide may have a positive effect on pain, one of the most underestimated non-motor symptoms. Prospective studies are warranted to investigate this potential benefit.

[PMID: 30291173]
Safinamide (Xadago) is a novel dual-mechanism drug that has been approved in the European Union and United States as add-on treatment to levodopa in Parkinson's disease therapy. In addition to its selective and reversible monoamine oxidase B inhibition, safinamide through use-dependent sodium channel blockade reduces overactive glutamatergic transmission in basal ganglia, which is believed to contribute to motor symptoms and complications including levodopa-induced dyskinesia (LID). The present study investigated the effects of safinamide on the development of LID in 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-lesioned rats, evaluating behavioral, molecular, and neurochemical parameters associated with LID appearance. 6-OHDA-lesioned rats were treated with saline, levodopa (6 mg/kg), or levodopa plus safinamide (15 mg/kg) for 21 days. Abnormal involuntary movements, motor performance, molecular composition of the striatal glutamatergic synapse, glutamate, and GABA release were analyzed. In the striatum, safinamide prevented the rearrangement of the subunit composition of <i>N</i>-methyl-d-aspartate receptors and the levodopa-induced increase of glutamate release associated with dyskinesia without affecting the levodopa-stimulated motor performance and dyskinesia. Overall, these findings suggest that the striatal glutamate-modulating component of safinamide's activity may contribute to its clinical effects, where its long-term use as levodopa add-on therapy significantly improves motor function and "on" time without troublesome dyskinesia.

[PMID: 29441484]
In this retrospective study, we evaluated both efficacy and effectiveness of safinamide 50 and 100 mg in the treatment of motor fluctuations and disabling dyskinesias in a cohort of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). Ninety-one PD patients were evaluated during the first year of commercialization of the drug, both prior to starting safinamide and at the last available follow-up. Evaluations were based on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Scale part III (UPDRS III), Hoehn & Yahr (HY), Unified Dyskinesia Rating Scale (UDysRS) walking and balance item 9 score, daily time spent in OFF and in ON with disabling dyskinesias (1 week diary), mean daily dose of levodopa (LD), dopamine-agonists (DA), catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitor (COMT-I), monoamine oxidase B inhibitor (MAOB-I), and their LD equivalent dose (LEDD). Eight patients withdrew safinamide within the first month for minor side effects. At the follow-up evaluation, after a mean time with safinamide of 7.5 months ± 3.4, all patients showed a significant improvement of all the scale scores, except for HY, and of the daily dosages of the drugs and the LEDD. The same results were shown by PD patients treated with safinamide 50 mg and patients who started safinamide without switching from a previous MAOBI. PD patients with safinamide 100 mg and patients who started safinamide switching from a previous MAOBI significantly improved in time spent in OFF and LEDD. In conclusion, safinamide is safe and effective in improving motor complications in patients with idiopathic PD and can be considered a useful levodopa sparing strategy.

[PMID: 29167350]
Safinamide has been recently approved as an add-on to levodopa therapy for Parkinson disease. In addition to inhibiting monoamine oxidase type B, it blocks sodium channels and modulates glutamate (Glu) release in vitro. Since this property might contribute to the therapeutic action of the drug, we undertook the present study to investigate whether safinamide inhibits Glu release also in vivo and whether this effect is consistent across different brain areas and is selective for glutamatergic neurons. To this aim, in vivo microdialysis was used to monitor the spontaneous and veratridine-induced Glu and GABA release in the hippocampus and basal ganglia of naive, awake rats. Brain levels of safinamide were measured as well. To shed light on the mechanisms underlying the effect of safinamide, sodium currents were measured by patch-clamp recording in rat cortical neurons. Safinamide maximally inhibited the veratridine-induced Glu and GABA release in hippocampus at 15 mg/kg, which reached free brain concentrations of 1.89-1.37 <i>µ</i>M. This dose attenuated veratridine-stimulated Glu (but not GABA) release in subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra reticulata, but not in striatum. Safinamide was ineffective on spontaneous neurotransmitter release. In vitro, safinamide inhibited sodium channels, showing a greater affinity at depolarized (IC<sub>50</sub> = 8 <i>µ</i>M) than at resting (IC<sub>50</sub> = 262 <i>µ</i>M) potentials. We conclude that safinamide inhibits in vivo Glu release from stimulated nerve terminals, likely via blockade of sodium channels at subpopulations of neurons with specific firing patterns. These data are consistent with the anticonvulsant and antiparkinsonian actions of safinamide and provide support for the nondopaminergic mechanism of its action.

[PMID: 25851099]
Safinamide (Xadago(®)) is an oral α-aminoamide derivative developed by Newron for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). The drug has both dopaminergic properties (highly selective and reversible inhibition of monoamine oxidase-B) and non-dopaminergic properties (selective sodium channel blockade and calcium channel modulation, with consequent inhibition of excessive glutamate release). Safinamide is approved in the EU, Iceland, Lichtenstein and Norway, as an add-on therapy to stable-dose levodopa, alone or in combination with other PD therapies in mid- to late-stage fluctuating PD patients; regulatory submissions have also been filed in the USA and Switzerland for its use in this indication. Additional submissions have been made in the USA, Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and Switzerland for early-stage PD. Safinamide has also undergone phase II investigation in PD patients with drug-induced dyskinesia (France, Germany, Austria, Canada and South Africa) or cognitive impairment (USA and Spain). This article summarizes the milestones in the development of safinamide leading to its first approval for PD.

[PMID: 29339106]
The loss of dopaminergic neurons (DAn) and reduced dopamine (DA) production underlies the reasoning behind the gold standard treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD) using levodopa (L-DOPA). Recently licensed by the European Medicine Agency (EMA) and US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), safinamide [a monoamine oxidase B (MOA-B) inhibitor] is an alternative to L-DOPA; as we discuss here, it enhances dopaminergic transmission with decreased secondary effects compared with L-DOPA. In addition, nondopaminergic actions (neuroprotective effects) have been reported, with safinamide inhibiting glutamate release and sodium/calcium channels, reducing the excitotoxic input to dopaminergic neuronal death. Effects of safinamide have been correlated with the amelioration of non-motor symptoms (NMS), although these remain under discussion. Overall, safinamide can be considered to have potential antidyskinetic and neuroprotective effects and future trials and/or studies should be performed to provide further evidence for its potential as an anti-PD drug.

[PMID: 26587996]
Safinamide (Xadago™) is an oral α-aminoamide derivative marketed for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). The drug has both dopaminergic properties, namely highly selective and reversible inhibition of monoamine oxidase B, and nondopamimetic properties, namely selective sodium channel blockade and calcium channel modulation, with consequent inhibition of excessive glutamate release. In 2014, safinamide was approved in the European Economic Area, as "an add-on therapy to stable dose levodopa, alone or in combination with other PD therapies in mid- to late-stage-fluctuating PD patients." In addition, evidence has been provided for safinamide in the treatment of motor symptoms in early PD patients. This article summarizes the pharmacological properties, development program, clinical indications for PD treatment, stratified according to several disease's stages and the safety profile of safinamide. A meta-analysis of the most frequent adverse events among Phase III trials has been also performed.