[PMID: 21340496]
Gender and environmental factors are known to influence the clinical heterogeneity and outcome of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Some variables have been suggested to be associated with the severity of the disease, which can be of great value in the correct management of RA patients. The purpose of this study was to investigate the associations among anticyclic citrullinated antibody (anti-CCP2) positivity, extra-articular manifestations (EAM), gender, and tobacco exposure in a Brazilian RA population. We performed a transversal study comprising 156 RA patients which were investigated for EAM, functional class, presence of anti-CCP2, and IgM rheumatoid factor (IgM-RF). The determination of anti-CCP2 was performed using enzyme immunoassay (ELISA) kits and IgM-RF by latex agglutination test. Clinical and demographical data were obtained through review of charts. Anti-CCP positivity intensity was directly correlated with tobacco smoking, sex, and the development of rheumatoid nodules. Intense anti-CCP2 reaction was 19.8-fold higher in females vs. males, 2.7-fold higher in tobacco vs. non-tobacco users, 7.7-fold higher in female vs. male tobacco users, and 5.15-fold higher in patients with rheumatoid nodules. Tobacco smoking, gender, and rheumatoid nodules are significantly correlated with anti-CCP2 positivity in Brazilian RA patients.

[PMID: 22853635]
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and psoriasis are immune-mediated inflammatory diseases with similarities in pathophysiology, and all can be treated with similar biological agents. Previous studies have shown that there are gender differences with regard to disease characteristics in RA and IBD, with women generally having worse scores on pain and quality of life measurements. The relationship is less clear for psoriasis. Because treatment differences between men and women could explain the dissimilarities, we investigated gender differences in the disease characteristics before treatment initiation and in the biologic treatment prescribed. Data on patients with RA or IBD were collected from two registries in which patients treated with biologic medication were enrolled. Basic demographic data and disease activity parameters were collected from a time point just before the initiation of the biologic treatment. For patients with psoriasis, the data were taken from the 2010 annual report of the Swedish Psoriasis Register for systemic treatment, which included also non-biologic treatment. For all three diseases, the prescribed treatment and disease characteristics were compared between men and women. In total, 4493 adult patients were included in the study (1912 with RA, 131 with IBD, and 2450 with psoriasis). Most of the treated patients with RA were women, whereas most of the patients with IBD or psoriasis were men. There were no significant differences between men and women in the choice of biologics. At treatment start, significant gender differences were seen in the subjective disease measurements for both RA and psoriasis, with women having higher (that is, worse) scores than men. No differences in objective measurements were found for RA, but for psoriasis men had higher (that is, worse) scores for objective disease activity measures. A similar trend to RA was seen in IBD. Women with RA or psoriasis scored significantly higher on subjective, but not on objective, disease activity measures than men, and the same trend was seen in IBD. This indicates that at the same level of treatment, the disease has a greater effect in women. These findings might suggest that in all three diseases, subjective measures are discounted to some extent in the therapeutic decision-making process, which could indicate undertreatment in female patients.

[PMID: 19158113]
To evaluate gender differences in score on 28-joint Disease Activity Score (DAS28), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) and Signals Of Functional Impairment (SOFI) and to relate these scores to radiographic joint destruction. In all, 549 patients with early RA (62% women) from the BARFOT (for "Better Anti-Rheumatic FarmacOTherapy") study were included. At baseline, 1, 2 and 5 years DAS28, HAQ and SOFI scoring, and radiographs of hands and feet were performed. The radiographs were scored using the van der Heijde-Sharp score. In women the DAS28 was significantly higher than in men due to higher scores for general health and tender joints. Likewise, HAQ and VAS pain were rated significantly higher in women. The SOFI score was worse in men during the first 2 years, depending on higher upper limb scores. Total Sharp score (TotSharp), erosion score and joint space narrowing score did not differ between the sexes at any time point. The DAS28 area under the curve (AUC) correlated significantly with TotSharp at 5 years in both genders (r = 0.316, r = 0.313) mainly owing to swollen joints and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). The SOFI AUC correlated significantly with TotSharp in women (r = 0.135 to 0.220) but not in men. Despite a similar degree of radiographic joint destruction women had, compared with men, worse scores for DAS28 and HAQ, possibly due to higher pain perception and less muscular strength and perhaps because men overestimate their functional capacity.

[PMID: 20889597]
To assess gender differences in disease characteristics and treatment responses over time in a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD)-naive seropositive early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) cohort. Patients with polyarticular disease who were DMARD-naive and had seropositive early RA (< 14 months) were recruited by the Western Consortium of Practicing Rheumatologists. Each patient was examined at study entry, after 6 and 12 months, and yearly thereafter. Clinical and demographic data were collected. We investigated gender differences in baseline disease characteristics and treatment using chi-squared, Mann-Whitney U, and t tests. We used generalized estimating equations (GEE) models for repeated measures to examine whether the rate of change of specific disease outcomes during the first 2 years after DMARD initiation was significantly influenced by gender. At baseline, men (n = 67) and women (n = 225) had similar disease activity and radiographic damage; men, however, had significantly worse erosion, while women had worse joint space narrowing. Despite similar treatment, women had worse disease progression over the 2-year followup, as assessed by trends in Disease Activity Score 28/erythrocyte sedimentation rate (DAS28-ESR4), physician global scores, and tender joint counts. In the GEE model, gender was significantly associated with the rate of change of DAS28-ESR4 scores (p = 0.009), although not independently associated with disease activity. Self-reported measures (Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index, patient global scores, fatigue, pain) were worse among women at baseline and throughout the study period. Men were more likely to achieve remission. At baseline, men and women had similar disease activity and joint damage. Responses to treatment over time were better among men in this prebiologic era; women had worse progression despite similar treatment.

[PMID: 18759162]
To determine whether the Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI) and the Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI) are equally applicable for the total population with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Five hundred and fifty-seven outpatients with RA [432 females, 125 males; median age 64 years (range 18-85); median disease duration 48 months (range 2-548)] were enrolled consecutively in this cross-sectional study. SDAI, CDAI, patient's assessment of pain on the visual analogue scale (VAS) 0-100, rheumatoid factor (RF), and disease duration were recorded. Linear regression analysis was performed for each confounding factor. The median SDAI for all 557 patients was 11.6 (range 0.07-46.60) and the median CDAI was 10.7 (0.00-42.10). The median SDAI was 12.2 (0.07-46.60) in females and 8.0 (0.10-35.20) in males. The respective medians for the CDAI were 11.3 (0.00-42.10) and 7.1 (0.00-32.00). These differences were highly statistically significant (p<0.001). Patient's assessment of pain on the VAS 0-100 scale had a median value of 32 mm. Regression analysis revealed a highly significant relationship between SDAI/CDAI levels and patient's pain rating (SDAI: r = 0.660, p<0.001; CDAI: r = 0.671, p<0.001). On multiple regression analysis, pain exerted a highly significant influence on SDAI and CDAI levels (p<0.001), whereas age, disease duration, and RF were not correlated with either level. SDAI and CDAI values are highly dependent on the patient's pain perception and gender. The effects of patient's age, disease duration, and RF were inconclusive with respect to the values of the respective disease activity indexes.

[PMID: 16418123]
Emotion regulation has been associated with perceived health in rheumatoid arthritis, which is diagnosed three times more often in women than men. Our aim was to examine gender differences in styles of emotion regulation (ambiguity, control, orientation, and expression) and gender-specificity of the associations between emotion regulation and perceived health (psychological well-being, social functioning, physical functioning, and disease activity) in 244 female and 91 male patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Women reported more emotional orientation than men, but did not differ from men with regard to ambiguity, control, and expression. Structural equation modelling showed that relationships between emotion regulation and perceived health were more frequent and stronger for women than men. This held especially for the affective dimension of health, while associations were similar for both women and men with regard to social and physical functioning. Only for women, the association between ambiguity and disease activity was significant, which appeared to be mediated by affective functioning. The observations that women are more emotionally oriented than men and that emotion regulation is more interwoven with psychological health in women than men, support the usefulness of a gender-sensitive approach in research and health care of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

[PMID: 17965425]
To investigate the influence of age and gender on the components of the 28-joint Disease Activity Score (DAS28) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and to clarify whether a high DAS28 can be equally interpreted in all age groups, independent of gender. A prospective cohort of 553 patients with RA was studied for approximately 20 years after diagnosis. The single measures of disease activity and the share of different components of the DAS28 (eg, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; ESR) were analysed and compared between three age groups (<45, 45-65 and >65 years) and per gender, using analysis of variance (ANOVA). The performance of the DAS28 and its components was explored in moderate to high and low DAS28 categories. Linear mixed model analysis was used to design the models best predicting ESR and the share of ESR. ESR significantly increased with age, independent of other variables of disease activity. This increase was more pronounced in male than in female patients. Nevertheless, the share of ESR increased with age only in male patients with a low DAS28 (<3.2). If the DAS28 score was >3.2, age and gender did not have a significant effect on any components of the DAS28. C-reactive protein (CRP) and DAS28(CRP) were not influenced by age. A high DAS28 was found to perform equally in all age groups, in men and women, despite the elevating effect of age on ESR. In elderly men with low disease activity, remission rate could be underestimated by an elevated ESR.

[PMID: 15083883]
To investigate whether gender is an independent factor associated with disease expression in early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. 438 patients with early RA (disease duration less than one year) were studied. They all were patients with early RA who presented at the Rheumatology Clinic of the University Hospital of Ioannina during the period 1991-2000. All patients fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology criteria for RA. The demographic, clinical, laboratory, radiological and therapeutic characteristics of the disease at diagnosis, and at the last follow-up were analyzed according to gender. We studied 312 women and 126 men with early RA. The female to male ratio was 2.5:1 and the mean age at diagnosis was 49.4 +/- 14.9 years for women and 55.3 +/-15.6 years for men (P < 0.0003). Women had a longer duration of follow-up (P < 0.0003). There were no differences between genders in the general symptoms or the simmetricity of joint involvement at at disease onset. However at disease onset women had a higher erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (> 30 mm/1st hour), although there were no significant differences between the two groups concerninig the rest of the clinical, laboratory and radiological findings. At the last follow-up women still had a higher ESR (>30 min/1st hour), but no significant differences were found between the two groups concerning the rest of the parameters investigated independently of the follow-up duration. Finally, women and men showed the same degree of radiological changes and functional ability and were treated similarly except for the more frequent use of hydroxychloroquine in women. It seems that gender does not signficantly influence the expression of RA.

[PMID: 1563036]
Disease patterns in RA vary between the sexes; the condition is more commonly seen in women, who exhibit a more aggressive disease and a poorer long-term outcome. Men, however, are more likely than women to die from extra-articular complications of rheumatoid disease. This chapter discusses the outcome and mortality studies that substantiate these conclusions and then examines the possible mechanisms that may account for them, including the HLA system, seropositivity, compliance, response to therapy and pain threshold. In particular, sex and sex hormones emerge as independent risk factors in rheumatoid disease. The epidemiological evidence points towards a peak age of onset of RA at the time of the menopause in women and towards later in life in men. Premenopausal women may fare better than postmenopausal women with RA. The possible protective effects of the oral contraceptive pill and the dramatic amelioration with pregnancy are well documented. In vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that sex hormones interfere with a number of the putative processes involved in the pathogenesis of RA, including immunoregulation, interaction with inflammatory mediators and the cytokine system, and direct effects on cartilage itself. All these observations point towards the importance of gonadal hormones. However, trials on the potential therapeutic use of sex hormones in RA are limited and, as yet, disappointing. Further work is necessary to determine whether the roles of sex hormones are as central protagonists or just supporting cast in the complex arena of rheumatoid disease.

[PMID: 12723987]
The present case-control study was conducted to investigate the relationship between smoking and rheumatoid arthritis, and to investigate formally the interaction between sex, smoking, and risk for developing rheumatoid arthritis. The study was performed in the Central District of Finland. Cases were patients with rheumatoid arthritis and the control group was a random sample of the general population. Logistic regression models were used to evaluate the effect of smoking on risk for rheumatoid arthritis, after adjusting for the effects of age, education, body mass index, and indices of general health and pain. Overall, 1095 patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 1530 control individuals were included. Patients were older, less well educated, more disabled, and had poorer levels of general health as compared with control individuals (all P < 0.01). Preliminary analyses revealed the presence of substantial statistical interaction between smoking and sex (P < 0.001). In separate multivariable analyses, past history of smoking was associated with increased risk for rheumatoid arthritis overall in men (odds ratio 2.0, 95% confidence interval 1.2-3.2) but not in women. Among men, this effect was seen only for rheumatoid factor-positive rheumatoid arthritis. There were significant interactions between smoking and age among women but not among men. We conclude that sex is a biologic effect modifier in the association between smoking and rheumatoid arthritis. The role of menopause in the etiology of rheumatoid arthritis merits further research.

[PMID: 20810033]
To investigate whether body mass index (BMI), as a proxy for body fat, influences rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease activity in a gender-specific manner. Consecutive patients with RA were enrolled from 25 countries into the QUEST-RA program between 2005 and 2008. Clinical and demographic data were collected by treating rheumatologists and by patient self-report. Distributions of Disease Activity Scores (DAS28), BMI, age, and disease duration were assessed for each country and for the entire dataset; mean values between genders were compared using Student's t-tests. An association between BMI and DAS28 was investigated using linear regression, adjusting for age, disease duration and country. A total of 5,161 RA patients (4,082 women and 1,079 men) were included in the analyses. Overall, women were younger, had longer disease duration, and higher DAS28 scores than men, but BMI was similar between genders. The mean DAS28 scores increased with increasing BMI from normal to overweight and obese, among women, whereas the opposite trend was observed among men. Regression results showed BMI (continuous or categorical) to be associated with DAS28. Compared to the normal BMI range, being obese was associated with a larger difference in mean DAS28 (0.23, 95% CI: 0.11, 0.34) than being overweight (0.12, 95% CI: 0.03, 0.21); being underweight was not associated with disease activity. These associations were more pronounced among women, and were not explained by any single component of the DAS28. BMI appears to be associated with RA disease activity in women, but not in men.

[PMID: 23217568]
Data on the effect of gender in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in non-Caucasian populations is scarce. Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) is a large population with unique characteristics, including high admixture. Our aim was to examine the effect of gender in patients with RA in LAC. This was a 2-phase study. First we conducted a cross-sectional and analytical study in which 1128 consecutive Colombian patients with RA were assessed. Second, a systematic review of the literature was done to evaluate the effect of gender in LAC patients with RA. Our results show a high prevalence of RA in LAC women with a ratio of 5.2 women per man. Colombian women with RA are more at risk of having an early age at onset and developing polyautoimmunity and abdominal obesity, and they perform more household duties than their male counterparts. However, male gender was associated with the presence of extra-articular manifestations. Of a total of 641 potentially relevant articles, 38 were considered for final analysis, in which several factors and outcomes related to gender were identified. RA in LAC women is not only more common but presents with some clinical characteristics that differ from RA presentation in men. Some of those characteristics could explain the high rates of disability and worse prognosis observed in women with RA in LAC.