[PMID: 23226529]
Daily pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with Truvada (a combination of emtricitabine (FTC) and tenofovir (TFV) disoproxil fumarate (TDF)) is a novel HIV prevention strategy recently found to prevent HIV transmission in men who have sex with men and heterosexual couples. We previously showed that a coitally-dependent Truvada regimen protected macaques against rectal SHIV transmission. Here we examined FTC and tenofovir TFV exposure in vaginal tissues after oral dosing and assessed if peri-coital Truvada also protects macaques against vaginal SHIV infection. The pharmacokinetic profile of emtricitabine (FTC) and tenofovir (TFV) was evaluated at first dose. FTC and TFV levels were measured in blood plasma, rectal, and vaginal secretions. Intracellular concentrations of FTC-triphosphate (FTC-TP) and TFV-diphosphate (TFV-DP) were measured in PBMCs, rectal tissues, and vaginal tissues. Efficacy of Truvada in preventing vaginal SHIV infection was assessed using a repeat-exposure vaginal SHIV transmission model consisting of weekly exposures to low doses of SHIV162p3. Six pigtail macaques with normal menstrual cycles received Truvada 24 h before and 2 h after each weekly virus exposure and six received placebo. Infection was monitored by serology and PCR amplification of SHIV RNA and DNA. As in humans, the concentration of FTC was higher than the concentration of TFV in vaginal secretions. Also as in humans, TFV levels in vaginal secretions were lower than in rectal secretions. Intracellular TFV-DP concentrations were also lower in vaginal tissues than in rectal tissues. Despite the low vaginal TFV exposure, all six treated macaques were protected from infection after 18 exposures or 4 full menstrual cycles. In contrast, all 6 control animals were infected. We modeled a peri-coital regimen with two doses of Truvada and showed that it fully protected macaques from repeated SHIV exposures. Our results open the possibility for simplified PrEP regimens to prevent vaginal HIV transmission in women.

[PMID: 24223514]
On the heels of several trials demonstrating the efficacy of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and the recent approval by the FDA of the supplemental indication for Truvada as PrEP, researchers, advocates, and community providers are calling for the investigation of implementation strategies that combine behavioral interventions with biomedical prevention. This paper describes the modification and integration of an evidence-based group-level intervention into a small PrEP pilot trial with young men who have sex with men (YMSM). The behavioral intervention as well as ongoing risk reduction counseling sessions were found to be highly acceptable among a sample of racially diverse YMSM.

[PMID: 21632769]
Daily preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with Truvada (emtricitabine [FTC] and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate [TDF]) is a novel HIV prevention strategy recently found to reduce HIV incidence among men who have sex with men. We used a macaque model of HIV transmission to investigate if Truvada maintains prophylactic efficacy against an FTC-resistant isolate containing the M184V mutation. Five macaques received a dose of Truvada 3 days before exposing them rectally to the simian/human immunodeficiency virus mutant SHIV162p3(M184V), followed by a second dose 2 h after exposure. Five untreated animals were used as controls. Virus exposures were done weekly for up to 14 weeks. Despite the high (>100-fold) level of FTC resistance conferred by M184V, all five treated animals were protected from infection, while the five untreated macaques were infected (P = 0.0008). Our results show that Truvada maintains high prophylactic efficacy against an FTC-resistant isolate. Increased susceptibility to tenofovir due to M184V and other factors, including residual antiviral activity by FTC and/or reduced virus fitness due to M184V, may all have contributed to the observed protection.

[PMID: 19731560]
Chronic hepatitis B affects 5-10% of HIV patients in Western countries. Lamivudine should no longer be used as a single anti-HBV agent in HIV-HBV co-infected patients, given its limited antiviral potency and high risk of selection of resistance, which further results in wide cross-resistance to all other nucleoside analogues. Recent reports of transmission of lamivudine-resistant HBV in HIV patients are of especial concern, and large surveillance studies suggest that it may occur in up to 10% of new HBV infections in Western countries. Another worrisome aspect of the selection of lamivudine-resistant HBV is the potential for selection of vaccine escape mutants. Currently, tenofovir must be viewed as the drug of choice in HIV-HBV co-infected patients in whom antiretroviral therapy is advised. Its co-formulation with emtricitabine (Truvada) is particularly convenient for treating both HIV and HBV in co-infected individuals. While pegIFN-alpha monotherapy for 1 year may be considered for HIV-HBV coinfected individuals with good spontaneous HIV control (elevated CD4 cell count, low plasma HIV-RNA), and certain HBV features (genotype A, HBeAg+, low serum HBV-DNA and elevated ALT), it is clear that very few coinfected patients fulfill these criteria. In HBeAg-negative HIV patients, adefovir may be an option but the relatively low antiviral potency of this drug discourages its wide use. Given its potential anti-HIV activity, both entecavir and telbivudine must only be prescribed with antiretroviral agents. Lack of information about potential pharmacodynamic interactions between entecavir and abacavir (both are guanosine analogues) or between telbivudine and zidovudine or stavudine (all are thymidine analogues) further discourages their concomitant use. At this time, most experts agree that early introduction of anti-HBV active HAART is the best strategy for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B in HIV patients, and Truvada must be part of the triple regimen.

[PMID: 29902179]
To achieve the 90-90-90 goals set by UNAIDS, the number of new HIV infections needs to decrease to approximately 500,000 by 2020. One of the 'five pillars' to achieve this goal is pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). Truvada (emtricitabine-tenofovir) is currently the only medication approved for PrEP. Despite its advantages, Truvada is costly and requires individuals to adhere to the once-daily regimen. To improve PrEP, many next-generation regimen, including long-acting formulations, are currently investigated. However, pre-clinical testing may not guide candidate selection, since it often fails to translate into clinical efficacy. On the other hand, quantifying prophylactic efficacy in the clinic is ethically problematic and requires to conduct long (years) and large (N>1000 individuals) trials, precluding systematic evaluation of candidates and deployment strategies. To prioritize- and help design PrEP regimen, tools are urgently needed that integrate pharmacological-, viral- and host factors determining prophylactic efficacy. Integrating the aforementioned factors, we developed an efficient and exact stochastic simulation approach to predict prophylactic efficacy, as an example for dolutegravir (DTG). Combining the population pharmacokinetics of DTG with the stochastic framework, we predicted that plasma concentrations of 145.18 and 722.23nM prevent 50- and 90% sexual transmissions respectively. We then predicted the reduction in HIV infection when DTG was used in PrEP, PrEP 'on demand' and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) before/after virus exposure. Once daily PrEP with 50mg oral DTG prevented 99-100% infections, and 85% of infections when 50% of dosing events were missed. PrEP 'on demand' prevented 79-84% infections and PEP >80% when initiated within 6 hours after virus exposure and continued for as long as possible. While the simulation framework can easily be adapted to other PrEP candidates, our simulations indicated that oral 50mg DTG is non-inferior to Truvada. Moreover, the predicted 90% preventive concentrations can guide release kinetics of currently developed DTG nano-formulations.

[PMID: 28276922]
The pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) drug Truvada is a new HIV prevention technology that is predominantly promoted as relevant to HIV-negative gay men. This paper explores what PrEP represents for HIV-positive gay men living in Paris, based upon data collected through interviews and ethnographic research. While HIV-positive gay men do not directly consume Truvada through PrEP, they nonetheless hold opinions and understandings of this drug, specifically as it relates to their own sexuality. This paper expands the representations and meanings of this new technology in a different light through the voices of gay men living with HIV in Paris. The main argument of this article is that PrEP as an additional HIV prevention tool blurs the lines between science, technologies and human sexuality.

[PMID: 22581627]
Twenty years after its original discovery, tenofovir has acquired a crucial position in the fight against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). First, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) is not only efficacious against, and has been licensed for the treatment of HIV (AIDS), but also HBV (hepatitis B). Second, for the treatment of HIV infections, TDF can be used in combination with other anti-HIV drugs, such as emtricitabine (combination termed Truvada(®)) and Truvada can be further combined with efavirenz, rilpivirine, elvitegravir, atazanavir, or darunavir, as a single once-daily oral pill. Third, Truvada can be used prophylactically to prevent transmission of HIV infection. And fourth, to prevent sexual HIV transmission, tenofovir could also be used topically (i.e., as a vaginal gel).

[PMID: 22874836]
In the United States, an estimated 48,100 new human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections occurred in 2009. Of these, 27% were in heterosexual men and women who did not inject drugs, and 64% were in men who have sex with men (MSM), including 3% in MSM who inject drugs. In January 2011, following publication of evidence of safety and efficacy of daily oral tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 300 mg (TDF)/emtricitabine 200 mg (FTC) (Truvada, Gilead Sciences) as antiretroviral preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to reduce the risk for HIV acquisition among MSM in the iPrEx trial, CDC issued interim guidance to make available information and important initial cautions on the use of PrEP in this population. Those recommendations remain valid for MSM, including MSM who also have sex with women. Since January 2011, data from studies of PrEP among heterosexual men and women have become available, and on July 16, 2012, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a label indication for reduction of risk for sexual acquisition of HIV infection among adults, including both heterosexuals and MSM. This interim guidance includes consideration of the new information and addresses pregnancy and safety issues for heterosexually active adults at very high risk for sexual HIV acquisition that were not discussed in the previous interim guidance for the use of PrEP in MSM.

[PMID: 29068302]
Truvada is getting a new lease on life as a preventive agent. It is the only drug approved to prevent HIV infections, and Truvada is the key pharmaceutical component of pre-exposure prophylaxis, which is aimed at preventing, rather than treating, HIV infection and transmission.

[PMID: 26411737]
The FEM-PrEP trial was a pre-exposure prophylaxis clinical trial to test the safety and efficacy of Truvada (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emtricitabine) in the prevention of human immunodeficiency virus infection. Because Truvada can suppress hepatitis B virus replication, and withdrawal of Truvada can cause hepatic flares in patients with chronic hepatitis B, pre-enrollment screening included serological screening for hepatitis B virus markers. Women with chronic infections were not enrolled in the trial. Women found to be unprotected against hepatitis B were enrolled and offered three doses of hepatitis B vaccine. Reinfection and reactivation of previously resolved hepatitis B virus infections have been documented in immunosuppressed individuals but not in healthy individuals. We present the case of a participant enrolled in the FEM-PrEP clinical trial with baseline evidence of immunity against hepatitis B virus who subsequently developed acute hepatitis B. A 21-year-old Black non-pregnant woman was enrolled in the FEM-PrEP trial. She was human immunodeficiency virus-negative and a serological test for hepatitis B virus was negative. She had evidence of low levels of protection against hepatitis B virus and normal liver function. She had no hepatitis B vaccination history, thus it was concluded that she had post-infection immunity. At week 36 she presented with severely elevated liver enzyme levels that, upon further investigation, were a result of acute hepatitis B virus infection. The infection followed an asymptomatic course until full recovery of her liver enzymes a few weeks later. At study unblinding, the participant was found to be on the Truvada arm. Retrospective plasma drug level testing found low levels of study drugs from week 4. The participant remained human immunodeficiency virus-negative throughout the study. Hepatitis B virus infection reactivation or reinfection is a rare phenomenon in healthy individuals. However, reactivations have been reported in patients being treated for chronic hepatitis B with the drugs contained in Truvada, after treatment had been withdrawn. This participant may have reactivated after stopping Truvada, or she may have reactivated spontaneously owing to relatively low levels of protective antibodies against hepatitis B. Alternatively, she may have been reinfected. Clinicians should be aware that hepatitis B virus reactivation or reinfection may cause elevated transaminases even in the presence of low baseline immunity.

[PMID: 26270298]
Antiretroviral preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP; emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate [Truvada]) prevents HIV without penalizing sexual pleasure, and may even enhance pleasure (e.g., by reducing HIV-related anxiety). However, concern about sexual risk behavior increasing with PrEP use (risk compensation) and corresponding stereotypes of promiscuity may undermine PrEP's preventive potential. In this commentary, we review literature on sexual behavior change accompanying PrEP use, discuss risk compensation concerns and the "Truvada whore" stereotype as PrEP barriers, question the appropriateness of restricting PrEP access because of risk compensation, and consider sexual pleasure as a benefit of PrEP, an acceptable motive for seeking PrEP, and a core element of health. It is essential for science to trump stereotypes and sex-negative messaging in guiding decision-making affecting PrEP access and uptake.

[PMID: 27093238]
Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) using the antiretroviral drug emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Truvada) has been shown to dramatically reduce the risk of HIV acquisition for women at higher risk of infection if taken daily. Understanding when and why women would intentionally stop using an efficacious oral PrEP drug within the context of their 'normal' daily lives is essential for delivering effective PrEP risk-reduction counselling. As part of a larger study, we conducted 60 qualitative interviews with women at higher risk of HIV in Bondo, Kenya, and Pretoria, South Africa. Participants charted their sexual contacts over the previous six months, indicated whether they would have taken PrEP if available and discussed whether and why they would have suspended PrEP use. Nearly all participants said they would have used PrEP in the previous six months; half indicated they would have suspended PrEP use at some point. Participants' reasons for an extended break from PrEP were related to partnership dynamics (e.g., perceived low risk of a stable partner) and phases of life (e.g., trying to conceive). Life events (e.g., holidays and travel) could prompt shorter breaks in PrEP use. These circumstances may or may not correspond to actual contexts of lower risk, highlighting the importance of tailored PrEP risk-reduction counselling.