[PMID: 29945807]
Intramural hematomas (IMHs) are reported to dynamically evolve into different clinical outcomes ranging from regression to aortic rupture, but no practice guidelines are available in China. To determine the evolution of IMHs after long-term follow-up and to identify the predictive factors of IMH outcomes in the Chinese population. A total of 123 IMH patients with clinical and imaging follow-up data were retrospectively studied. The primary endpoints were aortic disease-related death, aortic dissection, penetrating aortic ulcer (PAU), thickening of the aortic hematoma and aortic complications requiring surgical or endovascular treatment. All 123 IMH patients were monitored clinically. The follow-up duration ranged from 1.4 to 107 months (median, 20 months). Thirty-nine patients had type A IMH, and 84 had type B. The multivariate analysis showed that a baseline MAD ≥ 44.75 mm (2.9% vs 61.4%, P < 0.001) and acute PAUs (2.9% vs 34.1%, P = 0.008) were independent predictors of aorta-related events. Medication and short-term imaging are recommended for Chinese IMH patients with a hematoma thickness < 10.45 mm and a baseline MAD < 44.75 mm. Rigorous medical observation should also be performed during the acute phase of IMH.

[PMID: 10585078]
Intramural hematoma of the aorta is a condition increasingly observed in clinical practice. Uncertainty exists whether such lesions represent a different pathology or simply the precursors of classic dissecting aneurysm. The patient was a 76-year-old woman with intramural hematoma of the ascending aorta. Clinical course, progression of the lesion to type A aortic dissection, and surgical treatment are described. Although natural history of intramural hematoma of the ascending aorta is not clearly elucidated, the case presented confirms that the evolution toward intimal flap formation is possible and that we cannot foresee the stabilization of these lesions. We stress that intramural hematoma of the ascending aorta has to be managed as an aortic type A dissection and that aggressive treatment is advisable.

[PMID: 19793400]
This review article is written so as to present the pathophysiology, the symptomatology and the ways of diagnosis and treatment of a rather rare aortic disease called Intra-Mural Haematoma (IMH). Intramural haematoma is a quite uncommon but potentially lethal aortic disease that can strike as a primary occurrence in hypertensive and atherosclerotic patients to whom there is spontaneous bleeding from vasa vasorum into the aortic wall (media) or less frequently, as the evolution of a penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU). IMH displays a typical of dissection progress, and could be considered as a precursor of classic aortic dissection. IMH enfeebles the aortic wall and may progress to either outward rupture of the aorta or inward disruption of the intima layer, which ultimately results in aortic dissection. Chest and back acute penetrating pain is the most commonly noticed symptom at patients with IMH. Apart from a transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), a tomographic imaging such as a chest computed tomography (CT), a magnetic resonance (MRI) and most lately a multy detector computed tomography (MDCT) can ensure a quick and accurate diagnosis of IMH. Similar to type A and B aortic dissection, surgery is indicated at patients with type-A IMH, as well as at patients with a persistent and/or recurrent pain. For any other patient (with type-B IMH without an incessant pain and/or without complications), medical treatment is suggested, as applied in the case of aortic dissection. The outcome of IMH in ascending aorta (type A) appears favourable after immediate (emergent or urgent) surgical intervention, but according to international bibliography patients with IMH of the descending aorta (type B) show similar mortality rates to those being subjected to conservative medical or surgical treatment. Endovascular surgery and stent-graft placement is currently indicated in type B IMH.

[PMID: 25512883]
Thoracic aortic dissection (AD) is one of the most common aortic emergencies. It can be fatal if not promptly diagnosed and treated. Intramural hematoma (IMH) of the aorta is recognized as distinct from classic (double-barreled) AD. IMH also frequently leads to aortic emergency, which can be fatal unless rapidly diagnosed and treated. Recently, thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) has been used for the treatment of complications caused by AD. TEVAR is also a viable option for the treatment of complicated IHM. In this article, we review the details of TEVAR as treatment options for AD and IMH, including the indications for TEVAR, imaging, and follow-up.

[PMID: 29274600]
Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) is described as "dissection without intimal tear" due to rupture of vasa vasorum, which results in bleeding within the tunica media in the absence of intimal disruption or blood flow communication. The aim of our study is to validate perioperative evidence of intimal entry tear in patients with IMH and to suggest that this entity may represent a part of a disease and not a separate disease. We report two patients admitted to our institution with sudden onset thoracic pain. A CT scan showed an aneurysm of the ascending aorta complicated by type A IMH. The patients underwent open operation. Surgical set-up has included right axillary artery as arterial inflow, no cross-clamp before hypothermic circulatory arrest and Kazui protocol for selective antegrade cerebral perfusion. We found no evidence of intimal flap, but we identified an intimal tear in both patients. A hemiarch procedure associated with root replacement, using two-grafts techniques was performed in both cases. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patients were discharged home. Recent data are emerging from the radiologic literature about the evidence of intimal lesions in IMH, but surgical reports are scant. The evidence of intimal tears contributes to consider as questionable the etiological role of vasa vasorum and it may justify updates in the management. We consider that IMH may represent a part of a disease (aortic dissection), depicted by radiological images in a specific single instant of its clinical evolution.

[PMID: 32652687]
Within the spectrum of acute aortic syndromes, intramural hematoma (IMH) is a distinct lesion that is characterized by crescentic or circumferential thickening of the aortic wall in the absence of an intimal defect. The reported incidence of IMH among all type A acute aortic syndromes ranges from 3.5% to 28.3%. As compared with acute aortic dissection, IMH is a disease of the elderly, and it tends to have reduced rates of malperfusion syndromes, aortic insufficiency, and root dilation, yet also tends to have increased rates of pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade, and periaortic hematoma. With respect to natural history, IMH may progress to classic dissection, frank rupture, or aneurysmal dilation; yet, IMH may also regress and be completely resorbed. However, studies disagree over the rates of progression or regression; as such, few studies agree on the short-term and long-term prognosis associated with IMH. American and European guidelines advocate emergent surgery for all acutely presenting type A IMH. At a minimum, supracoronary replacement of the aorta with hemiarch reconstruction is the preferred extent of operative repair to reduce rates of long-term reintervention for disease progression. However, valve and/or root procedures may be necessary proximally, while total arch reconstruction or hybrid procedures for the descending aorta may be necessary distally. Much remains unknown for IMH, including the ideal extent of aortic repair, risk-stratification for elderly patients, and the optimal treatment paradigm for stable, uncomplicated IMH. As such, IMH remains a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge for the cardiovascular surgeon.

[PMID: 12874185]
Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) evolves very dynamically in the short-term to regression, dissection, or aortic rupture. The aim of the present study was to assess the long-term clinical and morphological evolution of medically treated IMH. Fifty of 68 consecutive patients with aortic IMH monitored clinically and by imaging techniques at 3, 6, and 12 months and annually thereafter were prospectively studied. Mean follow-up was 45+/-31 months. In the first 6 months, total IMH regression was observed in 14 and progression to aortic dissection in 18 patients; in 14 of these, the dissection was localized, and 12 later developed pseudoaneurysm. At the end of follow-up, the IMH had regressed completely without dilatation in 17 patients (34%), progressed to classical dissection in 6 (12%), evolved to fusiform aneurysm in 11 (22%), evolved to saccular aneurysm in 4 (8%), and evolved to pseudoaneurysm in 12 (24%). Evolution to dissection was related to echolucency (P<0.02) and to longitudinal extension of IMH (P<0.01). Multivariate analysis showed an independent association between regression and smaller maximum aortic diameter and between aneurysm formation and atherosclerotic ulcerated plaque and absence of echolucent areas in IMH. The most frequent long-term evolution of IMH is to aortic aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm. Complete regression without changes in aorta size is observed in one third of cases, and progression to classical dissection is less common. A normal aortic diameter in the acute phase is the best predictor of IMH regression without complications, and absence of echolucent areas and atherosclerotic ulcerated plaque are associated with evolution to aortic aneurysm.

[PMID: 15710757]
The definition, prevalence, outcomes, and appropriate treatment strategies for acute intramural hematoma (IMH) continue to be debated. We studied 1010 patients with acute aortic syndromes who were enrolled in the International Registry of Aortic Dissection (IRAD) to delineate the prevalence, presentation, management, and outcomes of acute IMH by comparing these patients with those with classic aortic dissection (AD). Fifty-eight (5.7%) patients had IMH, and this cohort tended to be older (68.7 versus 61.7 years; P<0.001) and more likely to have distal aortic involvement (60.3% versus 35.3%; P<0.001) compared with 952 patients with AD. Patients with IMH described more severe initial pain than did those with AD but were less likely to have ischemic leg pain, pulse deficits, or aortic valve insufficiency; moreover, they required a longer time to diagnosis and more diagnostic tests. Overall mortality of IMH was similar to that of classic AD (20.7% versus 23.9%; P=0.57), as was mortality in patients with IMH of the descending aorta (8.3% versus 13.1%; P=0.60) and the ascending aorta (39.1% versus 29.9%; P=0.34) compared with AD. IMH limited to the aortic arch was seen in 7 patients, with no deaths, despite medical therapy in only 6 of the 7 individuals. Among the 51 patients whose initial diagnostic study showed IMH only, 8 (16%) progressed to AD on a serial imaging study. The IRAD data demonstrate a 5.7% prevalence of IMH in patients with acute aortic syndromes. Like classic AD, IMH is a highly lethal condition when it involves the ascending aorta and surgical therapy should be considered, but this condition is less critical when limited to the arch or descending aorta. Fully 16% of patients have evidence of evolution to dissection on serial imaging.

[PMID: 15066238]
Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) is an acute, potentially lethal disorder that is similar to but pathologically distinct from acute aortic dissection. Although hemorrhage into the aortic media occurs in both disorders, an intimal tear with resultant false lumen is not present in IMH. Instead, hemorrhage occurs within the aortic wall either due to rupture of the vasa vasorum or, less commonly, because of an atherosclerotic penetrating aortic ulcer. The most common risk factors associated with IMH are hypertension, atherosclerosis, and advanced age. IMH is life-threatening because the hematoma may extend along or rupture through the aorta, leading to hemothorax, cardiac tamponade, stroke, mesenteric ischemia, or renal insufficiency. Optimal treatment is still somewhat controversial; however, there is no question that hypertension must be treated effectively and immediately. This is usually best accomplished by intravenous infusion of beta-blocking agents, with or without the addition of sodium nitroprusside. Recent studies support surgical treatment (ie, aortic root replacement) for IMH involving the ascending aorta, although some subsets of this population may be at lower risk and may benefit from medical therapy alone. In patients with IMH involving only the descending aorta, medical therapy alone is recommended (unless impending rupture, aortic aneurysm, or end-organ ischemia occurs). Patients who survive the acute event require intensive treatment of hypertension and frequent follow-up examinations. Because this population (especially the subset with penetrating aortic ulceration) is at high risk for aortic aneurysm and rupture, serial imaging studies of the aorta are essential.

[PMID: 25087203]
Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) is an acute aortic syndrome characterized by bleeding into the media of the aortic wall without intimal disruption or the classic flap formation. Its natural history is variable and still poorly understood, so strategies for therapeutic management are not fully established. In some cases there is partial or complete regression of the hematoma under medical treatment, but most progress to dissection, aneurysmal dilatation or aortic rupture. The authors present the case of a 44-year-old hypertensive male patient admitted with a diagnosis of IMH of the descending aorta. Despite initial symptom resolution and optimal medical therapy, the IMH evolved to a pseudoaneurysm, which was successfully treated by an endovascular approach.

[PMID: 32668075]
Type B acute aortic dissection (AAD) and intramural hematoma (IMH) can both present as potentially catastrophic lesions of the descending aorta. IMH is distinguished from AAD by the absence of an intimal tear and flap. With short-term outcomes being similar to type B AAD, IMH is treated identically to AAD in the corresponding segment of the aorta. While all patients with any acute aortic syndrome of the descending aorta receive prompt anti-impulse therapy, thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) is reserved for patients presenting with certain complications, namely malperfusion, rupture, or periaortic hematoma. Technical aspects of TEVAR for IMH include maximal endograft oversizing of 10% with 20 mm landing zones of the healthy aorta, revascularization of the left subclavian artery when covered, use of cerebrospinal fluid drainage with extensive coverage, and restoration of branch vessel perfusion. With respect to disease evolution, IMH may progress to classic AD, frank rupture, or aneurysmal dilation; yet, IMH may also regress and be completely resorbed. However, since the natural history of IMH is unpredictable, TEVAR is being used more aggressively to improve long-term survival, rates of secondary reintervention, and positive aortic remodeling. Much remains unknown for acute type B IMH, including the use of prophylactic TEVAR for stable uncomplicated presentations, as well as the optimal timing of intervention and certain technical aspects of TEVAR. As such, IMH remains a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge for cardiovascular surgeons.

[PMID: 10567317]
It has been reported that early surgery should be required for patients with type A aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) because it tends to develop classic aortic dissection or rupture. However, the anatomic features of type A IMH that develops dissection or rupture are unknown. The purpose of this study was to investigate the predictors of progression or regression of type A IMH by computed tomography (CT). Twenty-two consecutive patients with type A IMH were studied by serial CT images. Aortic diameter and aortic wall thickness of the ascending aorta were estimated in CT images at 3 levels on admission and at follow-up (mean 37 days). We defined patients who showed increased maximum aortic wall thickness in the follow-up CT (n=9) or died of rupture (n=1) as the progression group (n=10). The other 12 patients, who all showed decreased maximum wall thickness, were categorized as the regression group. In the progression group, the maximum aortic diameter in the initial CT was significantly greater than that in the regression group (55+/-6 vs 47+/-3 mm, P=0.001). A Cox regression analysis revealed that the maximum aortic diameter was the strongest predictor for progression of type A IMH. We considered the optimal cutoff value to be 50 mm for the maximum aortic diameter to predict progression (positive predictive value 83%, negative predictive value 100%). Maximum aortic diameter estimated by the initial CT images is predictive for progression of type A IMH.