[PMID: 19062530]
The review considers the original and published data on the molecular genetic basis of proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), the most common monogenic neuromuscular disease. The structures of the SMN1 gene and SMN2 pseudogene, mutations distorting the SMN1 function, the structure and functions of the Smn neurotrophic protein, its role in biogenesis of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), and the principles and prdblems of molecular diagnosis in SMA are described. Special consideration is given to the current approaches and prospects of gene and cell therapy of SMA, pharmacogenetic methods to correct the SMN2 function, and original results of long-term treatment of SMA patients with valproic acid drugs.

[PMID: 22628388]
Autosomal dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy is characterized by predominantly lower limb weakness and wasting, and congenital or early-onset contractures of the hip, knee and ankle. Mutations in TRPV4, encoding a cation channel, have recently been identified in one large dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy kindred, but the genetic basis of dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy in many families remains unknown. It has been hypothesized that differences in the timing and site of anterior horn cell loss in the central nervous system account for the variations in clinical phenotype between different forms of spinal muscular atrophy, but there has been a lack of neuropathological data to support this concept in dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy. We report clinical, electrophysiology, muscle magnetic resonance imaging and histopathology findings in a four generation family with typical dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy features, without mutations in TRPV4, and in whom linkage to other known dominant neuropathy and spinal muscular atrophy genes has been excluded. The autopsy findings in the proband, who died at 14 months of age from an unrelated illness, provided a rare opportunity to study the neuropathological basis of dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy. There was a reduction in anterior horn cell number in the lumbar and, to a lesser degree, the cervical spinal cord, and atrophy of the ventral nerve roots at these levels, in the absence of additional peripheral nerve pathology or abnormalities elsewhere along the neuraxis. Despite the young age of the child at the time of autopsy, there was no pathological evidence of ongoing loss or degeneration of anterior horn cells suggesting that anterior horn cell loss in dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy occurs in early life, and is largely complete by the end of infancy. These findings confirm that dominant congenital spinal muscular atrophy is a true form of spinal muscular atrophy caused by a loss of anterior horn cells localized to lumbar and cervical regions early in development.

[PMID: 11442327]
The spinal muscular atrophies are a group of mostly inherited disorders selectively affecting the lower motor neuron. There is a wide degree of clinical and genetic heterogeneity that must be taken into account when giving prognostic information. Autosomal recessive childhood proximal SMA is the commonest form and is due to mutations in a gene encoding a novel protein, SMN, that appears to play a critical role in RNA metabolism but has also been shown to interact with actin-binding proteins and mediators of programmed cell death. The identification of the genetic basis of SMA has resulted in advances for prenatal diagnosis and in new insights into motor neuron biology. The chromosomal location of two of the rarer dominant forms of SMA has been found. Identification of the molecular pathophysiology of lower motor neuron syndromes can be expected to aid in the development of therapy for these disabling disorders.

[PMID: 9731538]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common recessive disorder characterized by the loss of lower motor neurons in the spinal cord. The disease has been classified into three types based on age of onset and severity. SMA I-III all map to chromosome 5q13 (refs 2,3), and nearly all patients display deletions or gene conversions of the survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene. Some correlation has been established between SMN protein levels and disease course; nevertheless, the genetic basis for SMA phenotypic variability remains unclear, and it has been postulated that the loss of an additional modifying factor contributes to the severity of type I SMA. Using comparative genomics to screen for such a factor among evolutionarily conserved sequences between mouse and human, we have identified a novel transcript, H4F5, which lies closer to SMN1 than any previously identified gene in the region. A multi-copy microsatellite marker that is deleted in more than 90% of type I SMA chromosomes is embedded in an intron of this gene, indicating that H4F5 is also highly deleted in type I SMA chromosomes, and thus is a candidate phenotypic modifier for SMA.

[PMID: 22323744]
We report the cases of 2 patients with late-onset spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) type III, who were hemizygous for SMN1 deletion and carriers of novel SMN1 intragenic missense mutations, and we investigate the genotype-phenotype relationship. Patients were tested for SMN1 deletions with standard methodology. Sequencing of all exons, exon-intron junctions, and flanking sequences of SMN1 by nested PCR was used to detect intragenic point mutations. SMN1 and SMN2 quantification was undertaken to investigate the genotype-phenotype relationship. Two novel point mutations were identified in exon 3 of SMN1 (p.Tyr130Cys and p.Tyr130His) in the highly conserved Tudor domain of the Smn protein. The genetic basis of SMA in the rare cases of compound heterozygous carriers of SMN1 deletions is complex. Small intragenic SMN1 mutations often lead to severe SMA phenotypes, especially if the point mutations lie in exon 3 that codes for the highly conserved Tudor domain of the Smn protein. Although both our patients were carriers of intragenic SMN1 mutations in the coding region of the Tudor domain, they presented with a mild SMA phenotype despite a low SMN2 copy number. We discuss the possible determinant role of these novel missense mutations in the phenotypic outcome and compensatory mechanisms that may account for the genotype-phenotype discrepancy.

[PMID: 12220455]
Only one study has reported on the genetic basis of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) in South African subjects. This was conducted in the Johannesburg region and has suggested that black South Africans only (indigenous Africans) differ from the norm. We have explored this further by DNA studies in 30 unrelated and racially diverse patients who reside in the Western Cape, and who were assessed as SMA subjects according to the internationally accepted inclusion criteria for SMA. These subjects were seen at the neurology clinic at Red Cross Children's Hospital in Cape Town during the period 1980-2001. Four had the type 1 form of SMA, 16 had type 2 and 10 had type 3. All patients were found to be homozygous for the loss of either exon 7 or exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene. Six additional patients had anterior horn cell disease but were negative for the SMN1 gene deletion. All six had exclusion features listed in the international guidelines. This study shows that all patients from the Western Cape, which included 12 black South Africans, are no different genetically or phenotypically from the internationally recognized form of typical SMA.

[PMID: 12115944]
Spinal muscular atrophies (SMA) are characterized by degeneration of lower motor neurons associated with muscle paralysis and atrophy. Childhood SMA is a frequent recessive autosomal disorder and represents one of the most common genetic causes of death in childhood. Mutations of the SMN1 gene are responsible for SMA. The knowledge of the genetic basis of SMA, a better understanding of SMN function, and the recent generation of SMA mouse models represent major advances in the field of SMA. These are starting points towards understanding the pathophysiology of SMA and developing therapeutic strategies for this devastating neurodegenerative disease, for which no curative treatment is known so far.

[PMID: 9073029]
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is found in a familial form in around 5-10% of cases. Of these familial cases around 20% are associated with mutations of SOD-1. The genetic basis of the disease in the remaining familial cases, and genetic risk factors in sporadic cases, are unknown. Recently, the common forms of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) have been associated with mutations of the SMN and NAIP genes on chromosome 5, in the region q11.2-13.3. Some patients with both familial and sporadic motor neuron disease show only lower motor neuron signs, in common with SMA patients, and families containing individuals with phenotypes of both childhood SMA and adult motor neuron disease have been reported. We therefore examined the SMA locus as a candidate for ALS, in 54 patients with sporadic motor neuron disease, and 10 single-generation familial patients (with no evidence of SOD-1 mutations), and in a single patient with Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome. No mutations of the SMN or NAIP genes were detected. The difficulties of classification of lower motor neuron presentations of motor neuron diseases are discussed. The demonstration that mutations diagnostic of SMA are not found in ALS patients helps distinguish these conditions.

[PMID: 10339583]
SMN1 and SMN2 (survival motor neuron) encode identical proteins. A critical question is why only the homozygous loss of SMN1, and not SMN2, results in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Analysis of transcripts from SMN1/SMN2 hybrid genes and a new SMN1 mutation showed a direct relationship between presence of disease and exon 7 skipping. We have reported previously that the exon-skipped product SMNDelta7 is partially defective for self-association and SMN self-oligomerization correlated with clinical severity. To evaluate systematically which of the five nucleotides that differ between SMN1 and SMN2 effect alternative splicing of exon 7, a series of SMN minigenes was engineered and transfected into cultured cells, and their transcripts were characterized. Of these nucleotide differences, the exon 7 C-to-T transition at codon 280, a translationally silent variance, was necessary and sufficient to dictate exon 7 alternative splicing. Thus, the failure of SMN2 to fully compensate for SMN1 and protect from SMA is due to a nucleotide exchange (C/T) that attenuates activity of an exonic enhancer. These findings demonstrate the molecular genetic basis for the nature and pathogenesis of SMA and illustrate a novel disease mechanism. Because individuals with SMA retain the SMN2 allele, therapy targeted at preventing exon 7 skipping could modify clinical outcome.

[PMID: 17076267]
The molecular genetic basis of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder, is the loss of function of the survival motor neuron gene (SMN1). The SMN2 gene, a nearly identical copy of SMN1, has been detected as a promising target for SMA therapy. Both genes are ubiquitously expressed and encode identical proteins, but markedly differ in their splicing patterns: While SMN1 produces full-length (FL)-SMN transcripts only, the majority of SMN2 transcripts lacks exon 7. Transcriptional SMN2 activation or modulation of its splicing pattern to increase FL-SMN levels is believed to be clinically beneficial and therefore a crucial challenge in SMA research. Drugs such as valproic acid, phenylbutyrate, sodium butyrate, M344 and SAHA that mainly act as histone deacetylase inhibitors can mediate both: they stimulate the SMN2 gene transcription and/or restore the splicing pattern, thereby elevating the levels of FL-SMN2 protein. Preliminary phase II clinical trials and individual experimental curative approaches SMA patients show promising results. However, phase III double-blind placebo controlled clinical trials have to finally prove the efficacy of these drugs.

[PMID: 19646678]
The spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by degeneration and loss of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord, leading to muscle weakness and atrophy. Spinal muscular atrophy with pontocerebellar hypoplasia (SMA-PCH, also known as pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1 [PCH1]) is one of the rare infantile SMA variants that include additional clinical manifestations, and its genetic basis is unknown. We used a homozygosity mapping and positional cloning approach in a consanguineous family of Ashkenazi Jewish origin and identified a nonsense mutation in the vaccinia-related kinase 1 gene (VRK1) as a cause of SMA-PCH. VRK1, one of three members of the mammalian VRK family, is a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates p53 and CREB and is essential for nuclear envelope formation. Its identification as a gene involved in SMA-PCH implies new roles for the VRK proteins in neuronal development and maintenance and suggests the VRK genes as candidates for related phenotypes.

[PMID: 20225030]
Spinal muscular atrophies (SMA) are frequent autosomal recessive disorders characterized by degeneration of lower motor neurons. SMA are caused by mutations of the survival of motor neuron gene (SMN1) leading to a reduction of the SMN protein amount. The identification of SMN interacting proteins involved in the formation of the spliceosome and splicing changes in SMN-deficient tissues of mutant mice strongly support the view that SMN is involved in the splicing reaction. However, the molecular pathway linking SMN defect to the SMA phenotype remains unclear. From a better knowledge of the genetic basis of SMA and the defects resulting from the mutations of SMN1 in cellular or animal models, several therapeutics strategies have been selected aiming at targeting SMN2, a partially functional copy of SMN1 gene which remains present in patients, or to prevent neurons from death. Refined characterization of the degenerative process in SMA and the identification of the defective molecular pathway downstream from the SMN defect will provide further exciting insight into this disease in the near future. They should contribute to clarify the pathophysiology of SMA, the function of SMN and should help in designing potential targeted or non-targeted therapeutic molecules.