[PMID: 15149326]
In the renal hypertrophy that occurs in diabetes mellitus, decreased proteolysis may lead to protein accumulation, but it is unclear which proteins are affected. Because the lysosomal proteolytic pathway of chaperone-mediated autophagy is suppressed by growth factors in cultured cells, we investigated whether the abundance of substrates of this pathway increase in diabetic hypertrophy. Rats with streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes were pair-fed with vehicle-injected control rats. Proteolysis was measured as lysine release in renal cortical suspensions and protein synthesis as phenylalanine incorporation. Target proteins of chaperone-mediated autophagy were measured in cortical lysates and nuclear extracts by immunoblot analysis. Proteins that regulate chaperone-mediated autophagy [the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2a (LAMP2a) or the heat shock cognate protein of 73 kD (hsc-73)] were measured in lysosomes isolated by density gradient centrifugation. Proteolysis decreased by 41% in diabetic rats; protein synthesis increased at 3 days, but returned to baseline by 7 days. The abundance of proteins containing that chaperone-mediated autophagy KFERQ signal motif increased 38% and individual KFERQ containing proteins [e.g., M2 pyruvate kinase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and pax2] were more abundant. LAMP2a and hsc73 decreased by 25% and 81%, respectively, in cortical lysosomes from diabetic vs. control rats. The decline in proteolysis in acute diabetes mellitus is associated with an increase in proteins degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy and a decrease in proteins which regulate this pathway. This study provides the first evidence that reduced chaperone-mediated autophagy contributes to accumulation of specific proteins in diabetic-induced renal hypertrophy.

[PMID: 24477641]
PED/PEA-15 is a death effector domain (DED) family member with a variety of effects on cell growth and metabolism. To get further insight into the role of PED in cancer, we aimed to find new PED interactors. Using tandem affinity purification, we identified HSC70 (Heat Shock Cognate Protein of 70 kDa)-which, among other processes, is involved in chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)-as a PED-interacting protein. We found that PED has two CMA-like motifs (i.e., KFERQ), one of which is located within a phosphorylation site, and demonstrate that PED is a bona fide CMA substrate and the first example in which phosphorylation modifies the ability of HSC70 to access KFERQ-like motifs and target the protein for lysosomal degradation. Phosphorylation of PED switches its function from tumor suppression to tumor promotion, and we show that HSC70 preferentially targets the unphosphorylated form of PED to CMA. Therefore, we propose that the up-regulated CMA activity characteristic of most types of cancer cell enhances oncogenesis by shifting the balance of PED function toward tumor promotion. This mechanism is consistent with the notion of a therapeutic potential for targeting CMA in cancer, as inhibition of this autophagic pathway may help restore a physiological ratio of PED forms.

[PMID: 23452232]
Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is an age-associated degenerative muscle disease. Characteristic features are muscle-fibre vacuolization and intramuscle-fibre accumulations of multiprotein aggregates, which may result from the demonstrated impairments of the 26S proteasome and autophagy. Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a selective form of lysosomal degradation targeting proteins carrying the KFERQ motif. Lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP2A) and the heat-shock cognate protein 70 (Hsc70) constitute specific CMA components. Neither CMA components nor CMA activity has been studied in normal or disease human muscle, to our knowledge. We studied CMA components by immunocytochemistry, immunoblots, real-time PCR and immunoprecipitation in: (a) 16 s-IBM, nine aged-matched normal and nine disease control muscle biopsies; and (b) cultured human muscle fibres (CHMFs) with experimentally inhibited activities of either the 26S proteasome or autophagy. Compared with age-matched controls, in s-IBM muscle, LAMP2A and Hsc70 were on a given transverse section accumulated as aggregates in approximately 5% of muscle fibres, where they (a) colocalized with each other and α-synuclein (α-syn), a CMA-targeted protein; and (b) were bound to each other and to α-syn by immunoprecipitation. By immunoblots, LAMP2A was increased sevenfold P < 0.001 and Hsc70 2.6-fold P < 0.05. LAMP2A mRNA was increased 4.4-fold P < 0.001 and Hsc70 mRNA 1.9-fold P < 0.05. In CHMFs inhibition of either the 26S proteasome or autophagy induced CMA, evidenced by a significant increase of both LAMP2A and Hsc70. Our study demonstrates, for the first time, up-regulation of CMA components in s-IBM muscle, and it provides further evidence that altered protein degradation is likely an important pathogenic aspect in s-IBM.

[PMID: 16209346]
The structure of several lysosomal membrane glycoproteins (lamp1, lamp2, limpI and limpII) has been described. The significance of the receptor glycoprotein lamp2a in the chaperone-mediated autophagy of cytosolic proteins with KFERQ motif has been described in details as well as the chaperone protein Hsc73 and other chaperones involved in this process. Several modulatory mechanisms of the chaperone-mediated autophagy, which is activated in condition of stress and starvation, were also outlined.

[PMID: 10938088]
Annexins are a family of proteins that bind phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner. Analysis of the sequences of the different members of the annexin family revealed the presence of a pentapeptide biochemically related to KFERQ in some annexins but not in others. Such sequences have been proposed to be a targeting sequence for chaperone-mediated autophagy, a lysosomal pathway of protein degradation that is activated in confluent cells in response to removal of serum growth factors. We demonstrate that annexins II and VI, which contain KFERQ-like sequences, are degraded more rapidly in response to serum withdrawal, while annexins V and XI, without such sequences, are degraded at the same rate in the presence and absence of serum. Using isolated lysosomes, only the annexins containing KFERQ-like sequences are degraded by chaperone mediated-autophagy. Annexins V and XI could associate with lysosomes but did not enter the lysosomes and were not proteolytic substrates. Furthermore, four annexins containing KFERQ-like sequences, annexins I, II, IV, and VI, are enriched in lysosomes with high chaperone-mediated autophagy activity as expected for substrate proteins. These results provide striking evidence for the importance of KFERQ motifs in substrates of chaperone-mediated autophagy.

[PMID: 12105396]
Although the suppression of protein breakdown plays a major role in the growth of the adult kidney in conditions that cause renal hypertrophy, the pathways responsible for controlling proteolysis and the substrates being destroyed have only recently been investigated. This review focuses on the role of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in regulating specific substrates during kidney growth, and the role of the lysosomal pathways in the suppression of general protein breakdown and of the substrates of chaperone-mediated autophagy. New insights into the regulation of specific ubiquitin ligases demonstrate how the cell controls the destruction of particular substrates important for growth, including hypoxia-inducible factors and the cell cycle inhibitor, p27. In cell culture, growth factors suppress the lysosomal pathway of chaperone-mediated autophagy leading to the accumulation of specific cytoplasmic proteins containing KFERQ motifs. In a variety of systems, including cultured renal tubular cells, phosphoinositol 3 kinase activity and its downstream mediators control lysosomal proteolysis. Specific ubiquitin ligases and the pathways that control their substrate recognition may be key signalling intermediaries for cell growth, but global alterations in lysosomal pathways account for the decrease in general proteolysis. Functional KFERQ motifs mark proteins that are important in renal growth, including enzymes responsible for the characteristic shift to glycolytic metabolism during growth, transcription factors, and signalling molecules. As altering phosphoinositol 3 kinase changes patterns of vesicular trafficking, it is possible that the regulation of intracellular trafficking may underlie the changes seen in lysosomal proteolysis with growth.

[PMID: 19433452]
Promoting the degradation of Hsp90 client proteins by inhibiting Hsp90, an important protein chaperone, has been shown to be a promising new anticancer strategy. In this study, we show that an oxazoline analogue of apratoxin A (oz-apraA), a cyclodepsipeptide isolated from a marine cyanobacterium, promotes the degradation of Hsp90 clients through chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA). We identify a KFERQ-like motif as a conserved pentapeptide sequence in the kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) necessary for recognition as a CMA substrate. Mutation of this motif prevents EGFR degradation by CMA and promotes the degradation of EGFR through the proteasomal pathway in oz-apraA-treated cells. Oz-apraA binds to Hsc70/Hsp70. We propose that apratoxin A inhibits Hsp90 function by stabilizing the interaction of Hsp90 client proteins with Hsc70/Hsp70 and thus prevents their interactions with Hsp90. Our study provides the first examples for the ability of CMA to mediate degradation of membrane receptors and cross talks of CMA and proteasomal degradation mechanisms.

[PMID: 23880665]
The transcription factor HIF1 is mostly regulated by the oxygen-dependent proteasomal degradation of the labile subunit HIF1A. Recent data showed degradation of HIF1A in the lysosome through chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA). However the molecular mechanism involved has not been elucidated. This study shows that the KFERQ-like motif, that has been identified in all CMA substrates, is required to mediate the interaction between HIF1A and the chaperone HSPA8. Moreover, mutations in the KFERQ-like motif of HIF1A preclude the interaction with the CMA receptor LAMP2A, thus inhibiting its lysosomal degradation. Importantly, we show for the first time that the ubiquitin ligase STUB1 is required for degradation of HIF1A in the lysosome by CMA. Indeed, mutations in STUB1 that inhibit either the ubiquitin ligase activity or its ability to bind to HSPA8, both prevent degradation of HIF1A by CMA. Moreover, we show that HIF1A binds to and is translocated into intact lysosomes isolated from rat livers. This new pathway for degradation of HIF1A does not depend on the presence of oxygen and is activated in response to nutrient deprivation such that the levels of HIF1A bound to CMA positive lysosomes significantly increase in starved animal livers and the binding of HIF1A to LAMP2A increases in response to serum deprivation. Moreover, excessive degradation of HIF1A by CMA compromises cells' ability to respond to and survive under hypoxia, suggesting that this pathway might be of pathophysiological importance in conditions that combine hypoxia with starvation.

[PMID: 23070014]
A single cell has the potential to kill an entire human being. Efforts to cure cancer are limited by survival of individual cancer cells despite immune surveillance and toxic therapies. Understanding the intricate network of pathways that maintain cellular homeostasis and mediate stress response or default into cell death is critical to the development of strategies to eradicate cancer. Autophagy, proteasomal degradation and the unfolded protein response (UPR) are cellular pathways that degrade and recycle excess or damaged proteins to maintain cellular homeostasis and survival. This review will discuss autophagy and how it is integrated with proteasomal degradation and UPR to govern cell fate through restoration of cellular homeostasis or default into the apoptotic cell death pathway. The first response of autophagy is macroautophagy, which sequesters cytoplasm including organelles inside double-membraned autophagosome vesicles that fuse with lysosomes to degrade and recycle the contents. Ubiquitination patterns on proteins targeted for degradation determine whether adapter proteins will bring them to developing autophagosomes or to proteasomes. Macroautophagy is followed by chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), in which Hsc70 (Heat shock cognate 70) selectively binds proteins with exposed KFERQ motifs and pushes them inside lysosomes through the LAMP-2A (Lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A) receptor. These two processes and the lesser understood microautophagy, which involves direct engulfment of proteins into lysosomes, occur at basal and induced levels. Insufficient proteasome function or ER stress induction of UPR can induce autophagy, which can mitigate damage and stress. If this network is incapable of repairing the damage or overcoming continued stress, the default pathway of apoptosis is engaged to destroy the cell. Induction of macroautophagy by cancer therapeutics has led to clinical trials investigating combinations of HCQ (hydroxychloriquine) suppression of autophagy with apoptosis-inducing agents. Further study of the complex integration of autophagy, proteasomal degradation, UPR and apoptosis is likely to provide additional targets for our fight against cancer. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled "Apoptosis: Four Decades Later".

[PMID: 24323530]
Mutant N-terminal huntingtin (Htt) protein resulting from Huntington's disease (HD) with expanded polyglutamine accumulates and forms aggregates in vulnerable neurons. Both ubiquitin proteasomal and autophagic pathways contribute to the degradation of mutant Htt. Here, we focus on the involvement of chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), a selective form of autophagy in the clearance of Htt. Selective catabolism in CMA is conferred by the presence of a KFERQ-like targeting motif in the substrates, by which molecular chaperones recognize the hydrophobic surfaces of the misfolded substrates, and transfer them to the lysosomal membrane protein type-2A, LAMP-2A. The substrates are taken into the lysosomes through LAMP-2A and are rapidly degraded by the lysosomal enzymes. Taken together, we summarize the recent evidence to elucidate that Htt is also a potential substrate of CMA. We propose that the manipulation of CMA could be a therapeutic strategy for HD.

[PMID: 16782460]
Different mechanisms target intracellular components for their degradation into lysosomes through what is known as autophagy. In mammals, three main forms of autophagy have been described: macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA). CMA is the only autophagic pathway that allows selective degradation of soluble proteins in lysosomes. In contrast to the other mammalian forms of autophagy, CMA does not require vesicle formation or major changes in the lysosomal membrane. Instead, substrate proteins directly cross the lysosomal membrane to reach the lumen, where they are rapidly degraded. The substrate proteins are targeted to the lysosomal membrane by recognition of a targeting motif (a KFERQ-like motif), by a chaperone complex, consisting of hsc70 and its cochaperones, in the cytoplasm. Once at the lysosomal membrane, the protein interacts with a lysosomal receptor for this pathway, lysosomal associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP-2A), and it is translocated across the membrane into the lysosomal lumen assisted by a lysosome resident chaperone. These two characteristics--selectivity and direct substrate translocation--determine the particular role of CMA in different physiological and pathological conditions. In this chapter, we cover current findings on the molecular mechanisms for CMA and the possible pathophysiological relevance of this selective lysosomal degradation.

[PMID: 23404999]
Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a selective mechanism for the degradation of soluble cytosolic proteins bearing the sequence KFERQ. These proteins are targeted by chaperones and delivered to lysosomes where they are translocated into the lysosomal lumen and degraded via the lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP-2A). Mutations in LAMP2 that inhibit autophagy result in Danon disease characterized by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) plays a key role in cardiomyocyte excitation-contraction and its dysfunction can lead to cardiac failure. Whether RyR2 is degraded by CMA is unknown. To induce CMA, cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were treated with geldanamycin (GA) to promote protein degradation through this pathway. GA increased LAMP-2A levels together with its redistribution and colocalization with Hsc70 in the perinuclear region, changes indicative of CMA activation. The inhibition of lysosomes but not proteasomes prevented the loss of RyR2. The recovery of RyR2 content after incubation with GA by siRNA targeting LAMP-2A suggests that RyR2 is degraded via CMA. In silico analysis also revealed that the RyR2 sequence harbours six KFERQ motifs which are required for the recognition Hsc70 and its degradation via CMA. Our data suggest that presenilins are involved in RyR2 degradation by CMA. These findings are consistent with a model in which oxidative damage of the RyR2 targets it for turnover by presenilins and CMA, which could lead to removal of damaged or leaky RyR2 channels.

[PMID: 11262416]
Growth factors suppress the degradation of cellular proteins in lysosomes in renal epithelial cells. Whether this process also involves specific classes of proteins that influence growth processes is unknown. We investigated chaperone-mediated autophagy, a lysosomal import pathway that depends on the 73-kDa heat shock cognate protein and allows the degradation of proteins containing a specific lysosomal import consensus sequence (KFERQ motif). Epidermal growth factor (EGF) or ammonia, but not transforming growth factor beta1, suppresses total protein breakdown in cultured NRK-52E renal epithelial cells. EGF or ammonia prolonged the half-life of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, a classic substrate for chaperone-mediated autophagy, by more than 90%, whereas transforming growth factor beta1 did not. EGF caused a similar increase in the half-life of the KFERQ-containing paired box-related transcription factor, Pax2. The increase in half-life was accompanied by an increased accumulation of proteins with a KFERQ motif including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and Pax2. Ammonia also increased the level of the Pax2 protein. Lysosomal import of KFERQ proteins depends on the abundance of the 96-kDa lysosomal glycoprotein protein (lgp96), and we found that EGF caused a significant decrease in lgp96 in cellular homogenates and associated with lysosomes. We conclude that EGF in cultured renal cells regulates the breakdown of proteins targeted for destruction by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Because suppression of this pathway results in an increase in Pax2, these results suggest a novel mechanism for the regulation of cell growth.