[PMID: 21761288]
Drosophila melanogaster has a single Adar gene encoding a protein related to mammalian ADAR2 that edits transcripts encoding glutamate receptor subunits. We describe the structure of the Drosophila Adar locus and use ModENCODE information to supplement published data on Adar gene transcription, and splicing. We discuss the roles of ADAR in Drosophila in terms of the two main types of RNA molecules edited and roles of ADARs as RNA-binding proteins. Site-specific RNA editing events in transcripts encoding ion channel subunits were initially found serendipitously and subsequent directed searches for editing sites and transcriptome sequencing have now led to 972 edited sites being identified in 597 transcripts. Four percent of D. melanogaster transcripts are site-specifically edited and these encode a wide range of largely membrane-associated proteins expressed particularly in CNS. Electrophysiological studies on the effects of specific RNA editing events on ion channel subunits do not suggest that loss of RNA editing events in ion channels consistently produce a particular outcome such as making Adar mutant neurons more excitable. This possibility would have been consistent with neurodegeneration seen in Adar mutant fly brains. A further set of ADAR targets are dsRNA intermediates in siRNA generation, derived from transposons and from structured RNA loci. Transcripts with convergent overlapping 3' ends are also edited and the first discovered instance of RNA editing in Drosophila, in the Rnp4F transcript, is an example. There is no evidence yet to show that Adar antagonizes RNA interference in Drosophila. Evidence has been obtained that catalytically inactive ADAR proteins exert effects on microRNA generation and RNA interference. Whether all effects of inactive ADARs are due to RNA-binding or to even further roles of these proteins remains to be determined.

[PMID: 25921068]
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are an endogenous class of animal RNAs. Despite their abundance, their function and expression in the nervous system are unknown. Therefore, we sequenced RNA from different brain regions, primary neurons, isolated synapses, as well as during neuronal differentiation. Using these and other available data, we discovered and analyzed thousands of neuronal human and mouse circRNAs. circRNAs were extraordinarily enriched in the mammalian brain, well conserved in sequence, often expressed as circRNAs in both human and mouse, and sometimes even detected in Drosophila brains. circRNAs were overall upregulated during neuronal differentiation, highly enriched in synapses, and often differentially expressed compared to their mRNA isoforms. circRNA expression correlated negatively with expression of the RNA-editing enzyme ADAR1. Knockdown of ADAR1 induced elevated circRNA expression. Together, we provide a circRNA brain expression atlas and evidence for important circRNA functions and values as biomarkers.

[PMID: 22531175]
Auto-regulatory feedback loops are a common molecular strategy used to optimize protein function. In Drosophila, many messenger RNAs involved in neuro-transmission are re-coded at the RNA level by the RNA-editing enzyme, dADAR, leading to the incorporation of amino acids that are not directly encoded by the genome. dADAR also re-codes its own transcript, but the consequences of this auto-regulation in vivo are unclear. Here we show that hard-wiring or abolishing endogenous dADAR auto-regulation dramatically remodels the landscape of re-coding events in a site-specific manner. These molecular phenotypes correlate with altered localization of dADAR within the nuclear compartment. Furthermore, auto-editing exhibits sexually dimorphic patterns of spatial regulation and can be modified by abiotic environmental factors. Finally, we demonstrate that modifying dAdar auto-editing affects adaptive complex behaviours. Our results reveal the in vivo relevance of auto-regulatory control over post-transcriptional mRNA re-coding events in fine-tuning brain function and organismal behaviour.

[PMID: 19941656]
ADARs are RNA editing enzymes that target double stranded RNA and convert adenosine to inosine, which is read by translation machinery as if it were guanosine. Aside from their role in generating protein diversity in the central nervous system, ADARs have been implicated in the hypermutation of some RNA viruses, although why this hypermutation occurs is not well understood. Here we describe the hypermutation of adenosines to guanosines in the genome of the sigma virus--a negative sense RNA virus that infects Drosophila melanogaster. The clustering of these mutations and the context in which they occur indicates that they have been caused by ADARs. However, ADAR-editing of viral RNA is either rare or edited viral RNA are rapidly degraded, as we only detected evidence for editing in two of the 104 viral isolates we studied. This is the first evidence for ADARs targeting viruses outside of mammals, and it raises the possibility that ADARs could play a role in the antiviral defences of insects.

[PMID: 26656153]
RNA editing usually affects only a fraction of expressed transcripts and there is a vast amount of variation in editing levels of ADAR (adenosine deaminase, RNA-specific) targets. Here we explore natural genetic variation affecting editing levels of particular sites in 81 natural strains of Drosophila melanogaster. The analysis of associations between editing levels and single-nucleotide polymorphisms allows us to map putative cis-regulatory regions affecting editing of 16 A-to-I editing sites (cis-RNA editing quantitative trait loci or cis-edQTLs, P < 10(-8)). The observed changes in editing levels are validated by independent molecular technique. All identified regulatory variants are located in close proximity of modulated editing sites. Moreover, colocalized editing sites are often regulated by same loci. Similar to expression and splicing QTL studies, the characterization of edQTLs will greatly expand our understanding of cis-regulatory evolution of gene expression.

[PMID: 25555396]
Adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing is a highly conserved process that post-transcriptionally modifies mRNA, generating proteomic diversity, particularly within the nervous system of metazoans. Transcripts encoding proteins involved in neurotransmission predominate as targets of such modifications. Previous reports suggest that RNA editing is responsive to environmental inputs in the form of temperature alterations. However, the molecular determinants underlying temperature-dependent RNA editing responses are not well understood. Using the poikilotherm Drosophila, we show that acute temperature alterations within a normal physiological range result in substantial changes in RNA editing levels. Our examination of particular sites reveals diversity in the patterns with which editing responds to temperature, and these patterns are conserved across five species of Drosophilidae representing over 10 million years of divergence. In addition, we show that expression of the editing enzyme, ADAR (adenosine deaminase acting on RNA), is dramatically decreased at elevated temperatures, partially, but not fully, explaining some target responses to temperature. Interestingly, this reduction in editing enzyme levels at elevated temperature is only partially reversed by a return to lower temperatures. Lastly, we show that engineered structural variants of the most temperature-sensitive editing site, in a sodium channel transcript, perturb thermal responsiveness in RNA editing profile for a particular RNA structure. Our results suggest that the RNA editing process responds to temperature alterations via two distinct molecular mechanisms: through intrinsic thermo-sensitivity of the RNA structures that direct editing, and due to temperature sensitive expression or stability of the RNA editing enzyme. Environmental cues, in this case temperature, rapidly reprogram the Drosophila transcriptome through RNA editing, presumably resulting in altered proteomic ratios of edited and unedited proteins.

[PMID: 17018572]
Adenosine deaminases that act on RNA [adenosine deaminase, RNA specific (ADAR)] catalyze the site-specific conversion of adenosine to inosine in primary mRNA transcripts. These re-coding events affect coding potential, splice sites, and stability of mature mRNAs. ADAR is an essential gene, and studies in mouse, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila suggest that its primary function is to modify adult behavior by altering signaling components in the nervous system. By comparing the sequence of isogenic cDNAs to genomic DNA, we have identified and experimentally verified 27 new targets of Drosophila ADAR. Our analyses led us to identify new classes of genes whose transcripts are targets of ADAR, including components of the actin cytoskeleton and genes involved in ion homeostasis and signal transduction. Our results indicate that editing in Drosophila increases the diversity of the proteome, and does so in a manner that has direct functional consequences on protein function.

[PMID: 24137011]
RNA editing by deamination of specific adenosine bases to inosines during pre-mRNA processing generates edited isoforms of proteins. Recoding RNA editing is more widespread in Drosophila than in vertebrates. Editing levels rise strongly at metamorphosis, and Adar(5G1) null mutant flies lack editing events in hundreds of CNS transcripts; mutant flies have reduced viability, severely defective locomotion and age-dependent neurodegeneration. On the other hand, overexpressing an adult dADAR isoform with high enzymatic activity ubiquitously during larval and pupal stages is lethal. Advantage was taken of this to screen for genetic modifiers; Adar overexpression lethality is rescued by reduced dosage of the Rdl (Resistant to dieldrin), gene encoding a subunit of inhibitory GABA receptors. Reduced dosage of the Gad1 gene encoding the GABA synthetase also rescues Adar overexpression lethality. Drosophila Adar(5G1) mutant phenotypes are ameliorated by feeding GABA modulators. We demonstrate that neuronal excitability is linked to dADAR expression levels in individual neurons; Adar-overexpressing larval motor neurons show reduced excitability whereas Adar(5G1) null mutant or targeted Adar knockdown motor neurons exhibit increased excitability. GABA inhibitory signalling is impaired in human epileptic and autistic conditions, and vertebrate ADARs may have a relevant evolutionarily conserved control over neuronal excitability.

[PMID: 20886259]
RNA editing is proposed as a modulator of transcriptomes, but its biological impact has not been fully elucidated. In particular, its importance for transposable elements is controversial. We found RNA editing on antisense read-through transcripts of KP elements, one of the deletion derivatives of P transposable elements in Drosophila melanogaster. Three kinds of RNA editing were detected at 20 sites around the terminal inverted repeats (TIR); 15 A-to-G, four U-to-C, and one C-to-U conversions. A-to-G conversions are suggested to be attributed to A-to-I RNA editing on KP element RNAs, because inosine (I) in RNA is recognized as G by reverse transcriptase. TIRs were deduced to form dsRNAs as a putative target of ADAR. This is the first report of RNA editing on mobile elements of Drosophila.

[PMID: 17662845]
Increasing proteomic diversity via the hydrolytic deamination of adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) in select mRNA templates appears crucial to the correct functioning of the nervous system in several model organisms, including Drosophila, Caenorabditis elegans, and mice. The genome of the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, contains a single gene encoding the enzyme responsible for deamination, termed ADAR (for adenosine deaminase acting on RNA). The mRNAs that form the substrates for ADAR primarily function in neuronal signaling, and, correspondingly, deletion of ADAR leads to severe nervous system defects. While several ADAR enzymes are present in mice, the presence of a single ADAR in Drosophila, combined with the diverse genetic toolkit available to researchers and the wide range of ADAR target mRNAs identified to date, make Drosophila an ideal organism to study the genetic basis of A-to-I RNA editing. This chapter describes a variety of methods for genetically manipulating Drosophila A-to-I editing both in time and space, as well as techniques to study the molecular basis of ADAR-mRNA interactions. A prerequisite for experiments in this field is the ability to quantify the levels of editing in a given mRNA. Therefore, several commonly used methods for the quantification of editing levels will also be described.

[PMID: 11973307]
Genome analysis of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster reveals three new ligand-gated ion channel subunits with the characteristic YXCC motif found only in alpha-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits. The subunits are designated Dalpha5, Dalpha6, and Dalpha7. Cloning of the Dalpha5 embryonic cDNAs reveals an atypically large N terminus, part of which is without identifiable sequence motifs and is specified by two polymorphic alleles. Embryonic clones from Dalpha6 contain multiple variant transcripts arising from alternative splicing as well as A-to-I pre-mRNA editing. Alternative splicing in Dalpha6 involves exons encoding nAChR functional domains. The Dalpha6 transcript is a target of the Drosophila adenosine deaminase acting on RNA (dADAR). This is the first case for any organism where a nAChR gene is the target of mRNA editing. Seven adenosines could be modified in the extracellular ligand-binding region of Dalpha6, four of which are also edited in the Dalpha6 ortholog in the tobacco budworm Heliothis virescens. The conservation of an editing site between the insect orders Diptera and Lepidoptera makes nAChR editing the most evolutionarily conserved invertebrate RNA editing site so far described. These findings add to our understanding of nAChR subunit diversity, which is increased and regulated by mechanisms acting at the genomic and mRNA levels.

[PMID: 10629039]
Pre-mRNA editing involving the conversion of adenosine to inosine is mediated by adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADAR1 and ADAR2). ADARs contain multiple double-stranded RNA(dsRNA)-binding domains in addition to an adenosine deaminase domain. An adenosine deaminase acting on tRNAs, scTad1p (also known as scADAT1), cloned from Saccharomyces cerevisiae has a deaminase domain related to the ADARs but lacks dsRNA-binding domains. We have identified a gene homologous to scADAT1 in the region of Drosophila melanogaster Adh chromosome II. Recombinant Drosophila ADAT1 (dADAT1) has been expressed in the yeast Pichia pastoris and purified. The enzyme has no activity on dsRNA substrates but is a tRNA deaminase with specificity for adenosine 37 of insect alanine tRNA. dADAT1 shows greater similarity to vertebrate ADARs than to yeast Tad1p, supporting the hypothesis of a common evolutionary origin for ADARs and ADATs. dAdat1 transcripts are maternally supplied in the egg. Zygotic expression is widespread initially and later concentrates in the central nervous system.

[PMID: 22658416]
The RNA editing enzyme ADAR chemically modifies adenosine (A) to inosine (I), which is interpreted by the ribosome as a guanosine. Here we assess cotranscriptional A-to-I editing in Drosophila by isolating nascent RNA from adult fly heads and subjecting samples to high throughput sequencing. There are a large number of edited sites within nascent exons. Nascent RNA from an ADAR-null strain was also sequenced, indicating that almost all A-to-I events require ADAR. Moreover, mRNA editing levels correlate with editing levels within the cognate nascent RNA sequence, indicating that the extent of editing is set cotranscriptionally. Surprisingly, the nascent data also identify an excess of intronic over exonic editing sites. These intronic sites occur preferentially within introns that are poorly spliced cotranscriptionally, suggesting a link between editing and splicing. We conclude that ADAR-mediated editing is more widespread than previously indicated and largely occurs cotranscriptionally.