[PMID: 26655866]
Plantar fasciitis, a common injury in runners, has been speculated to be associated with weakness of the intrinsic foot muscles. A recent study reported that atrophy of the intrinsic forefoot muscles might contribute to plantar fasciitis by destabilizing the medial longitudinal arch. However, intrinsic foot muscle volume difference between individuals with plantar fasciitis and healthy counterparts remains unknown. This study examined the relationship of intrinsic foot muscle volume and incidence of plantar fasciitis. Case-control study. 20 experienced (≥5 years) runners were recruited. Ten of them had bilateral chronic (≥2 years) plantar fasciitis while the others were healthy characteristics-matched runners. Intrinsic muscle volumes of the participants' right foot were scanned with a 1.5T magnetic resonance system and segmented using established methods. Body-mass normalized intrinsic foot muscle volumes were compared between runners with and without chronic plantar fasciitis. There was significant greater rearfoot intrinsic muscle volume in healthy runners than runners with chronic plantar fasciitis (Cohen's d=1.13; p=0.023). A similar trend was also observed in the total intrinsic foot muscle volume but it did not reach a statistical significance (Cohen's d=0.92; p=0.056). Forefoot volume was similar between runners with and without plantar fasciitis. These results suggest that atrophy of intrinsic foot muscles may be associated with symptoms of plantar fasciitis in runners. These findings may provide useful information in rehabilitation strategies of chronic plantar fasciitis.

[PMID: 26184993]
Plantar fasciitis (PF)is the most common cause of plantar heel pain. Despite many treatment alternatives for heel spur, the association of calcaneal spur size with clinical and functional parameters is inconclusive. The objective of this study to investigate the correlation of calcaneal spur length with clinical findings and functional status documented with Foot Function Index in patients with plantar fasciitis. We performed power analysis for the sample size estimation. 87 patients with PF were scrutinized to reach the estimated patient number 75. Computer-aided linear measurements were done for spur length from tip to base in milimeters. Perceived pain intensity was evaluated by visual analog scale (VAS). Patients were asked to rate the pain experienced on a 10-cm VAS. Foot function index was applied to the patients to evaluate pain, disability and activity limitation of the patients. Of the 75 participants, 24 were males (32%) and 51 were females (68%). The mean age was 47 ± 10 years (range 30-65 years). The mean calcaneal spur length was 3.86 ± 3.36 mm (range between 0 and 12.2). Calcaneal spur length was significantly correlated with age (p = 0.003), BMI (p = 0.029), symptom duration, (p = 0.001) VAS (p = 0.003), and FFI total score (p < 0.001). Our study demonstrated that length of the calcaneal spur is significantly correlated with age, BMI, symptom duration, perceived pain, FFI pain and disability subscores, and FFI total scores. The size of the calcaneal spur is an important parameter correlated with pain and functional scores in PF.

[PMID: 26665894]
Plantar fasciitis (PF) is present in 10% of the population and is the most common cause of plantar heel pain. PF is painful, can alter daily activities and presents as a sharp pain localized to the plantar foot and medial heel. The underlying etiology involves microtrauma to the plantar fascia, specifically at its insertion point on the calcaneus. Successful management of plantar fasciitis is typically achieved with the conservative therapy approaches discussed.

[PMID: 25429080]
Plantar fasciitis, a chronic degenerative process that causes medial plantar heel pain, is responsible for approximately 1 million physician visits each year. Individuals with plantar fasciitis experience pain that is most intense during their first few steps of the day or after prolonged standing. The authors provide an overview of the diagnosis and management of a common problem encountered in the primary care setting. Routine imaging is not initially recommended for the evaluation of plantar fasciitis but may be required to rule out other pathologic conditions. Overall, plantar fasciitis carries a good prognosis when patients use a combination of several conservative treatment modalities. Occasionally, referral to a specialist may be necessary.

[PMID: 23037146]
Plantar fasciitis is a debilitating and painful problem present in the general population. It most often presents with moderate to severe pain in the proximal inferior heel region and is most commonly associated with repeated trauma to the plantar fascia. Plantar fasciitis, itself, is an injury at the site of attachment at the medial tubercle of the calcaneus, often due to excessive and repetitive traction. Plantar fasciitis is the most common cause of heel pain and is estimated to affect 2 million people in the United States alone. For adults suffering from plantar fasciitis, are foot orthoses a viable treatment option to reduce pain?

[PMID: 21272731]
Plantar fasciitis is a common cause of heel pain and is the result of a degenerative process of the plantar fascia at its calcaneal attachment. A case study of a preliminary experience with local injections of botulinum toxin A (BTX-A) for the treatment of chronic plantar fasciitis in a 43-year-old woman is presented. We injected the patient with 70 units of BTX-A (0.7mL) in 2 divided doses: 40 units (0.4mL) in the tender region of the heel, and 30 units (0.3mL) in the most tender point of the foot arch. Visual analog scale (VAS) and pressure pain threshold (PPT) were measured to evaluate the efficacy of BTX-A injections. Real-time, high-resolution ultrasonographic findings of the plantar fascia after BTX-A injections were also used for serial follow-ups. After BTX-A injection, decreased VAS values were reported and increased PPT was observed. In ultrasonographic studies, the thickness of the plantar fascia and the hypoechogenicity of the fascia were reduced. Decreased plantar fascia thickness was observed on the first and third week after BTX-A injections. The findings were compatible with the changes in pain assessed by VAS and PPT. Ultrasonographic findings also indicated a progressive decrease in the thickness of the underlying muscle belly. Ultrasonography seems to be a valuable, noninvasive diagnostic tool for the evaluation of plantar fasciitis treated with BTX-A injections. It can offer objective measurements of therapeutic effects and is feasible for serial follow-ups.

[PMID: 15134611]
Plantar fasciitis is a common foot disorder that impacts many functional activities. Research that quantifies the impact that plantar fasciitis has on function is lacking. In addition, little is known about which variables are associated with disability in patients with plantar fasciitis. The first purpose of this study was to determine if age, gender, body mass index, pain intensity, chronicity of symptoms, or ankle dorsiflexion range of motion was associated with disability in patients with plantar fasciitis. The second purpose was to describe the impact that plantar fasciitis has on functional status in the context of five functional domains: household activities of daily living, usual work and hobbies, nonweightbearing activities, walking-related activities, and running-related activities. Fifty consecutive patients diagnosed with unilateral plantar fasciitis were recruited. Demographic and impairment data were collected and all patients completed the Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS), a validated self-report measure of disability. Multiple regression analysis was used to describe the association between the variables and disability. Graphs depicting five domains of function derived from the LEFS were generated to describe the extent of disability. Body mass index (BMI) was the only variable that was significantly associated with disability (F = 9.87, p =.003). Measures of pain intensity, ankle dorsiflexion, age, gender, chronicity, and time spent weightbearing were not related to disability. Plantar fasciitis showed distinct patterns of disability depending on the functional domain that was assessed. With the exception of BMI, impairment and demographic variables do not predict the extent of functional loss in patients with plantar fasciitis. The most likely domains of function to be at least moderately affected in patients with plantar fasciitis are running-related activities and usual work or hobbies.

[PMID: 19952249]
Although plantar fasciitis is the most common cause of heel pain, little has been reported on the incidence rates of this disorder. We sought to determine the incidence rate and demographic risk factors of plantar fasciitis in an ethnically diverse and physically active population of United States military service members. A query was performed with use of the Defense Medical Epidemiology Database for the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification, code for plantar fasciitis (728.71). Multivariate Poisson regression analysis was used to estimate the rate of plantar fasciitis per 1000 person-years, while controlling for sex, race, rank, service, and age. The overall unadjusted incidence rate of plantar fasciitis was 10.5 per 1000 person-years. Compared with men, women had a significantly increased adjusted incidence rate ratio for plantar fasciitis of 1.96 (95% confidence interval, 1.94 to 1.99). The adjusted incidence rate ratio for black service members compared with white service members was 1.12 (95% confidence interval, 1.09 to 1.12). With junior officers as the referent category, junior enlisted, senior enlisted, and senior officer rank groups had a significantly increased adjusted incidence rate ratio for plantar fasciitis: 1.20 (95% confidence interval, 1.18 to 1.23), 1.19 (95% confidence interval, 1.17 to 1.22), and 1.56 (95% confidence interval, 1.52 to 1.61), respectively. Compared with service members in the Air Force, those in the Army and Marines had a significantly increased adjusted incidence rate ratio for plantar fasciitis of 1.85 (95% confidence interval, 1.82 to 1.87) and 1.28 (95% confidence interval, 1.25 to 1.30), respectively. The adjusted incidence rate ratio for the age group of forty years old or more compared with the twenty to twenty-four-year-old group was 3.42 (95% confidence interval, 3.34 to 3.51). Female sex; black race; junior enlisted, senior enlisted, and senior officer rank groups; service in the Army or Marines; and increasing age are all risk factors for plantar fasciitis.

[PMID: 21916393]
Plantar fasciitis, a self-limiting condition, is a common cause of heel pain in adults. It affects more than 1 million persons per year, and two-thirds of patients with plantar fasciitis will seek care from their family physician. Plantar fasciitis affects sedentary and athletic populations. Obesity, excessive foot pronation, excessive running, and prolonged standing are risk factors for developing plantar fasciitis. Diagnosis is primarily based on history and physical examination. Patients may present with heel pain with their first steps in the morning or after prolonged sitting, and sharp pain with palpation of the medial plantar calcaneal region. Discomfort in the proximal plantar fascia can be elicited by passive ankle/first toe dorsiflexion. Diagnostic imaging is rarely needed for the initial diagnosis of plantar fasciitis. Use of ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging is reserved for recalcitrant cases or to rule out other heel pathology; findings of increased plantar fascia thickness and abnormal tissue signal the diagnosis of plantar fasciitis. Conservative treatments help with the disabling pain. Initially, patient-directed treatments consisting of rest, activity modification, ice massage, oral analgesics, and stretching techniques can be tried for several weeks. If heel pain persists, then physician-prescribed treatments such as physical therapy modalities, foot orthotics, night splinting, and corticosteroid injections should be considered. Ninety percent of patients will improve with these conservative techniques. Patients with chronic recalcitrant plantar fasciitis lasting six months or longer can consider extracorporeal shock wave therapy or plantar fasciotomy.

[PMID: 22166747]
Due to complexity of the plantar intrinsic foot muscles, little is known about their muscle architecture in vivo. Chronic plantar fasciitis may be accompanied by muscle atrophy of plantar intrinsic foot muscles and tibialis posterior compromising the dynamic support of the foot prolonging the injury. Magnetic resonance images of the foot may be digitized to quantify muscle architecture. The first purpose of this study was to estimate in vivo the volume and distribution of healthy plantar intrinsic foot muscles. The second purpose was to determine whether chronic plantar fasciitis is accompanied by atrophy of plantar intrinsic foot muscles and tibialis posterior. Magnetic resonance images were taken bilaterally in eight subjects with unilateral plantar fasciitis. Muscle perimeters were digitally outlined and muscle signal intensity thresholds were determined for each image for volume computation. The mean volume of contractile tissue in healthy plantar intrinsic foot muscles was 113.3 cm(3). Forefoot volumes of plantar fasciitis plantar intrinsic foot muscles were 5.2% smaller than healthy feet (P=0.03, ES=0.26), but rearfoot (P=0.26, ES=0.08) and total foot volumes (P=0.07) were similar. No differences were observed in tibialis posterior size. While the total volume of plantar intrinsic foot muscles was similar in healthy and plantar fasciitis feet, atrophy of the forefoot plantar intrinsic foot muscles may contribute to plantar fasciitis by destabilizing the medial longitudinal arch. These results suggest that magnetic resonance imaging measures may be useful in understanding the etiology and rehabilitation of chronic plantar fasciitis.

[PMID: 27904584]
Plantar fasciitis (PF) is a common foot complaint, affects both active sportsmen and physically inactive middle age group. It is believed that PF results from degenerative changes rather than inflammation. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) therapy has been introduced as an alternative therapy for PF. This study is aimed to systematically review to the effectiveness and relevant factors of PRP treatment in managing PF. A search was conducted in electronic databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar using different keywords. Publications in English-language from 2010 to 2015 were included. Two reviewers extracted data from selected articles after the quality assessment was done. A total of 1126 articles were retrieved, but only 12 articles met inclusion and exclusion criteria. With a total of 455 patients, a number of potentially influencing factors on the effectiveness of PRP for PF was identified. In all these studies, PRP had been injected directly into the plantar fascia, with or without ultrasound guidance. Steps from preparation to injection were found equally crucial. Amount of collected blood, types of blood anti-coagulant, methods in preparing PRP, speed, and numbers of time the blood samples were centrifuged, activating agent added to the PRP and techniques of injection, were varied between different studies. Regardless of these variations, superiority of PRP treatment compared to steroid was reported in all studies. In conclusion, PRP therapy might provide an effective alternative to conservative management of PF with no obvious side effect or complication. The onset of action after PRP injection also greatly depended on the degree of degeneration.

[PMID: 12756315]
The authors review histologic findings from 50 cases of heel spur surgery for chronic plantar fasciitis. Findings include myxoid degeneration with fragmentation and degeneration of the plantar fascia and bone marrow vascular ectasia. Histologic findings are presented to support the thesis that "plantar fasciitis" is a degenerative fasciosis without inflammation, not a fasciitis. These findings suggest that treatment regimens such as serial corticosteroid injections into the plantar fascia should be reevaluated in the absence of inflammation and in light of their potential to induce plantar fascial rupture.

[PMID: 27957702]
Plantar fascia (PF) disorders commonly cause heel pain and disability in the general population. Imaging is often required to confirm diagnosis. This review article aims to provide simple and systematic guidelines for imaging assessment of PF disease, focussing on key findings detectable on plain radiography, ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Sonographic characteristics of plantar fasciitis include PF thickening, loss of fibrillar structure, perifascial collections, calcifications and hyperaemia on Doppler imaging. Thickening and signal changes in the PF as well as oedema of adjacent soft tissues and bone marrow can be assessed on MRI. Radiographic findings of plantar fasciitis include PF thickening, cortical irregularities and abnormalities in the fat pad located deep below the PF. Plantar fibromatosis appears as well-demarcated, nodular thickenings that are iso-hypoechoic on ultrasound and show low-signal intensity on MRI. PF tears present with partial or complete fibre interruption on both ultrasound and MRI. Imaging description of further PF disorders, including xanthoma, diabetic fascial disease, foreign-body reactions and plantar infections, is detailed in the main text. Ultrasound and MRI should be considered as first- and second-line modalities for assessment of PF disorders, respectively. Indirect findings of PF disease can be ruled out on plain radiography. Teaching Points • PF disorders commonly cause heel pain and disability in the general population.• Imaging is often required to confirm diagnosis or reveal concomitant injuries.• Ultrasound and MRI respectively represent the first- and second-line modalities for diagnosis.• Indirect findings of PF disease can be ruled out on plain radiography.