[PMID: 15813666]
Lucinactant, formerly known as KL(4) surfactant, is a novel synthetic lung surfactant containing phospholipids and an engineered peptide, sinapultide, which is designed to mimic the actions of human surfactant protein B. It has been developed for use in the prevention or treatment of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), a common problem in premature infants, which results from a deficiency or degradation of pulmonary surfactant. Lucinactant is administered intratracheally soon after birth as a replacement surfactant. In the pivotal randomized, double-blind, prophylaxis trial in premature infants, the incidence of RDS at 24 hours after birth was significantly lower in lucinactant recipients than in recipients of colfosceril palmitate, a synthetic non-protein-containing surfactant. RDS-related mortality at 14 days was significantly lower in lucinactant recipients than in recipients of colfosceril palmitate or beractant, a bovine-derived surfactant. In another randomized, double-blind, prophylaxis trial in premature infants, the rate of survival without bronchopulmonary dysplasia at 28 days of age in lucinactant recipients was not inferior to that in recipients of poractant alfa, a porcine-derived surfactant. Lucinactant was generally well tolerated. Adverse events were transient and related to the administration procedure. There were no differences in the incidences of complications of prematurity between lucinactant and the other surfactants.

[PMID: 18822258]
There are numerous pulmonary conditions in which qualitative or quantitative anomalies of the surfactant system have been demonstrated. In premature newborns with immature lungs, a functional deficit in surfactant is the main physiopathologic mechanism of the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). Since the landmark pilot study of Fujiwara, published more than 20 years ago, the efficacy of exogenous surfactant for the treatment of neonatal RDS has been established by numerous controlled studies and meta-analyses. Enlightened by a growing insight into both the structure and function of the different surfactant components, a new generation of synthetic surfactants has been developed. Various complementary approaches have confirmed the fundamental role of the two hydrophobic proteins, SP-B and SP-C, in the surfactant system, thus opening the way to the design of analogues, either by chemical synthesis or expression in a prokaryotic system. An example of these peptide-containing synthetic surfactant preparations, lucinactant (Surfaxin), has been recently tested in comparison to a synthetic surfactant that does not contain protein as well as to animal derived surfactant preparations. Major clinical outcomes between lucinactant and animal-derived surfactant preparations were fund similar in two randomized controlled trials, opening the way to a new generation of synthetic surfactants in the near future.

[PMID: 16896079]
The pharmacology, clinical efficacy, and cost considerations of exogenous lung surfactants are reviewed. Exogenous pulmonary surfactants, along with advancements in ventilatory care, have significantly reduced the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and its related complications in infants. The following exogenous surfactants are approved for the prophylaxis and treatment (rescue) of neonatal RDS: beractant, a modified natural surfactant; calfactant and poractant, both natural surfactants; and colfosceril, a synthetic surfactant that is not currently available in the United States. Lucinactant, a synthetic surfactant, is under investigation and received approvable status from the Food and Drug Administration in February 2005. The surfactants are delivered directly to their site of action, and only small amounts reach the systemic circulation. Bioavailability to the distal airways and alveoli depends on the method of delivery, the stage and severity of pulmonary disease, and the properties of the particular surfactant. According to data from clinical trials, the use of exogenous surfactant therapy for rescue within the first two hours of life appears to be as efficacious as prophylaxis in most premature infants. Comparative trials of surfactants have proven the efficacy of both synthetic and natural surfactants in the prevention and treatment of RDS. However, these trials have universally demonstrated greater reduction in the immediate need for ventilator support in infants who receive natural surfactants. Natural preparations cause less pneumothorax, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and mortality compared with synthetic preparations. Synthetic agents offer the potential advantages of an unlimited supply with consistent pharmaceutical quality and no risk of transmitting infectious disease or causing immunologic sensitization.

[PMID: 23473590]
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is the leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality in premature infants. It is caused by surfactant deficiency and lung immaturity. Lucinactant is a synthetic surfactant containing sinapultide, a bioengineered peptide mimic of surfactant-associated protein B. A meta-analysis of clinical trials demonstrates that lucinactant is as effective as animal-derived surfactants in preventing RDS in premature neonates, and in vitro studies suggest it is more resistant to oxidative and protein-induced inactivation. Its synthetic origin confers lower infection and inflammation risks as well other potential benefits, which may make lucinactant an advantageous alternative to its animal-derived counterparts, which are presently the standard treatment for RDS.

[PMID: 16452346]
Animal-derived, protein-containing surfactants seem to be superior to protein-free surfactants. Lucinactant, a synthetic surfactant containing a surfactant protein-B peptide analog, has been shown to be effective in animal models and phase II clinical trials. To date, lucinactant has not been compared with an animal-derived surfactant in a premature animal model. The objective was to compare the acute and sustained effects of lucinactant among premature lambs with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) with the effects of a natural porcine surfactant (poractant-alpha). After 5 minutes of mechanical ventilation twin premature lambs were assigned randomly to the lucinactant group (30 mg/mL, 5.8 mL/kg) or the poractant-alpha group (80 mg/mL, 2.2 mL/kg). Heart rate, systemic arterial pressure, arterial pH, blood gas values, and lung mechanics were recorded for 12 hours. Baseline fetal pH values were similar for the 2 groups (pH 7.27). After 5 minutes of mechanical ventilation, severe RDS developed (pH: <7.08; Paco2: >80 mm Hg; Pao2: <40 mm Hg; dynamic compliance: <0.08 mL/cm H2O per kg). After surfactant instillation, similar improvements in gas exchange and lung mechanics were observed for the lucinactant and poractant-alpha groups at 1 hour (pH: 7.3 +/- 0.1 vs 7.4 +/- 0.1; Paco2: 8 +/- 18 mm Hg vs 40 +/- 8 mm Hg; Pao2: 167 +/- 52 mm Hg vs 259 +/- 51 mm Hg; dynamic compliance: 0.3 +/- 0.1 mL/cm H2O per kg vs 0.3 +/- 0.1 mL/cm H2O per kg). The improvements in lung function were sustained, with no differences between groups. Cardiovascular profiles remained stable in both groups. Among preterm lambs with severe RDS, lucinactant produced improvements in gas exchange and lung mechanics similar to those observed with a porcine-derived surfactant.

[PMID: 23032799]
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in premature neonates. This syndrome is caused by a lack of endogenous surfactant production in the lungs. Surfactant replacement was established as a safe and effective treatment in the 1990s and has become the standard of care for these infants. Surfactant products are either protein-free synthetic phospholipid compounds or animal-derived lung preparations. Currently, about 90,000 infants a year receive treatment with one of the commercially available animal-derived surfactants. Lucinactant (Surfaxin®) is a new synthetic surfactant with a pulmonary surfactant-associated protein B mimic that recently received FDA approval. The clinical trials that have been performed, although underpowered, may indicate that lucinactant is superior to phospholipid synthetic surfactant preparations and at least as effective as animal-derived surfactants in reducing morbidity and mortality from RDS. This review summarizes the current clinical knowledge about lucinactant.

[PMID: 23118645]
The use of exogenous surfactants among preterm infants for the prevention and treatment of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) has led to economic and cost-effectiveness evaluations of these products. Lucinactant (Surfaxin), a novel, peptide-based, synthetic surfactant, has been shown to significantly reduce RDS-related mortality, compared with the most commonly prescribed animal-derived surfactant, beractant (Survanta). Infants who survive expend significant healthcare resources; therefore, the impact of improved survival through 1-year corrected age was evaluated in a prospectively defined pharmacoeconomic analysis. The objectives of this study were to estimate the healthcare resource utilization, economic impact, and cost-effectiveness of lucinactant versus beractant for the prevention of RDS among surviving very low birth weight (VLBW) preterm infants weighing 600 to 1250 grams. A decision-analytic model was developed to compare the healthcare resource utilization, economic impact, and cost-effectiveness of lucinactant versus beractant. Infants who received lucinactant had fewer neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) days and fewer NICU days on mechanical ventilation compared with infants who received beractant. Total healthcare costs for the initial stay in the NICU were lower by $8,803 among infants who received lucinactant compared with infants who received beractant. The incremental cost per life saved was $40,309 for lucinactant compared with beractant. Administration of lucinactant to surviving VLBW preterm infants resulted in fewer NICU days and fewer NICU days on mechanical ventilation compared with beractant. Fewer NICU days translates into lower total costs among infants who received lucinactant. This comprehensive pharmacoeconomic analysis indicates that lucinactant is a cost-effective therapy for the prevention of RDS among preterm infants.

[PMID: 15805380]
Evidence suggests that synthetic surfactants consisting solely of phospholipids can be improved through the addition of peptides, such as sinapultide, that mimic the action of human surfactant protein-B (SP-B). A synthetic surfactant containing a mimic of SP-B may also reduce the potential risks associated with the use of animal-derived products. Our objective was to compare the efficacy and safety of a novel synthetic surfactant containing a functional SP-B mimic (lucinactant; Discovery Laboratories, Doylestown, PA) with those of a non-protein-containing synthetic surfactant (colfosceril palmitate; GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, United Kingdom) and a bovine-derived surfactant (beractant; Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) in the prevention of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and RDS-related death. We assigned randomly (double-masked) 1294 very preterm infants, weighing 600 to 1250 g and of < or =32 weeks gestational age, to receive colfosceril palmitate (n = 509), lucinactant (n = 527), or beractant (n = 258) within 20 to 30 minutes after birth. Primary outcome measures were the rates of RDS at 24 hours and the rates of death related to RDS during the first 14 days after birth. All-cause mortality rates, bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) rates, and rates of other complications of prematurity were prespecified secondary outcomes. Primary outcomes, air leaks, and causes of death were assigned by an independent, masked, adjudication committee with prespecified definitions. The study was monitored by an independent data safety monitoring board. Lucinactant reduced significantly the incidence of RDS at 24 hours, compared with colfosceril (39.1% vs 47.2%; odds ratio [OR]: 0.68; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.52-0.89). There was no significant difference in comparison with beractant (33.3%). However, lucinactant reduced significantly RDS-related mortality rates by 14 days of life, compared with both colfosceril (4.7% vs 9.4%; OR: 0.43; 95% CI: 0.25-0.73) and beractant (10.5%; OR: 0.35; 95% CI: 0.18-0.66). In addition, BPD at 36 weeks postmenstrual age was significantly less common with lucinactant than with colfosceril (40.2% vs 45.0%; OR: 0.75; 95% CI: 0.56-0.99), and the all-cause mortality rate at 36 weeks postmenstrual age was lower with lucinactant than with beractant (21% vs 26%; OR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.45-1.00). Lucinactant is a more effective surfactant preparation than colfosceril palmitate for the prevention of RDS. In addition, lucinactant reduces the incidence of BPD, compared with colfosceril palmitate, and decreases RDS-related mortality rates, compared with beractant. Therefore, we conclude that lucinactant, the first of a new class of surfactants containing a functional protein analog of SP-B, is an effective therapeutic option for preterm infants at risk for RDS.

[PMID: 22821059]
Acute inflammatory responses to supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilation have been implicated in the pathophysiological sequelae of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). Although surfactant replacement therapy (SRT) has contributed to lung stability, the effect on lung inflammation is inconclusive. Lucinactant contains sinapultide (KL4), a novel synthetic peptide that functionally mimics surfactant protein B, a protein with anti-inflammatory properties. We tested the hypothesis that lucinactant may modulate lung inflammatory response to mechanical ventilation in the management of RDS and may confer greater protection than animal-derived surfactants. Preterm lambs (126.8 ± 0.2 SD d gestation) were randomized to receive lucinactant, poractant alfa, beractant, or no surfactant and studied for 4 h. Gas exchange and pulmonary function were assessed serially. Lung inflammation biomarkers and lung histology were assessed at termination. SRT improved lung compliance relative to no SRT without significant difference between SRT groups. Lucinactant attenuated lung and systemic inflammatory response, supported oxygenation at lower ventilatory requirements, and preserved lung structural integrity to a greater degree than either no SRT or SRT with poractant alfa or beractant. These data suggest that early intervention with lucinactant may more effectively mitigate pulmonary pathophysiological sequelae of RDS than the animal-derived surfactants poractant alfa or beractant.

[PMID: 22859930]
The key feature of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is the insufficient production of surfactant in the lungs of preterm infants. As a result, researchers have looked into the possibility of surfactant replacement therapy as a means of preventing and treating RDS. We sought to identify the role of surfactant in the prevention and management of RDS, comparing the various types, doses, and modes of administration, and the recent development. A PubMed search was carried out up to March 2012 using phrases: surfactant, respiratory distress syndrome, protein-containing surfactant, protein-free surfactant, natural surfactant, animal-derived surfactant, synthetic surfactant, lucinactant, surfaxin, surfactant protein-B, surfactant protein-C.Natural, or animal-derived, surfactant is currently the surfactant of choice in comparison to protein-free synthetic surfactant. However, it is hoped that the development of protein-containing synthetic surfactant, such as lucinactant, will rival the efficacy of natural surfactants, but without the risks of their possible side effects. Administration techniques have also been developed with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) and selective surfactant administration now recommended; multiple surfactant doses have also reported better outcomes. An aerosolised form of surfactant is being trialled in the hope that surfactant can be administered in a non-invasive way. Overall, the advancement, concerning the structure of surfactant and its mode of administration, offers an encouraging future in the management of RDS.

[PMID: 17533176]
The benefits of exogenous surfactants for prevention or treatment of respiratory distress syndrome are well established, but there is a paucity of long-term follow-up data from surfactant-comparison trials. We sought to determine and compare survival and pulmonary and neurodevelopmental outcomes through 1 year corrected age of preterm infants who received lucinactant and other surfactants in the SELECT (Safety and Effectiveness of Lucinactant Versus Exosurf in a Clinical Trial) and STAR (Surfaxin Therapy Against Respiratory Distress Syndrome) trials individually and, secondarily, from analysis using combined data from these 2 trials. All infants from both trials who were randomly assigned to administration of lucinactant (175 mg/kg), colfosceril palmitate (67.5 mg/kg), beractant (100 mg/kg), or poractant alfa (175 mg/kg) were prospectively followed through 1 year corrected age, at which point masked assessment of outcomes was performed for surviving infants. One-year survival was a key outcome of interest. Other parameters assessed included rates of rehospitalization and respiratory morbidity and gross neurologic status. Data were analyzed by comparing the different surfactants within each trial and, in secondary analysis, combining data from both trials to compare lucinactant versus the animal-derived surfactants (beractant and poractant) used in these trials. Survival rates over time were compared by using the Wilcoxon test for survival through 1 year corrected age and logistic regression for comparison of fixed time points. The latter analyses were performed by using the prespecified approach, where loss to follow-up or withdrawal of consent was imputed as a death, and also using raw data. Other outcomes were analyzed by using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test or logistic regression for categorical data, and analysis of variance on ranks was used for continuous data. Very few cases were lost to follow-up in either trial (29 of 1546 enrolled in both trials [1.9%]). In the primary analysis of the SELECT trial comparing lucinactant to either colfosceril or beractant, there were no significant differences in the proportion of infants who were alive through 1 year corrected age. Fixed-time-point estimates of mortality at 1 year corrected age imputing loss to follow-up as a death were 28.1% for lucinactant, 31.0% for colfosceril, and 31.0% for beractant. By using raw data without imputing loss to follow-up as a death, mortality estimates at 1 year corrected age were computed to be 26.6%, 29.1%, and 28.3%, respectively. In the primary analysis of the STAR trial, significantly more infants treated with lucinactant were alive through 1 year corrected age compared with those who received poractant alfa. Fixed time estimates of mortality at 1 year corrected age imputing loss to follow-up as a death were 19.4% for lucinactant and 24.2% for poractant. These estimates using raw data that did not impute loss to follow-up as a death were 18.6% and 21.9%, respectively. In the combined analysis, survival through 1 year corrected age was higher for infants in the lucinactant group versus that of the infants in the animal-derived surfactants (beractant and poractant) group. The fixed-time-point estimates of mortality at 1 year corrected age imputing loss to follow-up as a death for lucinactant and animal-derived surfactants were 26.0% and 29.4%, respectively. However, the 1-year-corrected-age estimates using combined raw data were 24.6% for the lucinactant group and 26.7% for the animal-derived surfactant group. The incidence of postdischarge rehospitalizations, total number of rehospitalizations, incidence of respiratory illnesses, and total number of respiratory illnesses were generally similar among those in the treatment groups. Neurologic status at 1 year corrected age was essentially similar between infants who received lucinactant and those who received all other surfactants used in these 2 trials. Findings from this 1-year follow-up of both lucinactant trials indicate that this new peptide-based synthetic surfactant is at least as good, if not superior, to animal-derived surfactants for prevention of respiratory distress syndrome and may be a viable alternative to animal-derived products.

[PMID: 15805381]
Available therapeutic surfactants are either animal-derived or non-protein-containing synthetic products. Animal-derived surfactants contain variable amounts of surfactant apoproteins, whereas the older-generation synthetic products contain only phospholipids and lack surfactant proteins (SPs). Both decrease morbidity and mortality rates associated with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) among preterm infants, compared with placebo. However, excess mortality rates have been observed with non-protein-containing synthetic surfactants, compared with the animal-derived products. Evidence suggests that synthetic surfactants consisting solely of phospholipids can be improved with the addition of peptides that are functional analogs of SPs. Lucinactant is a new synthetic peptide-containing surfactant that contains sinapultide, a novel, 21-amino acid peptide (leucine and lysine repeating units, KL4 peptide) designed to mimic human SP-B. It is completely devoid of animal-derived components. We hypothesized that the outcomes for premature infants treated with lucinactant and poractant alfa would be similar. Therefore, we compared lucinactant (Surfaxin; Discovery Laboratories, Doylestown, PA) with porcine-derived, poractant alfa (Curosurf; Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, Italy) in a trial to test for noninferiority. A total of 252 infants born between 24 and 28 weeks of completed gestation, with birth weights between 600 and 1250 g, were assigned randomly in a multicenter, multinational, noninferiority, randomized, controlled study to receive either lucinactant (n = 124) or poractant alfa (n = 128) within 30 minutes of life. The primary outcome was the incidence of being alive without bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) through 28 days of age. Key secondary outcomes included death at day 28 and 36 weeks postmenstrual age (PMA), air leaks, neuroimaging abnormalities, and other complications related to either prematurity or RDS. An independent, international, data and safety monitoring committee monitored the trial. The treatment difference between lucinactant and poractant alfa for survival without BPD through 28 days was 4.75% (95% confidence interval [CI]: -7.3% to 16.8%) in favor of lucinactant, with the lower boundary of the 95% CI for the difference, ie, -7.3%, being greater than the prespecified noninferiority margin of -14.5%. At 28 days, 45 of 119 infants given lucinactant were alive without BPD (37.8%; 95% CI: 29.1-46.5%), compared with 41 of 124 given poractant alfa (33.1%; 95% CI: 24.8-41.3%); at 36 weeks PMA, the rates were 64.7% and 66.9%, respectively. The corresponding mortality rate through day 28 for the lucinactant group was lower than that for the poractant alfa group (11.8% [95% CI: 6.0-17.6%] vs 16.1% [95% CI: 9.7-22.6%]), as was the rate at 36 weeks PMA (16% and 18.5%, respectively). There were no differences in major dosing complications. In addition, no significant differences were observed in the incidences of common complications of prematurity, including intraventricular hemorrhage (grades 3 and 4) and cystic periventricular leukomalacia (lucinactant: 14.3%; poractant alfa: 16.9%). Lucinactant and poractant alfa were similar in terms of efficacy and safety when used for the prevention and treatment of RDS among preterm infants. The ability to enhance the performance of a synthetic surfactant with the addition of a peptide that mimics the action of SP-B, such as sinapultide, brings potential advantages to exogenous surfactant therapy.

[PMID: 22791092]
Inhibition of surfactant function and abnormal surfactant synthesis lead to surfactant dysfunction in children with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. We evaluated whether intratracheal lucinactant, a synthetic, peptide-containing surfactant, was safe and well-tolerated in infants with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, and assessed its effects on clinical outcomes. Infants ≤ 2 yrs of age with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure were enrolled in a phase II, double-blind, multinational, placebo-controlled randomized trial across 36 pediatric intensive care units. Infants requiring mechanical ventilation with persistent hypoxemia meeting acute lung injury criteria were randomized to receive intratracheal lucinactant (175 mg/kg) or air placebo. One retreatment was allowed 12-24 hrs after initial dosing if hypoxemia persisted. Peri-dosing tolerability of intratracheal lucinactant and adverse experiences were assessed. Mechanical ventilation duration was analyzed using analysis of variance. The Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test was used for categorical variables.We enrolled 165 infants (84 lucinactant; 81 placebo) with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. There were no significant differences in baseline subject characteristics, with the exception of a lower positive end-expiratory pressure and higher tidal volume in placebo subjects. The incidence of transient peri-dosing bradycardia and desaturation was significantly higher in the lucinactant treatment group. There were no statistical differences between groups for other adverse events or mortality. Oxygenation improved in infants randomized to receive lucinactant as indicated by fewer second treatments (67% lucinactant vs. 81% placebo, p = .02) and a trend in improvement in partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood to fraction of inspired oxygen from eligibility to 48 hrs after dose (p = .06). There was no significant reduction in duration of mechanical ventilation with lucinactant (geometric least square means: 4.0 days lucinactant vs. 4.5 days placebo; p = .254). In a subset of infants (n = 22), the duration of mechanical ventilation in children with acute lung injury (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood to fraction of inspired oxygen >200) was significantly shorter with lucinactant (least square means: 2.4 days lucinactant vs. 4.3 days placebo; p = .006). In mechanically ventilated infants with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, treatment with intratracheal lucinactant appeared to be generally safe. An improvement in oxygenation and a significantly reduced requirement for retreatment suggests that lucinactant might improve lung function in infants with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure.