[PMID: 22771813]
The present work aims to study the effects induced by a chronic treatment with a novel CB1 antagonist (NESS038C6) in C57BL/6N diet-induced obesity (DIO) mice. Mice treated with NESS038C6 and fed with a fat diet (NESS038C6 FD) were compared with the following three reference experimental groups: DIO mice fed with the same fat diet used for NESS038C6 and treated with vehicle or the reference CB1 antagonist/inverse agonist rimonabant, "VH FD" and "SR141716 FD", respectively; DIO mice treated with vehicle and switched to a normal diet (VH ND). NESS038C6 chronic treatment (30 mg/kg/day for 31 days) determined a significant reduction in DIO mice weight relative to that of VH FD. The entity of the effect was comparable to that detected in both SR141716 FD and VH ND groups. Moreover, if compared to VH FD, NESS038C6 FD evidenced: (i) improvement of cardiovascular risk factors; (ii) significant decrease in adipose tissue leptin expression; (iii) increase in mRNA expression of hypothalamic orexigenic peptides and a decrease of anorexigenic peptides; (iv) expression increase of metabolic enzymes and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α in the liver; (v) normalization of monoaminergic transporters and neurotrophic expression in mesolimbic area. However, in contrast to the case of rimonabant, the novel CB1 antagonist improved the disrupted expression profile of genes linked to the hunger-satiety circuit, without altering monoaminergic transmission. In conclusion, the novel CB1 antagonist compound NESS038C6 may represent a useful candidate agent for the treatment of obesity and its metabolic complications, without or with reduced side effects relative to those instead observed with rimonabant.

[PMID: 21903140]
While a high-fat diet when compared to low-fat diet is known to produce overeating and health complications, less is known about the effects produced by fat-rich diets differing in their specific composition of fat. This study examined the effects of a high-fat diet containing relatively high levels of saturated compared to unsaturated fatty acids (HiSat) to a high-fat diet with higher levels of unsaturated fatty acids (USat). A HiSat compared to USat meal caused rats to consume more calories in a subsequent chow test meal. The HiSat meal also increased circulating levels of triglycerides (TG) and expression of the orexigenic peptides, galanin (GAL) in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and orexin (OX) in the perifornical lateral hypothalamus (PFLH). A similar increase in TG levels and PVN GAL and PFLH OX was also seen in rats given chronic access to the HiSat compared to USat diet, while neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related protein (AgRP) in the arcuate nucleus showed decreased expression. The importance of TG in producing these changes was supported by the finding that the TG-lowering medication gemfibrozil as compared to vehicle, when peripherally administered before consumption of a HiSat meal, significantly decreased the expression of OX, while increasing the expression of NPY and AgRP. These findings substantiate the importance of the fat composition in a diet, indicating that those rich in saturated compared to unsaturated fatty acids may promote overeating by increasing circulating lipids and specific hypothalamic peptides, GAL and OX, known to preferentially stimulate the consumption of a fat-rich diet.

[PMID: 25258168]
AT1 receptor blockers (ARBs) represent an approach for treating metabolic syndrome due to their potency in reducing hypertension, body weight and onset of type 2 diabetes. The mechanism underlying ARB-induced weight loss is still unclear. Leptin resistance tests (LRTs) in diet-induced obese or lean rats were conducted to determine whether telmisartan (8 mg·kg(-1) ·day(-1) , 14 days) enhances leptin sensitivity. Phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pSTAT3) staining was performed in hypothalami to determine leptin transport across the blood-brain barrier. Telmisartin reduced weight gain, food intake and plasma leptin but blood pressure remained unchanged. The 24 h profiles of plasma leptin after saline injections were similar in controls and telmisartan-treated rats, but after leptin injections were higher in controls and slightly lower in telmisartan-treated animals. After telmisartan, energy intake during LRT was lower in leptin- than in saline-pretreated rats, but remained unchanged in controls, irrespectively of whether rats received saline or leptin. Leptin minimized the gain in body weight during LRT in telmisartan-treated rats as compared with saline-treated animals. pSTAT3 staining was reduced in cafeteria diet-fed rats as compared with chow-fed rats but this was normalized by telmisartan. Telmisartin reduced hypothalamic mRNA levels of the orexigenic peptides melanin-concentrating hormone and prepro-orexin. Rats fed a cafeteria diet develop leptin resistance after 2 weeks. Leptin sensitivity was preserved by telmisartan treatment even in rats fed a cafeteria diet. This pleiotropic effect is not related to the hypotensive action of telmisartan.

[PMID: 23707377]
Energy homeostasis (balance) depends on the relationship between the amount of consumed feed energy and energy expenditure. Coordination of energy expenditure and feed intake (appetite) is necessary for the regulation of body composition. The hypothalamus integrates peripheral and central signals to generate satiety or hunger. Birds and mammals utilize common signaling molecules but some molecules possess different/opposite functions. If relevant, particular differences with the mammalian regulatory system are highlighted in this review. For example, obestatin had no significant effect on feed intake of chicks, but it was claimed to decrease food intake in mammalian species. Ghrelin displayed appetite-stimulating effects in mammals but appetite-decreasing effects in birds. Recently, the function of the hypothalamic AMPK signaling pathway on feed intake regulation has received considerable attention in poultry. Alpha-lipoic acid might exert its appetite-decreasing effect by the AMPK signaling pathway. This review discusses the central regulation of energy homeostasis, role of (an)orexigenic peptides, effect of feed deprivation on hypothalamic neuropeptide gene expression and provides a model for involvement of AMPK in the regulation of avian energy balance.

[PMID: 22325091]
Metformin appears to be involved in altering energy expenditure and thermogenesis, and could affect hypothalamic feeding circuits. However, it is not clear whether metformin is able to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to reach the hypothalamus and exert a direct effect on the central nervous system. Here we show the presence of metformin in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of diabetic rats administered orally with metformin which was confirmed by detecting the concentration of metformin with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Food intake of diabetic rats treated with metformin was reduced, and glucose homeostasis was gained. Expression of orexigenic peptides neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related protein (AgRP) decreased in the hypothalamus of metformin-treated diabetic rats, though anorexigenic peptides pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) did not change significantly. The phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) was increased but phosphorylated AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) was similar in the hypothalamus of metformin-treated diabetic rats. Our findings suggest that metformin may cross BBB and play a central mechanism on regulation of food intake in the hypothalamus. The anorexic effect of metformin may be mediated by inhibition of NPY and AgRP gene expression through the STAT3 signaling pathway.

[PMID: 24991043]
Aging is often associated with overweight and obesity. There exists a long-standing debate about whether meal pattern also contributes to the development of obesity. The orexigenic hormone ghrelin regulates appetite and satiety by activating its receptor, growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). In mice, circulating ghrelin concentrations and brain GHS-R expression were shown to increase with aging. To assess whether GHS-R regulates feeding pattern during aging, we studied meal patterns for the following cohorts of male mice fed a normal unpurified diet: 1) 3-4 mo, young wild-type (WT) mice; 2) 3-4 mo, young Ghsr-null (Ghsr(-/-)) mice; 3) 12-14 mo, middle-aged WT (WT-M) mice; 4) 12-14 mo, middle-aged Ghsr(-/-) (Ghsr(-/-)-M) mice; 5) 24-26 mo, old WT (WT-O) mice; and 6) 24-26 mo, old Ghsr(-/-) (Ghsr(-/-)-O) mice. Although the total daily food intake of Ghsr(-/-) mice was similar to that of WT controls, Ghsr(-/-)-M and Ghsr(-/-)-O mice had 9% (P = 0.07) and 16% (P < 0.05) less body weight compared with WT-M and WT-O mice, respectively, primarily due to reduced fat mass (P < 0.05, WT-M vs. Ghsr(-/-)-M and WT-O vs. Ghsr(-/-)-O). Intriguingly, Ghsr(-/-)-M mice ate larger meals (on average, Ghsr(-/-)-M mice ate 0.117 g/meal and WT-M mice ate 0.080 g/meal; P < 0.01) and took a longer time to eat (Ghsr(-/-)-M, 196.0 s and WT-M, 128.9 s; P < 0.01), but ate less frequently (Ghsr(-/-)-M, 31.0 times/d and WT-M, 42.3 times/d; P < 0.05) than WT-M controls. In addition, we found that expression of hypothalamic orexigenic peptides, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP), was relatively lower in aged WT mice (P = 0.09 for NPY and P = 0.06 for AgRP), but anorexic peptide pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) expression remained unchanged between the WT age groups. Interestingly, old Ghsr(-/-) mice had greater hypothalamic NPY expression (102% higher; P < 0.05) and AgRP expression (P = 0.07) but significantly lower POMC expression (P < 0.05) when compared with age-matched WT-O controls. Thus, our results indicate that GHS-R plays an important role in the regulation of meal pattern and that GHS-R ablation may modulate feeding behavior through the regulation of hypothalamic neuropeptides. Our results collectively suggest that ghrelin receptor antagonism may have a beneficial effect on metabolism during aging.

[PMID: 25241055]
Different alcohol drinking patterns, involving either small and frequent drinking bouts or large and long-lasting bouts, are found to differentially affect the risk for developing alcohol-related diseases, suggesting that they have different underlying mechanisms. Such mechanisms may involve orexigenic peptides known to stimulate alcohol intake through their actions in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). These include orexin (OX), which is expressed in the perifornical lateral hypothalamus, and galanin (GAL) and enkephalin (ENK), which are expressed within as well as outside the PVN. To investigate the possibility that these peptides affect different aspects of consumption, a microstructural analysis of ethanol drinking behavior was performed in male, Sprague-Dawley rats trained to drink 7% ethanol and implanted with guide shafts aimed at the PVN. While housed in specialized cages containing computerized intake monitors (BioDAQ Laboratory Intake Monitoring System, Research Diets Inc., New Brunswick, NJ) that measure bouts of ethanol drinking, these rats were given PVN injections of OX (0.9 nmol), GAL (1.0 nmol), or the ENK analog D-Ala2-met-enkephalinamide (DALA) (14.2 nmol), as compared to saline vehicle. Results revealed clear differences between the effects of these peptides. While all 3 stimulated ethanol intake, they had distinct effects on patterns of drinking, with OX increasing the number of drinking bouts, GAL increasing the size of the drinking bouts, and DALA increasing both the size and duration of the bouts. In contrast, these peptides had little impact on water or food intake. These results support the idea that different peptides can increase ethanol consumption by promoting distinct aspects of the ethanol drinking response. The stimulatory effect of OX on drinking frequency may be related to its neuronally stimulatory properties, while the stimulatory effect of GAL and ENK on bout size and duration may reflect a suppressive effect of these neuronally inhibitory peptides on the satiety-controlling PVN.

[PMID: 25047666]
It is known that a decline in food intake occurs with aging. In this study, we investigated changes in parameters associated with food intake in response to aging, and whether orexigenic peptides stimulated food intake after peripheral administration even in aged mice. Food intake and body weight of 27-month-old male C57BL/6N mice were lower than those of 15-month-old mice. Epididymal and mesenteric fat mass, blood glucose, triglyceride, and leptin levels were also decreased. Meanwhile, the hypothalamic mRNA expression of endogenous orexigenic peptides such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related protein, also called agouti-related peptide, was increased. Next, we tested responsiveness to exogenously administered orexigenic peptides coupled to NPY in aged as well as young mice. Orally administered rubiscolin-6, a δ opioid agonist hexapeptide derived from a major green leaf protein Rubisco, stimulated food intake in 27-month-old mice. In contrast, ghrelin was ineffective after intraperitoneal administration to aged mice, suggesting that the NPY system downstream of ghrelin but not δ opioid receptors might be impaired in aged mice. Orally administered rubiscolin-6 stimulates food intake in aged mice with ghrelin resistance.

[PMID: 25017744]
Food restriction (FR) and refeeding (Re) have been suggested to impair body mass regulation and thereby making it easier to regain the lost weight and develop over-weight when FR ends. However, it is unclear if this is the case in small mammals showing seasonal forging behaviors. In the present study, energy budget, body fat and serum leptin level were measured in striped hamsters that were exposed to FR-Re. The effects of leptin on food intake, body fat and genes expressions of several hypothalamus neuropeptides were determined. Body mass, fat content and serum leptin level decreased during FR and then increased during Re. Leptin supplement significantly attenuated the increase in food intake during Re, decreased genes expressions of neuropepetide Y (NPY) and agouti-related protein (AgRP) of hypothalamus and leptin of white adipose tissue (WAT). Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) gene expression of WAT increased in leptin-treated hamsters that were fed ad libitum, but decreased in FR-Re hamsters. This indicates that the adaptive regulation of WAT HSL gene expression may be involved in the mobilization of fat storage during Re, which partly contributes to the resistance to FR-Re-induced overweight. Leptin may be involved in the down regulations of hypothalamus orexigenic peptides gene expression and consequently plays a crucial role in controlling food intake when FR ends.

[PMID: 22922128]
Maternal diet ingested during gestation can profoundly alter production and action of hypothalamic neuropeptides involved in feeding and body weight regulation. In this study, we set out to simulate, in a rat model, modifications to feeding habit often observed in pregnant women. Gestating dams were fed a restricted normal diet with the opportunity to complete their energy requirements with either a high-fat (HF) or a high-carbohydrate (HC) diet. Growth and hypothalamic feeding peptides were measured in the offspring at 3 (weaning) and 20 weeks of age. At weaning, body weight was lower in HC pups than in HF pups or control (Ca) pups born to dams fed control diet ad libitum. Expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY) and AgRP mRNA in the arcuate nucleus were increased in HC pups vs Ca and HF pups. By 20 weeks of age, body weight differentials had disappeared, and there was no differences in NPY and AgRP gene expression, although POMC expression was lower in HC rats than in HF rats. NPY and orexin peptide concentrations in the paraventricular nucleus at this age were higher in HC rats than in Ca and HF rats. In HC rats, there was also a greater positive gradient of peptide concentration between the zone of release and the zone of synthesis for NPY and orexin. The early up-regulation of orexigenic peptides in HC rats may be a compensatory adjustment to low body weight. This persisting overactive orexigenic drive might have deleterious metabolic effects in an obesogenic environment at adulthood.

[PMID: 25039297]
Neuroinflammation is a feedback mechanism against infection, with recent studies suggesting a neuromodulatory role. The chemokine, (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), and its receptor, (C-C motif) receptor type 2 (CCR2), affect neuromodulation and migration in response to damage. Although CCL2 co-localizes with neuropeptides in the hypothalamus that control voluntary behavior, the function of CCL2/CCR2 is unknown. This led us to consider the possibility that CCL2 acting through CCR2, under natural conditions, may affect the migration and peptide levels of hypothalamic neurons that control voluntary behavior. This study used primary embryonic hypothalamic neurons to examine the effect of CCL2 on migratory behavior and on levels of the peptides, enkephalin (ENK) and galanin. Treatment with CCL2 led to a significant, dose-dependent increase in the number of migrated neurons and an increase in the velocity and distance traveled. CCL2 also significantly increased the number of ENK-expressing and CCR2/ENK co-expressing neurons and the percentage of neurons that contain higher levels of ENK. Lastly, CCL2 produced a dose-dependent increase in expression of ENK and galanin. These results provide evidence for a stimulatory effect of CCL2 on embryonic hypothalamic neurons involving changes in migratory behavior, expression, and synthesis of neuropeptides that function in controlling behavior. Our results demonstrate that the chemokine, CCL2, functions through its receptor, CCR2, to stimulate the migration and expression of the orexigenic peptides, enkephalin (ENK) and galanin (GAL), in developing embryonic hypothalamic neurons that are important for controlling ingestive behavior. This evidence reveals broad effects of CCL2 in the developing hypothalamus, showing this chemokine system to be tightly linked to the hypothalamic peptide neurons.

[PMID: 25502749]
Orexin A and B, orexigenic peptides produced primarily by the lateral hypothalamus that signal through two G protein-coupled receptors, orexin receptors 1/2, have been implicated in the regulation of several physiological processes in mammals. In avian (nonmammalian vertebrates) species; however, the physiological roles of orexin are not well defined. Here, we provide novel evidence that not only is orexin and its related receptors 1/2 (ORXR1/2) expressed in chicken muscle tissue and quail muscle (QM7) cell line, orexin appears to be a secretory protein in QM7 cells. In vitro administration of recombinant orexin A and B (rORX-A and B) differentially regulated prepro-orexin expression in a dose-dependent manner with up-regulation for rORX-A (P < 0.05) and downregulation for rORX-B (P < 0.05) in QM7 cells. While both peptides upregulated ORXR1 expression, only a high dose of rORX-B decreased the expression of ORXR2 (P < 0.05). The presence of orexin and its related receptors and the regulation of its own system in avian muscle cells indicate that orexin may have autocrine, paracrine, and/or endocrine roles. rORXs differentially regulated mitochondrial dynamics network. While rORX-A significantly induced the expression of mitochondrial fission-related genes (DNM1, MTFP1, MTFR1), rORX-B increased the expression of mitofusin 2, OPA1, and OMA1 genes that are involved in mitochondrial fusion. Concomitant with these changes, rORXs differentially regulated the expression of several mitochondrial metabolic genes (av-UCP, av-ANT, Ski, and NRF-1) and their related transcriptional regulators (PPARγ, PPARα, PGC-1α, PGC-1β, and FoxO-1) without affecting ATP synthesis. Taken together, our data represent the first evidence of the presence and secretion of orexin system in the muscle of nonmammalian species and its role in mitochondrial fusion and fission, probably through mitochondrial-related genes and their related transcription factors.

[PMID: 21574955]
With advancing age most aspects of the peptidergic regulation of energy balance are altered. The alteration involves both the peripheral peptides derived from the adipose tissue or the gastrointestinal tract and the peptides of the central nervous system (brainstem and hypothalamus). In general, the expression of orexigenic peptides and their receptors decreases with age, while that of the anorexic ones rather increases, but not simultaneously and not in a linear fashion. Apart from such quantitative changes, the efficacy of the related peptides may also change with age. These changes are not necessarily linear, either: instead of continuous decline or increase of its effects, the effects of a peptide may become less pronounced in some phases of aging and much enhanced in other ones. Comparing the individual peptides, the phasic alterations in their anabolic or catabolic roles in the regulation of energy balance may exhibit dissimilar time-patterns. In addition, within the overall anabolic or catabolic effects, the feeding and metabolic actions of certain peptides may not change simultaneously. Altogether, as compared with young adults, in middle-aged animals or individuals the anabolic processes (increased food intake with decreased energy expenditure) seem to prevail, which processes may contribute to the explanation of age-related obesity, while in the old ones the catabolic processes (anorexia with enhanced metabolic rate) dominate, which possibly explain the aging anorexia, frailty and sarcopenia.