[PMID: 22072984]
Previous genome-wide scans of positive natural selection in humans have identified a number of non-neutrally evolving genes that play important roles in skin pigmentation, metabolism, or immune function. Recent studies have also shown that a genome-wide pattern of local adaptation can be detected by identifying correlations between patterns of allele frequencies and environmental variables. Despite these observations, the degree to which natural selection is primarily driven by adaptation to local environments, and the role of pathogens or other ecological factors as selective agents, is still under debate. To address this issue, we correlated the spatial allele frequency distribution of a large sample of SNPs from 55 distinct human populations to a set of environmental factors that describe local geographical features such as climate, diet regimes, and pathogen loads. In concordance with previous studies, we detected a significant enrichment of genic SNPs, and particularly non-synonymous SNPs associated with local adaptation. Furthermore, we show that the diversity of the local pathogenic environment is the predominant driver of local adaptation, and that climate, at least as measured here, only plays a relatively minor role. While background demography by far makes the strongest contribution in explaining the genetic variance among populations, we detected about 100 genes which show an unexpectedly strong correlation between allele frequencies and pathogenic environment, after correcting for demography. Conversely, for diet regimes and climatic conditions, no genes show a similar correlation between the environmental factor and allele frequencies. This result is validated using low-coverage sequencing data for multiple populations. Among the loci targeted by pathogen-driven selection, we found an enrichment of genes associated to autoimmune diseases, such as celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, and multiples sclerosis, which lends credence to the hypothesis that some susceptibility alleles for autoimmune diseases may be maintained in human population due to past selective processes.

[PMID: 23799614]
Squamous cell lung cancer is a major histotype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that is distinct from lung adenocarcinoma. We used whole-exome sequencing to identify novel non-synonymous somatic mutations in squamous cell lung cancer. We identified 101 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) including 77 non-synonymous SNVs (67 missense and 10 nonsense mutations) and 11 INDELs causing frameshifts. We also found four SNVs located within splicing sites. We verified 62 of the SNVs (51 missense, 10 nonsense and 1 splicing-site mutation) and 10 of the INDELs as somatic mutations in lung cancer tissue. Sixteen of the mutated genes were also mutated in at least one patient with a different type of lung cancer in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutation in Cancer (COSMIC) database. Four genes (LPHN2, TP53, MYH2 and TGM2) were mutated in approximately 10% of the samples in the COSMIC database. We identified two missense mutations in C10orf137 and MS4A3 that also occurred in other solid-tumor tissues in the COSMIC database. We found another somatic mutation in EP300 that was mutated in 4.2% of the 2,020 solid-tumor samples in the COSMIC database. Taken together, our results implicate TP53, EP300, LPHN2, C10orf137, MYH2, TGM2 and MS4A3 as potential driver genes of squamous cell lung cancer.

[PMID: 15946860]
This is the first report of an insect esterase efficiently expressed in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris (so far insect esterases have been produced only in the baculovirus system). Having isolated a Tribolium castaneum carboxylesterase cDNA (TCE), we were initially unable to express it in Escherichia coli or P. pastoris despite significant transcription levels. As codon usage bias is different in T. castaneum and P. pastoris, we assumed this was a possible explanation for the translational barrier observed in yeast. Accordingly, we designed and constructed by recursive PCR a synthetic TCE gene (synTCE) optimized for heterologous expression in P. pastoris, i.e., a gene in which certain TCE codons are replaced with synonymous codons 'preferred' in P. pastoris. When the altered gene was placed under the control of either the P. pastoris glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAP) promoter or the inducible alcohol oxidase (AOX1) promoter and introduced on an expression vector into P. pastoris, its product was produced intracellularly. We also successfully explored the possibility of obtaining a secreted product: P. pastoris cells expressing an in-frame fusion of synTCE with the alpha-factor secretion signal under the control of the GAP promoter were found to secrete the recombinant esterase into the external medium (to a concentration of 7 mg/L). In addition to this demonstration of TCE production in yeast, our results suggest that the GAP promoter could advantageously replace the AOX1 promoter as a driver of synTCE expression. TCE specific activity was approximately 5 U/mg when p-nitrophenyl acetate was used as substrate.

[PMID: 23819581]
It is a great challenge of modern biology to determine the functional roles of non-synonymous Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (nsSNPs) on complex phenotypes. Statistical and machine learning techniques establish correlations between genotype and phenotype, but may fail to infer the biologically relevant mechanisms. The emerging paradigm of Network-based Association Studies aims to address this problem of statistical analysis. However, a mechanistic understanding of how individual molecular components work together in a system requires knowledge of molecular structures, and their interactions. To address the challenge of understanding the genetic, molecular, and cellular basis of complex phenotypes, we have, for the first time, developed a structural systems biology approach for genome-wide multiscale modeling of nsSNPs--from the atomic details of molecular interactions to the emergent properties of biological networks. We apply our approach to determine the functional roles of nsSNPs associated with hypoxia tolerance in Drosophila melanogaster. The integrated view of the functional roles of nsSNP at both molecular and network levels allows us to identify driver mutations and their interactions (epistasis) in H, Rad51D, Ulp1, Wnt5, HDAC4, Sol, Dys, GalNAc-T2, and CG33714 genes, all of which are involved in the up-regulation of Notch and Gurken/EGFR signaling pathways. Moreover, we find that a large fraction of the driver mutations are neither located in conserved functional sites, nor responsible for structural stability, but rather regulate protein activity through allosteric transitions, protein-protein interactions, or protein-nucleic acid interactions. This finding should impact future Genome-Wide Association Studies. Our studies demonstrate that the consolidation of statistical, structural, and network views of biomolecules and their interactions can provide new insight into the functional role of nsSNPs in Genome-Wide Association Studies, in a way that neither the knowledge of molecular structures nor biological networks alone could achieve. Thus, multiscale modeling of nsSNPs may prove to be a powerful tool for establishing the functional roles of sequence variants in a wide array of applications.

[PMID: 19633228]
Genetic variation for pathogen infectivity is an important driver of disease incidence and prevalence in both natural and managed systems. Here, we use the interaction between the rust pathogen, Melampsora lini, and two host plants, Linum marginale and Linum usitatissimum, to examine how host-pathogen interactions influence the maintenance of polymorphism in genes underlying pathogen virulence. Extensive sequence variation at two effector loci (AvrP123, AvrP4) was found in M. lini isolates collected from across the native range of L. marginale in Australia, as well as in isolates collected from a second host, the cultivated species L. usitatissimum. A highly significant excess of nonsynonymous compared with synonymous polymorphism was found at both loci, suggesting that diversifying selection is important for the maintenance of the observed sequence diversity. Agrobacterium-mediated transient transformation assays were used to demonstrate that variants of both the AvrP123 and AvrP4 genes are differentially recognized by resistance genes in L. marginale. We further characterized patterns of nucleotide variation at AvrP123 and AvrP4 in 10 local populations of M. lini infecting the wild host L. marginale. Populations were significantly differentiated with respect to allelic representation at the Avr loci, suggesting the possibility of local selection maintaining distinct genetic structures between pathogen populations, whereas limited diversity may be explained via selective sweeps and demographic bottlenecks. Together, these results imply that interacting selective and nonselective factors, acting across a broad range of scales, are important for the generation and maintenance of adaptively significant variation in populations of M. lini.

[PMID: 23015295]
Gastric adenocarcinoma is a rare diagnosis in childhood. A 14-year-old male patient presented with metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma, and a strong family history of colon cancer. Clinical sequencing of CDH1 and APC were negative. Whole exome sequencing was therefore applied to capture the majority of protein-coding regions for the identification of single-nucleotide variants, small insertion/deletions, and copy number abnormalities in the patient's germline as well as primary tumor. DNA was extracted from the patient's blood, primary tumor, and the unaffected mother's blood. DNA libraries were constructed and sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2000. Data were post-processed using Picard and Samtools, then analyzed with the Genome Analysis Toolkit. Variants were annotated using an in-house Ensembl-based program. Copy number was assessed using ExomeCNV. Each sample was sequenced to a mean depth of coverage of greater than 120×. A rare non-synonymous coding single-nucleotide variant (SNV) in TP53 was identified in the germline. There were 10 somatic cancer protein-damaging variants that were not observed in the unaffected mother genome. ExomeCNV comparing tumor to the patient's germline, identified abnormal copy number, spanning 6,946 genes. We present an unusual case of Li-Fraumeni detected by whole exome sequencing. There were also likely driver somatic mutations in the gastric adenocarcinoma. These results highlight the need for more thorough and broad scale germline and cancer analyses to accurately inform patients of inherited risk to cancer and to identify somatic mutations.

[PMID: 23450047]
The tumorigenic role of genetic abnormalities in sporadic pituitary nonfunctioning adenomas (NFAs), which usually originate from gonadotroph cells, is unknown. The objective of the study was to identify somatic genetic abnormalities in sporadic pituitary NFAs. Whole-exome sequencing was performed using DNA from 7 pituitary NFAs and leukocyte samples obtained from the same patients. Somatic variants were confirmed by dideoxynucleotide sequencing, and candidate driver genes were assessed in an additional 24 pituitary NFAs. Whole-exome sequencing achieved a high degree of coverage such that approximately 97% of targeted bases were represented by more than 10 base reads; 24 somatic variants were identified and confirmed in the discovery set of 7 pituitary NFAs (mean 3.5 variants/tumor; range 1-7). Approximately 80% of variants occurred as missense single nucleotide variants and the remainder were synonymous changes or small frameshift deletions. Each of the 24 mutations occurred in independent genes with no recurrent mutations. Mutations were not observed in genes previously associated with pituitary tumorigenesis, although somatic variants in putative driver genes including platelet-derived growth factor D (PDGFD), N-myc down-regulated gene family member 4 (NDRG4), and Zipper sterile-α-motif kinase (ZAK) were identified; however, DNA sequence analysis of these in the validation set of 24 pituitary NFAs did not reveal any mutations indicating that these genes are unlikely to contribute significantly in the etiology of sporadic pituitary NFAs. Pituitary NFAs harbor few somatic mutations consistent with their low proliferation rates and benign nature, but mechanisms other than somatic mutation are likely involved in the etiology of sporadic pituitary NFAs.

[PMID: 24147068]
Neuroblastoma is one of the most genomically heterogeneous childhood malignances studied to date, and the molecular events that occur during the course of the disease are not fully understood. Genomic studies in neuroblastoma have showed only a few recurrent mutations and a low somatic mutation burden. However, none of these studies has examined the mutations arising during the course of disease, nor have they systemically examined the expression of mutant genes. Here we performed genomic analyses on tumors taken during a 3.5 years disease course from a neuroblastoma patient (bone marrow biopsy at diagnosis, adrenal primary tumor taken at surgical resection, and a liver metastasis at autopsy). Whole genome sequencing of the index liver metastasis identified 44 non-synonymous somatic mutations in 42 genes (0.85 mutation/MB) and a large hemizygous deletion in the ATRX gene which has been recently reported in neuroblastoma. Of these 45 somatic alterations, 15 were also detected in the primary tumor and bone marrow biopsy, while the other 30 were unique to the index tumor, indicating accumulation of de novo mutations during therapy. Furthermore, transcriptome sequencing on the 3 tumors demonstrated only 3 out of the 15 commonly mutated genes (LPAR1, GATA2, and NUFIP1) had high level of expression of the mutant alleles, suggesting potential oncogenic driver roles of these mutated genes. Among them, the druggable G-protein coupled receptor LPAR1 was highly expressed in all tumors. Cells expressing the LPAR1 R163W mutant demonstrated a significantly increased motility through elevated Rho signaling, but had no effect on growth. Therefore, this study highlights the need for multiple biopsies and sequencing during progression of a cancer and combinatorial DNA and RNA sequencing approach for systematic identification of expressed driver mutations.

[PMID: 23935863]
We have developed a sequence conservation-based artificial neural network predictor called NetDiseaseSNP which classifies nsSNPs as disease-causing or neutral. Our method uses the excellent alignment generation algorithm of SIFT to identify related sequences and a combination of 31 features assessing sequence conservation and the predicted surface accessibility to produce a single score which can be used to rank nsSNPs based on their potential to cause disease. NetDiseaseSNP classifies successfully disease-causing and neutral mutations. In addition, we show that NetDiseaseSNP discriminates cancer driver and passenger mutations satisfactorily. Our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on several disease/neutral datasets as well as on cancer driver/passenger mutation datasets and can thus be used to pinpoint and prioritize plausible disease candidates among nsSNPs for further investigation. NetDiseaseSNP is publicly available as an online tool as well as a web service: http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetDiseaseSNP.

[PMID: 23704925]
Cutaneous malignant melanoma is the most fatal skin cancer and although improved comprehension of its pathogenic pathways allowed to realize some effective molecular targeted therapies, novel targets and drugs are still needed. Aiming to add genetic information potentially useful for novel targets discovery, we performed an extensive genomic characterization by whole-exome sequencing and SNP array profiling of six cutaneous melanoma cell lines derived from metastatic patients. We obtained a total of 3,325 novel coding single nucleotide variants, including 2,172 non-synonymous variants. We catalogued the coding mutations according to Sanger COSMIC database and to a manually curated list including genes involved in melanoma pathways identified by mining recent literature. Besides confirming the presence of known melanoma driver mutations (BRAF(V600E), NRAS(Q61R) ), we identified novel mutated genes involved in signalling pathways crucial for melanoma pathogenesis and already addressed by current targeted therapies (such as MAPK and glutamate pathways). We also identified mutations in four genes (MUC19, PAICS, RBMXL1, KIF23) never reported in melanoma, which might deserve further investigations. All data are available to the entire research community in our Melanoma Exome Database (at https://155.253.6.64/MExDB/). In summary, these cell lines are valuable biological tools to improve the genetic comprehension of this complex cancer disease and to study functional relevance of individual mutational events, and these findings could provide insights potentially useful for identification of novel therapeutic targets for cutaneous malignant melanoma.

[PMID: 23694700]
A common goal of tumor sequencing projects is finding genes whose mutations are selected for during tumor development. This is accomplished by choosing genes that have more non-synonymous mutations than expected from an estimated background mutation frequency. While this background frequency is unknown, it can be estimated using both the observed synonymous mutation frequency and the non-synonymous to synonymous mutation ratio. The synonymous mutation frequency can be determined across all genes or in a gene-specific manner. This choice introduces an interesting trade-off. A gene-specific frequency adjusts for an underlying mutation bias, but is difficult to estimate given missing synonymous mutation counts. Using a genome-wide synonymous frequency is more robust, but is less suited for adjusting biases. Studying four evaluation criteria for identifying genes with high non-synonymous mutation burden (reflecting preferential selection of expressed genes, genes with mutations in conserved bases, genes with many protein interactions, and genes that show loss of heterozygosity), we find that the gene-specific synonymous frequency is superior in the gene expression and protein interaction tests. In conclusion, the use of the gene-specific synonymous mutation frequency is well suited for assessing a gene's non-synonymous mutation burden.

[PMID: 22649506]
Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is a rare cancer of the sinonasal tract with little molecular characterization. We performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) on paired normal and tumor DNA from a patient with metastatic-ONB to identify the somatic alterations that might be drivers of tumorigenesis and/or metastatic progression. Genomic DNA was isolated from fresh frozen tissue from a metastatic lesion and whole blood, followed by WGS at >30X depth, alignment and mapping, and mutation analyses. Sanger sequencing was used to confirm selected mutations. Sixty-two somatic short nucleotide variants (SNVs) and five deletions were identified inside coding regions, each causing a non-synonymous DNA sequence change. We selected seven SNVs and validated them by Sanger sequencing. In the metastatic ONB samples collected several months prior to WGS, all seven mutations were present. However, in the original surgical resection specimen (prior to evidence of metastatic disease), mutations in KDR, MYC, SIN3B, and NLRC4 genes were not present, suggesting that these were acquired with disease progression and/or as a result of post-treatment effects. This work provides insight into the evolution of ONB cancer cells and provides a window into the more complex factors, including tumor clonality and multiple driver mutations.

[PMID: 22893128]
Cancer cells evolve from normal cells by somatic mutations and natural selection. Comparing the evolution of cancer cells and that of organisms can elucidate the genetic basis of cancer. Here we analyse somatic mutations in >400 cancer genomes. We find that the frequency of somatic single-nucleotide variations increases with replication time during the S phase much more drastically than germ-line single-nucleotide variations and somatic large-scale structural alterations, including amplifications and deletions. The ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous single-nucleotide variations is higher for cancer cells than for germ-line cells, suggesting weaker purifying selection against somatic mutations. Among genes with recurrent mutations only cancer driver genes show evidence of strong positive selection, and late-replicating regions are depleted of cancer driver genes, although enriched for recurrently mutated genes. These observations show that replication timing has a prominent role in shaping the single-nucleotide variation landscape of cancer cells.