[PMID: 8077949]
The 605 amino acid E1 protein of bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1) is a multifunctional nuclear protein required for viral DNA replication. A nuclear localization signal (NLS) sequence was previously defined by point mutations in three short adjacent clusters of basic amino acids located in the amino-terminal region of the E1 protein. In this study, we used a fusion protein approach to evaluate the contribution of other regions of the E1 protein to nuclear transport. The nearly full-length E1 gene and six non-overlapping subfragments were each fused in-frame with the lacZ gene in a eukaryotic expression vector. Each clone was electroporated into COS-1 cells, and the intracellular location of the E1-beta-galactosidase fusion proteins was determined by immunofluorescence. Only the constructs containing the full-length E1 or a single subregion (E1-259; amino acids 84 to 166) produced fusion proteins that entered the nucleus. Point mutations in the NLS sequences of the E1-259-lacZ construct prevented nuclear translocation of the corresponding fusion protein. This confirms the previous result that the cluster of basic amino acids is critical for nuclear transport. Furthermore, the data obtained in this investigation indicated that the region of E1 containing the NLS sequence was not only necessary, but was also sufficient for nuclear localization. No other region of E1 contained independent nuclear localization activity.

[PMID: 12551941]
Proteins destined for the mitochondrial matrix space have leader sequences that are typically present at the most N-terminal end of the nuclear-encoded precursor protein. The leaders are rich in positive charges and usually deficient of negative charges. This observation led to the acid-chain hypothesis to explain how the leader sequences interact with negatively charged receptor proteins. Here we show using both chimeric leaders and one from isopropyl malate synthase that possesses a negative charge that the leader need not be at the very N terminus of the precursor. Experiments were performed with modified non-functioning leader sequences fused to either the native or a non-functioning leader of aldehyde dehydrogenase so that an internal leader sequence could exist. The internal leader is sufficient for the import of the modified precursor protein. It appears that this leader still needs to form an amphipathic helix just like the normal N-terminal leaders do. This internal leader could function even if the most N-terminal portion contained negative charges in the first 7-11 residues. If the first 11 residues were deleted from isopropyl malate synthase, the resulting protein was imported more successfully than the native protein. It appears that precursors that carry negatively charged leaders use an internal signal sequence to compensate for the non-functional segment at the most N-terminal portion of the protein.

[PMID: 9624150]
The complete primary structure of the mouse type XIII collagen chain was determined by cDNA cloning. Comparison of the mouse amino acid sequences with the previously determined human sequences revealed a high identity of 90%. Surprisingly, the mouse cDNAs extended further in the 5' direction than the previously identified human clones. The 5' sequences contained a new in-frame ATG codon for translation initiation which resulted in elongation of the N-terminal noncollagenous domain by 81 residues. These N-terminal sequences lack a typical signal sequence but include a highly hydrophobic segment that clearly fulfills the criteria for a transmembrane domain. The sequence data thus unexpectedly suggested that type XIII collagen may be located on the plasma membrane, with a short cytosolic N-terminal portion and a long collagenous extracellular portion. These sequence data prompted us to generate antipeptide antibodies against type XIII collagen in order to study the protein and its subcellular location. Western blotting of human tumor HT-1080 cell extract revealed bands of over 180 kDa. These appeared to represent disulfide-bonded multimeric polypeptide forms that resolved upon reduction into 85-95-kDa bands that are likely to represent a mixture of splice forms of monomeric type XIII collagen chains. These chains were shown to contain the predicted N-terminal extension and thus also the putative transmembrane segment. Immunoprecipitation of biotinylated type XIII collagen from surface-labeled HT-1080 cells, subcellular fractionation, and immunofluorescence staining were used to demonstrate that type XIII collagen molecules are indeed located in the plasma membranes of these cells.

[PMID: 8307567]
The transient axonal glycoprotein (TAG-1) is a cell adhesion molecule that promotes neurite outgrowth and belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily. We have isolated cDNAs encoding TAX1, the human homologue of TAG-1. Human TAX1 shows a high degree of homology to rat TAX1 and less to its chick counterpart, axonin-1, with 91 and 75% identity at the amino acid level, respectively. The numbers of immunoglobulin (IgC2) domains and fibronectin repeats present in TAG-1 are conserved among the three species. The highest degree of conservation occurs in the second IgC2 domain (98% with the rat and 82% with the chick). The human homologue also contains a putative N-terminal signal sequence and a C-terminal hydrophobic sequence, suggestive of linkage to the cell membrane via phosphatidylinositol. In addition, the two mammalian TAG-1 proteins share the RGD tripeptide, a motif known to mediate recognition of fibronectin by integrins. In situ hybridization to human metaphase chromosomes maps the TAX1 gene encoding human TAG-1 to a single location on chromosome 1q32.

[PMID: 8955395]
We report the characterization of a gene encoding a novel flocculin related to the STA genes of yeast, which encode secreted glucoamylase. The STA genes comprise sequences that are homologous to the sporulation-specific glucoamylase SGA and to two other sequences, S2 and S1. We find that S2 and S1 are part of a single gene which we have named FLO11. The sequence of FLO11 reveals a 4,104-bp open reading frame on chromosome IX whose predicted product is similar in overall structure to the class of yeast serine/threonine-rich GPI-anchored cell wall proteins. An amino-terminal domain containing a signal sequence and a carboxy-terminal domain with homology to GPI (glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositol) anchor-containing proteins are separated by a central domain containing a highly repeated threonine- and serine-rich sequence. Yeast cells that express FLO11 aggregate in the calcium-dependent process of flocculation. Flocculation is abolished when FLO11 is disrupted. The product of STA1 also is shown to have flocculating activity. When a green fluorescent protein fusion of FLO11 was expressed from the FLO11 promoter on a single-copy plasmid, fluorescence was observed in vivo at the periphery of cells. We propose that FLO11 encodes a flocculin because of its demonstrated role in flocculation, its structural similarity to other members of the FLO gene family, and the cell surface location of its product. FLO11 gene sequences are present in all yeast strains tested, including all standard laboratory strains, unlike the STA genes which are present only in the variant strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae var. diastaticus. FLO11 differs from all other yeast flocculins in that it is located near a centromere rather than a telomere, and its expression is regulated by mating type. Repression of FLO11-dependent flocculation in diploids is conferred by the mating-type repressor al/alpha2.

[PMID: 21834515]
A transmembrane domain (TMD) at the N-terminus of a membrane protein is a signal sequence that targets the protein to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Proline is found more frequently in TM helices compared to water-soluble helices. To investigate the effects of proline on protein translocation and integration in mammalian cells, we made proline substitutions throughout the TMD of dipeptidyl peptidase IV, a type II membrane protease with a single TMD at its N-terminus. The proteins were expressed and their capacities for targeting and integrating into the membrane were measured in both mammalian cells and in vitro translation systems. Three proline substitutions in the central region of the TMD resulted in various defects in membrane targeting and/or integration. The replacement of proline with other amino acids of similar hydrophobicity rescued both the translocation and anchoring defects of all three proline mutants, indicating that conformational change caused by proline is a determining factor. Increasing hydrophobicity of the TMD by replacing other residues with more hydrophobic residues also effectively reversed the translocation and integration defects. Intriguingly, increasing hydrophobicity at the C-terminal end of the TMD rescued much more effectively than it did at the N-terminal end. Thus, the effect of proline on translocation and integration of the TMD is not determined solely by its conformation and hydrophobicity, but also by the location of proline in the TMD, the location of highly hydrophobic residues, and the relative position of the proline to other proline residues in the TMD.

[PMID: 18931123]
Metal ion homeostasis mechanisms in the food-borne human pathogen Campylobacter jejuni are poorly understood. The Cj1516 gene product is homologous to the multicopper oxidase CueO, which is known to contribute to copper tolerance in Escherichia coli. Here we show, by optical absorbance and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, that purified recombinant Cj1516 contains both T1 and trinuclear copper centers, which are characteristic of multicopper oxidases. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry revealed that the protein contained approximately six copper atoms per polypeptide. The presence of an N-terminal "twin arginine" signal sequence suggested a periplasmic location for Cj1516, which was confirmed by the presence of p-phenylenediamine (p-PD) oxidase activity in periplasmic fractions of wild-type but not Cj1516 mutant cells. Kinetic studies showed that the pure protein exhibited p-PD, ferroxidase, and cuprous oxidase activities and was able to oxidize an analogue of the bacterial siderophore anthrachelin (3,4-dihydroxybenzoate), although no iron uptake impairment was observed in a Cj1516 mutant. However, this mutant was very sensitive to increased copper levels in minimal media, suggesting a role in copper tolerance. This was supported by increased expression of the Cj1516 gene in copper-rich media. A mutation in a second gene, the Cj1161c gene, encoding a putative CopA homologue, was also found to result in copper hypersensitivity, and a Cj1516 Cj1161c double mutant was found to be more copper sensitive than either single mutant. These observations and the apparent lack of alternative copper tolerance systems suggest that Cj1516 (CueO) and Cj1161 (CopA) are major proteins involved in copper homeostasis in C. jejuni.

[PMID: 21572038]
The neuregulins (NRGs) play important roles in animal development and homeostasis, and their deregulation has been linked to diseases such as cancer and schizophrenia. The NRGs belong to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family of transmembrane growth factors. Although NRGs may be synthesized as transmembrane proteins (the pro-NRGs), some of them lack an N-terminal signal sequence, raising the question of how these pro-NRGs are directed to the plasma membrane. Here we have explored the domains of pro-NRGs that are required for their membrane anchoring, cell surface exposure, and biological activity. We show that an internal hydrophobic region acts as a membrane-anchoring domain, but other regions of pro-NRG are required for proper sorting to the plasma membrane. Using mutants that are located in different subcellular compartments, we show that only plasma membrane-exposed pro-NRG is biologically active. At this location, the pro-NRGs may act as transautocrine molecules (i.e. as membrane factors able to activate receptors present in cells that are in physical contact with the pro-NRG-producing cells (in trans) or capable of activating receptors present in the pro-NRG-producing cells (in cis)).

[PMID: 9013954]
The CD6 protein has been shown to play important roles in T cell costimulation and adhesion. Recently, variably spliced isoforms of CD6 mRNA have been identified in both human and murine T cells. Here we report on the genomic organization of the human CD6 gene, its chromosomal localization, and the characterization of novel isoforms. Human CD6 is encoded by at least 13 exons. The amino terminal signal sequence, extracellular region, and transmembrane domain are encoded by seven exons, while the cytoplasmic domain of CD6 is encoded by six exons. Each of the three extracellular scavenger receptor cysteine-rich domains is encoded by a separate exon. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies and screening of a chromosome-specific YAC (yeast artificial chromosome) library revealed that the gene encoding CD6 is located on chromosome 11 at 11q13 in close proximity to the gene encoding the related molecule CD5 and within 600 kb of CD20. Analysis of mRNA transcripts encoding CD6 isolated from mitogen-activated PBMC and from B cells obtained from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia revealed the presence of at least five different CD6 transcripts. These transcripts arise via variable splicing of exons encoding the cytoplasmic domain of CD6. The existence of these isoforms suggests that signaling through CD6 could be regulated via alternative splicing of cytoplasmic encoding exons.

[PMID: 19453274]
Ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) of Nitrosomonas europaea is a metalloenzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of ammonia to hydroxylamine. This study shows that AMO resides in the cytoplasm of the bacteria in addition to its location in the membrane and is distributed approximately equally in both subcellular fractions. AMO in both fractions catalyzes the oxidation of ammonia and binds [(14)C]acetylene, a mechanism-based inhibitor which specifically interacts with catalytically active AMO. Soluble AMO was purified 12-fold to electrophoretic homogeneity with a yield of 8%. AMO has a molecular mass of approximately 283 kDa with subunits of ca. 27 kDa (alpha-subunit, AmoA), ca. 42 kDa (beta-subunit, AmoB), and ca. 24 kDa (gamma-subunit, cytochrome c(1)) in an alpha(3)beta(3)gamma(3) sub-unit structure. Different from the beta-subunit of membrane-bound AMO, AmoB of soluble AMO possesses an N-terminal signal sequence. AMO contains Cu (9.4+/-0.6 mol per mol AMO), Fe (3.9+/-0.3 mol per mol AMO), and Zn (0.5 to 2.6 mol per mol AMO). Upon reduction the visible absorption spectrum of AMO reveals absorption bands characteristic of cytochrome c. Electron para-magnetic resonance spectroscopy of air-oxidized AMO at 50 K shows a paramagnetic signal originating from Cu(2+) and at 10 K a paramagnetic signal characteristic of heme-Fe.

[PMID: 9551364]
We have taken several approaches to investigate the capacity of the secretory pathway to liberate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-restricted antigenic peptides from precursor polypeptides. Cells lacking the peptide transporter (TAP) are unable to deliver peptides from cytosolic antigens to class I molecules. TAP can be bypassed by targeting peptides directly to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) using NH2-terminal signal sequences. This results in the generation of enormous numbers of MHC class I complexes (50,000 peptides/cell), and recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing such peptides are highly immunogenic. In contrast to signal sequence-targeted peptides, peptides are liberated very inefficiently from internal locations in ER-targeted full-length proteins, indicating that the secretory pathway has a limited capacity for generating antigenic peptides from most polypeptide contexts. We have, however, identified a location in proteins from which peptides can be liberated in numerous contexts in the secretory pathway. Placing a number of different peptides at the COOH termini of a secreted protein and two proteins with type II membrane anchors resulted in their TAP-independent presentation. These findings demonstrate that the secretory compartment possesses proteases able to liberate COOH-terminal antigenic peptides from virtually any context, entirely consistent with a role for these proteases in the processing of TAP-transported antigenic peptide precursors.

[PMID: 11231276]
The recently characterized human serine protease, Testisin, is expressed on premeiotic testicular germ cells and is a candidate type II tumor suppressor for testicular cancer. Here we report the cloning, characterization and expression of the gene encoding mouse Testisin, Prss21. The murine Testisin gene comprises six exons and five introns and spans approximately 5 kb of genomic DNA with an almost identical structure to the human Testisin gene, PRSS21. The gene was localized to murine chromosome 17 A3.3-B; a region syntenic with the location of PRSS21 on human chromosome 16p13.3. Northern blot analyses of RNA from a range of adult murine tissues demonstrated a 1.3 kb mRNA transcript present only in testis. The murine Testisin cDNA shares 65% identity with human Testisin cDNA and encodes a putative pre-pro-protein of 324 amino acids with 80% similarity to human Testisin. The predicted amino-acid sequence includes an N-terminal signal sequence of 27 amino acids, a 27 amino-acid pro-region, a 251 amino-acid catalytic domain typical of a serine protease with trypsin-like specificity, and a C-terminal hydrophobic extension which is predicted to function as a membrane anchor. Immunostaining for murine Testisin in mouse testis demonstrated specific staining in the cytoplasm and on the plasma membrane of round and elongating spermatids. Examination of murine Testisin mRNA expression in developing sperm confirmed that the onset of murine Testisin mRNA expression occurred at approximately day 18 after birth, corresponding to the appearance of spermatids in the testis, in contrast to the expression of human Testisin in spermatocytes. These data identify the murine ortholog to human Testisin and demonstrate that the murine Testisin gene is temporally regulated during murine spermatogenesis.

[PMID: 11575719]
thi1 has been recently isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana and is probably involved in both thiamine biosynthesis and as protection of organellar DNA from damage. Studies of thiamine biosynthesis in plants suggests a plastid location for the pathway, which is in agreement with the predicted THI1 N-terminal chloroplastic transit peptide (TP). On the other hand, thiamine is synthesized in mitochondria in yeast cells. Interestingly, A. thaliana thi1 cDNA complements a yeast strain disrupted for the homologous gene. Analysis of THI1 amino acid sequence revealed the presence of a putative amphiphilic alpha-helix, which is typical for mitochondrial presequences, located downstream of the chloroplast transit peptide. To define the putative role of the two predicted targeting sequences in tandem, we produced two chimeric genes encompassing the chloroplastic THI1 TP and either 4 or 27 (including the putative mitochondrial presequence) N-terminal residues of the mature THI1, both linked to the reporter (gusA) gene. Analysis of GUS distribution in subcellular fractions of transgenic plants revealed that in the construct retaining only 4 residues of mature THI1, GUS was found in the chloroplastic fraction. Extension of the THI1 transit peptide to 27 residues of the mature protein allowed import and processing of GUS into both mitochondria and chloroplasts. Direct analysis by immunogold-labeling with an anti-THI1 polyclonal antibody identified THI1 in both organelles in Arabidopsis. We also provide evidence that the precursors of both organellar isoforms are encoded by a single nuclear transcript. Thus, THI1 is targeted simultaneously to mitochondria and chloroplasts by a post transcriptional mechanism.