[PMID: 22244809]
Aleglitazar is a dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-α/γ agonist with a balanced activity (similar half-maximal effective concentrations) toward PPAR-α and -γ that is in clinical development for the treatment of patients who have experienced an acute coronary syndrome and have type 2 diabetes mellitus. This study aimed to characterize the metabolic profile and the routes and rates of elimination of aleglitazar and its major metabolites in humans. In this Phase I, nonrandomized, open-label, single-center, single-dose study, 6 healthy male subjects each received a single oral dose of 300 μg [(14)C]-labeled aleglitazar. Total urine and feces were collected for up to 15 days. Venous blood samples were collected to determine the plasma concentrations of aleglitazar and its metabolites and for radioactivity counting. The median age (range) and mean (SD) body mass index of subjects were 48 (41-60) years and 24.8 (3.0) kg/m(2), respectively. Recovery of total radioactivity, as a percentage of the dose administered, was high (93 [3]%). Aleglitazar was predominantly eliminated in feces (mean, 66% [range, 55%-74%]), with only 28% (range, 22%-36%) of the radioactivity recovered in urine. Only a mean (SD) of 1.8 (0.8)% of aleglitazar was eliminated unchanged as parent compound in feces and only 0.3 (0.4)% was eliminated in urine. Almost all excreted drug-related material could be attributed to its 2 main metabolites, M1 (21%) and M6 (38%). Treatment with aleglitazar was well tolerated, and no serious adverse events were reported. In healthy volunteers, aleglitazar was excreted mainly in the form of inactive metabolites, mostly M1 and M6, with only a small proportion eliminated unchanged.

[PMID: 19515415]
Despite previous reports of potential adverse cardiovascular effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonists, the promise for PPAR agonists to positively affect risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes is of continued interest. The SYNCHRONY study aimed to establish the glucose-lowering and lipid-modifying effects, and safety profile, of the dual PPAR-alpha and PPAR-gamma agonist aleglitazar. In this double-blind study, patients with type 2 diabetes (either drug-naive or pre-treated with </=two oral agents) were enrolled from 47 sites in seven countries. After a single-blind, 4-5-week placebo run-in period, 332 patients were randomised double-blind (via an interactive voice-response system) to 16 weeks' treatment with aleglitazar at once-daily doses of 50 mug, 150 mug, 300 mug, or 600 mug, or matching placebo (n=55 in each group), or to open-label pioglitazone 45 mg once daily (n=57) as a reference. The primary efficacy endpoint was the change in glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA(1c)) concentration from baseline to the end of treatment. Patients who received at least one dose of study drug and had at least one evaluable post-baseline HbA(1c) measurement were included in the efficacy analysis. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00388518. The efficacy analysis excluded six patients (n=0 in pioglitazone group; n=1 in each of placebo, 50 mug, 150 mug, and 600 mug aleglitazar groups; and n=2 in 300 mug aleglitazar group). Aleglitazar significantly reduced baseline HbA(1c) versus placebo in a dose-dependent manner, from -0.36% (95% CI 0.00 to -0.70, p=0.048) with 50 mug to -1.35% (-0.99 to -1.70, p<0.0001) with 600 mug. The trend of changes over time suggests that the maximum effect of aleglitazar on HbA(1c) concentration was not yet reached after 16 weeks of treatment. Oedema, haemodilution, and weight gain occurred in a dose-dependent manner. However, at aleglitazar doses less than 300 mug, no patients had congestive heart failure, frequency of oedema was similar to placebo (one case at 50 mug, two at 150 mug, and three with placebo) and less than with pioglitazone (four cases), and bodyweight gain was less than with pioglitazone (0.52 kg at 150 mug vs 1.06 kg). The favourable balance in the safety and efficacy profile of aleglitazar represents encouraging short-term clinical data for this agent and provides good evidence to enter phase III investigation. F Hoffmann-La Roche AG (Switzerland).

[PMID: 22113345]
Aleglitazar is a dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-α/γ agonist in clinical development, designed to offer a balanced activation of PPAR-α and PPAR-γ. A phase 2 trial has demonstrated improvements in dyslipidemia and glycemic control and reduction of cardiovascular risk markers in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with aleglitazar. This study evaluated whether supratherapeutic doses of aleglitazar affect cardiac repolarization, as detected by changes in the QT interval.Healthy subjects were randomized to receive single oral doses of placebo, 300 μg aleglitazar, 3000 μg aleglitazar, and 400 mg moxifloxacin, in 1 of 4 sequences. Triplicate 12-lead electrocardiogram measurements were recorded predose and regularly (0.75-72 hours) after each treatment. The primary outcome was measurement of QT interval using a study-specific correction factor for heart rate.Administration of aleglitazar (300 μg and 3000 μg) did not cause any significant QT prolongation and after aleglitazar treatment any mean increases from placebo were <5 msec, at all time points. There was a trend for aleglitazar to cause a small dose-dependent decrease in QT interval using a study-specific correction factor for heart rate. The incidence of adverse events was similar with aleglitazar (18%-20%) and placebo (26%).Single supratherapeutic doses of aleglitazar are not associated with prolongation of the QT interval corrected for heart rate.

[PMID: 21114416]
Aleglitazar, a dual PPAR-α/γ agonist, combines the lipid benefits of fibrates and the insulin-sensitizing benefits of thiazolidinediones. To investigate the pharmacokinetic effects of co-administration of atorvastatin or rosuvastatin with aleglitazar. In a two-cohort, open-label, randomised, three-period crossover study, 44 healthy subjects received once-daily oral doses of aleglitazar 300 μg, statin (atorvastatin 80 mg or rosuvastatin 40 mg) and aleglitazar co-administered with each statin for 7 days. Plasma concentrations of each drug were measured and pharmacokinetic parameters determined on day 7 in each period. Peak observed plasma concentration (C(max)) and total exposures (AUC(0 - 24)) of aleglitazar, atorvastatin and rosuvastatin. C(max) and AUC(0 - 24) to aleglitazar were similar, whether administered alone or in combination with a statin. Total exposure to either statin was unaffected by co-administration with aleglitazar. C(max) treatment ratios for both statins exceeded the conventional no-effect boundary (1.25) when administered with aleglitazar. Co-administration of aleglitazar with a statin does not alter the pharmacokinetic profile of either drug.

[PMID: 21251281]
Glycemic control and management of dyslipidemia to reduce cardiovascular risk are major therapeutic goals in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). This study was performed to evaluate the effects of aleglitazar, a balanced dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α/γ (PPARα/γ) agonist, on both lipid and glycemic parameters in obese, hypertriglyceridemic, insulin-resistant rhesus monkeys. A 135-day efficacy study was performed in six rhesus monkeys. After a 28-day baseline assessment (vehicle only), monkeys received oral aleglitazar 0.03 mg/kg per day for 42 days, followed by a 63-day washout period. Plasma levels of markers of glycemic and lipid regulation were measured at baseline, at the end of the dosing period, and at the end of the washout period. Compared with baseline values, aleglitazar 0.03 mg/kg per day reduced triglyceride levels by an average of 89% (328 to 36 mg/dL; P = 0.0035 when normalized for baseline levels) and increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels by 125% (46 to 102 mg/dL; P = 0.0007). Furthermore, aleglitazar reduced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (41%) and increased levels of apolipoprotein A-I (17%) and A-II (17%). Aleglitazar also improved insulin sensitivity by 60% (P = 0.001). Mean body weight was reduced by 5.9% from baseline values with aleglitazar at this dose (P = 0.043). Aleglitazar, a dual PPARα/γ agonist, has beneficial effects on both lipid and glucose parameters and may have a therapeutic role in modifying cardiovascular risk factors and improving glycemic control in patients with T2DM.

[PMID: 20837369]
Aleglitazar is a new, balanced dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)α/γ agonist designed to optimize lipid and glycemic benefits and minimize PPAR-related adverse effects. SESTA R was a 26-week, randomized, double-blind, multicenter study comparing the effects of a supratherapeutic dosage of aleglitazar (600 μg/day) with pioglitazone (45 mg/day) on change in measured GFR (mGFR) in 174 patients with type 2 diabetes and normal to mildly impaired renal function (estimated GFR [eGFR] 60 to 120 ml/min/1.73 m(2)). In 118 patients with evaluable GFR measurements, baseline mean (± SD) mGFR was 97.6 ± 17.5 ml/min/1.73 m(2) in the aleglitazar group and 101.9±21.6ml/min/1.73m(2) in the pioglitazone group. Mean percent change from baseline mGFR was -16.9% (90% confidence interval -22.0 to -11.5) with aleglitazar and -4.6% (-10.15 to 1.35) with pioglitazone, a mean treatment difference of -13.0% (-19.0 to -6.5). The 17% decrease from baseline in mGFR was consistent with the 19% decrease in eGFR Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) observed with aleglitazar, which reached a plateau after 4weeks, with no further progression until treatment discontinuation. Following aleglitazar withdrawal, eGFR values returned to pretreatment levels within the 4-8-week follow-up, which suggests reversible hemodynamic changes in renal function. Despite the increased incidence of expected, dose-dependent PPAR class side effects (e.g., peripheral edema, weight gain, and congestive heart failure) limiting further development of this supratherapeutic dosage of aleglitazar (600 μg/day), these data, together with the data from the dose-ranging SYNCHRONY study, suggest aleglitazar may be a potential new treatment for cardiovascular risk reduction in post-acute coronary syndrome patients at the therapeutic 150 μg daily dose.

[PMID: 20336066]
This multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, ascending-dose study investigated the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamic effects, safety, and tolerability of aleglitazar, a novel peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/gamma (PPARalpha/gamma) dual agonist. After a 3-week washout period, 71 patients with type 2 diabetes received either a single oral dose of aleglitazar (20, 50, 100, 300, 600, or 900 microg) or placebo, followed by once-daily dosing for 6 weeks. Few adverse events were reported, with no apparent relationship between the rate of incidence or severity of the adverse events and the dose of aleglitazar administered. Aleglitazar exposure increased in a dose-proportional manner both after a single dose and at steady state, with no accumulation. Aleglitazar produced dose-dependent improvements in levels of fasting and postprandial glucose, insulin resistance, and lipid parameters. Dose-dependent decreases from baseline in creatinine clearance exceeded 10% at doses >300 microg. The PPARalpha- and PPARgamma-related effects occurred over similar dose ranges, indicating that aleglitazar is a balanced agonist of the two receptor subtypes.

[PMID: 24157957]
: Aleglitazar acts through balanced activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors α and γ; warfarin is a commonly prescribed anticoagulant. Given the extent of cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes, cotreatment with aleglitazar and warfarin is likely in this population. This open-label, randomized, 2-period, crossover study in 12 healthy male subjects investigated the potential for drug-drug interactions between warfarin and aleglitazar (final data drawn from 11 white subjects). The primary objective was to investigate the effect of aleglitazar on the pharmacokinetic properties of S-warfarin and on the pharmacodynamics of the racemic mixture; the secondary objectives included the effect of aleglitazar on R-warfarin pharmacokinetics and of racemic warfarin on aleglitazar pharmacokinetics. Subjects were randomized to single-dose warfarin on day 1 or aleglitazar once daily (12 days) plus single-dose warfarin on day 6 followed by a 14-day washout period, then crossover. Coadministration of aleglitazar reduced S- and R-warfarin exposure (AUC0-∞) by 18% and 13%, respectively, but did not change its pharmacodynamic effects (prothrombin time and factor VII activity). After warfarin dosing, aleglitazar trough concentrations remained within the same range. These findings indicate that coadministration of aleglitazar and warfarin is unlikely to affect the efficacy or safety of either agent.

[PMID: 24016490]
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) regulate transcription of genes involved in glucose uptake, lipid metabolism, and inflammation. Aleglitazar is a potent dual PPAR agonist with insulin-sensitizing and glucose-lowering actions and favorable effects on lipid profiles and biomarkers of cardiovascular risk. The AleCardio trial examines whether the addition of aleglitazar to standard medical therapy reduces the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and recent acute coronary syndrome. AleCardio is a phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. A total of 7,228 patients were randomized to aleglitazar 150 μg or placebo daily in addition to standard medical therapy. The primary efficacy end point is time to the first event of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke. Principal safety end points are hospitalization due to heart failure and changes in renal function. Treatment will continue until 7,000 patients are followed up for at least 2.5 years and 950 primary end point events are adjudicated. AleCardio will establish whether the PPAR-α/γ agonist aleglitazar improves cardiovascular outcomes in patients with diabetes and high-risk coronary disease.

[PMID: 25407798]
Type 2 diabetes is a major risk factor for chronic kidney disease, which substantially increases the risk of cardiovascular disease mortality. This Phase IIb safety study (AleNephro) in patients with stage 3 chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes, evaluated the renal effects of aleglitazar, a balanced peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α/γ agonist. Patients were randomized to 52 weeks' double-blind treatment with aleglitazar 150 μg/day (n=150) or pioglitazone 45 mg/day (n=152), followed by an 8-week off-treatment period. The primary endpoint was non-inferiority for the difference between aleglitazar and pioglitazone in percentage change in estimated glomerular filtration rate from baseline to end of follow-up. Secondary endpoints included change from baseline in estimated glomerular filtration rate and lipid profiles at end of treatment. Mean estimated glomerular filtration rate change from baseline to end of follow-up was -2.7% (95% confidence interval: -7.7, 2.4) with aleglitazar versus -3.4% (95% confidence interval: -8.5, 1.7) with pioglitazone, establishing non-inferiority (0.77%; 95% confidence interval: -4.5, 6.0). Aleglitazar was associated with a 15% decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate versus 5.4% with pioglitazone at end of treatment, which plateaued to 8 weeks and was not progressive. Superior improvements in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides, with similar effects on glycosylated hemoglobin were observed with aleglitazar versus pioglitazone. No major safety concerns were identified. The primary endpoint in AleNephro was met, indicating that in stage 3 chronic kidney disease patients with type 2 diabetes, the decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate after 52 weeks' treatment with aleglitazar followed by 8 weeks off-treatment was reversible and comparable (non-inferior) to pioglitazone. NCT01043029 January 5, 2010.

[PMID: 24682069]
No therapy directed against diabetes has been shown to unequivocally reduce the excess risk of cardiovascular complications. Aleglitazar is a dual agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors with insulin-sensitizing and glucose-lowering actions and favorable effects on lipid profiles. To determine whether the addition of aleglitazar to standard medical therapy reduces cardiovascular morbidity and mortality among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and a recent acute coronary syndrome (ACS). AleCardio was a phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted in 720 hospitals in 26 countries throughout North America, Latin America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific regions. The enrollment of 7226 patients hospitalized for ACS (myocardial infarction or unstable angina) with type 2 diabetes occurred between February 2010 and May 2012; treatment was planned to continue until patients were followed-up for at least 2.5 years and 950 primary end point events were positively adjudicated. Randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive aleglitazar 150 µg or placebo daily. The primary efficacy end point was time to cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. Principal safety end points were hospitalization due to heart failure and changes in renal function. The trial was terminated on July 2, 2013, after a median follow-up of 104 weeks, upon recommendation of the data and safety monitoring board due to futility for efficacy at an unplanned interim analysis and increased rates of safety end points. A total of 3.1% of patients were lost to follow-up and 3.2% of patients withdrew consent. The primary end point occurred in 344 patients (9.5%) in the aleglitazar group and 360 patients (10.0%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.96 [95% CI, 0.83-1.11]; P = .57). Rates of serious adverse events, including heart failure (3.4% for aleglitazar vs 2.8% for placebo, P = .14), gastrointestinal hemorrhages (2.4% for aleglitazar vs 1.7% for placebo, P = .03), and renal dysfunction (7.4% for aleglitazar vs 2.7% for placebo, P < .001) were increased. Among patients with type 2 diabetes and recent ACS, use of aleglitazar did not reduce the risk of cardiovascular outcomes. These findings do not support the use of aleglitazar in this setting with a goal of reducing cardiovascular risk. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01042769.

[PMID: 22514701]
To compare the molecular and biologic signatures of a balanced dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-α/γ agonist, aleglitazar, with tesaglitazar (a dual PPAR-α/γ agonist) or a combination of pioglitazone (Pio; PPAR-γ agonist) and fenofibrate (Feno; PPAR-α agonist) in human hepatocytes. Gene expression microarray profiles were obtained from primary human hepatocytes treated with EC(50)-aligned low, medium and high concentrations of the three treatments. A systems biology approach, Causal Network Modeling, was used to model the data to infer upstream molecular mechanisms that may explain the observed changes in gene expression. Aleglitazar, tesaglitazar and Pio/Feno each induced unique transcriptional signatures, despite comparable core PPAR signaling. Although all treatments inferred qualitatively similar PPAR-α signaling, aleglitazar was inferred to have greater effects on high- and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels than tesaglitazar and Pio/Feno, due to a greater number of gene expression changes in pathways related to high-density and low-density lipoprotein metabolism. Distinct transcriptional and biologic signatures were also inferred for stress responses, which appeared to be less affected by aleglitazar than the comparators. In particular, Pio/Feno was inferred to increase NFE2L2 activity, a key component of the stress response pathway, while aleglitazar had no significant effect. All treatments were inferred to decrease proliferative signaling. Aleglitazar induces transcriptional signatures related to lipid parameters and stress responses that are unique from other dual PPAR-α/γ treatments. This may underlie observed favorable changes in lipid profiles in animal and clinical studies with aleglitazar and suggests a differentiated gene profile compared with other dual PPAR-α/γ agonist treatments.

[PMID: 26093872]
Insulin-resistant states, including type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prediabetes, are associated with elevated cardiovascular (CV) risk. Aleglitazar is a dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α/γ agonist with favorable insulin-sensitizing and glucose-lowering actions, favorable effects on blood lipids, and an acceptable safety profile in short-time studies. Therefore, it was hypothesized that aleglitazar would reduce CV morbidity and mortality in patients with T2D mellitus and prediabetes (defined as glycosylated hemoglobin ≥5.7% to <6.5%) with previous CV complications. ALEPREVENT was a phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, trial comparing aleglitazar 150 μg or placebo daily in patients with T2D or prediabetes with established, stable CV disease. The intended sample size was 19,000 with a primary efficacy measure of major adverse CV events. However, the trial was halted prematurely after 1,999 patients had been randomized because of futility and an unfavorable benefit risk ratio in another CV outcomes trial evaluating aleglitazar. At study termination after 58 ± 38 days of treatment, data had been collected from 1,996 patients (1,581 with T2D and 415 with pre-T2D). Despite the brief duration of treatment, aleglitazar induced favorable changes in glycosylated hemoglobin and blood lipids, similar for participants with T2D or prediabetes. However, compared with placebo, aleglitazar increased the incidence of hypoglycemia (86 vs 166; P < .0001), and muscular events (3 vs12; P = .012). Even within a short duration of exposure, aleglitazar was associated with excess adverse events, corroborating the findings of a larger and longer trial in T2D. Coupled with the previous failure of several other peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α/γ activators, this class now holds little promise for CV therapeutics.