[PMID: 29113731]
Few therapeutic options are available to treat the late-stage of human African trypanosomiasis, a neglected tropical disease, caused by Trypanosoma brucei gambiense (g-HAT). The firstline treatment is a combination therapy of oral nifurtimox and intravenous eflornithine that needs to be administered in a hospital setting by trained personnel, which is not optimal given that patients often live in remote areas with few health resources. Therefore, we aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of an oral regimen of fexinidazole (a 2-substituted 5-nitroimidazole with proven trypanocidal activity) versus nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy in patients with late-stage g-HAT. In this randomised, phase 2/3, open-label, non-inferiority trial, we recruited patients aged 15 years and older with late-stage g-HAT from g-HAT treatment centres in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (n=9) and the Central African Republic (n=1). Patients were randomly assigned (2:1) to receive either fexinidazole or nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy according to a predefined randomisation list (block size six). The funder, data management personnel, and study statisticians were masked to treatment. Oral fexinidazole was given once a day (days 1-4: 1800 mg, days 5-10: 1200 mg). Oral nifurtimox was given three times a day (days 1-10: 15 mg/kg per day) with eflornithine twice a day as 2 h infusions (days 1-7: 400 mg/kg per day). The primary endpoint was success at 18 months (ie, deemed as patients being alive, having no evidence of trypanosomes in any body fluid, not requiring rescue medication, and having a cerebrospinal fluid white blood cell count ≤20 cells per μL). Safety was assessed through routine monitoring. Primary efficacy analysis was done in the modified intention-to-treat population and safety analyses in the intention-to-treat population. The acceptable margin for the difference in success rates was defined as 13%. This study has been completed and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01685827. Between October, 2012, and November, 2016, 419 patients were pre-screened. Of the 409 eligible patients, 14 were not included because they did not meet all inclusion criteria (n=12) or for another reason (n=2). Therefore, 394 patients were randomly assigned, 264 to receive fexinidazole and 130 to receive nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy. Success at 18 months was recorded in 239 (91%) patients given fexinidazole and 124 (98%) patients given nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy, within the margin of acceptable difference of -6·4% (97·06% CI -11·2 to -1·6; p=0·0029). We noted no difference in the proportion of patients who experienced treatment-related adverse events (215 [81%] in the fexinidazole group vs 102 [79%] in the nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy group). Treatment discontinuations were unrelated to treatment (n=2 [1%] in the fexinidazole group). Temporary nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy interruption occurred in three (2%) patients. 11 patients died during the study (nine [3%] in the fexinidazole group vs two [2%] in the nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy group). Our findings show that oral fexinidazole is effective and safe for the treatment of T b gambiense infection compared with nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy in late-stage HAT patients. Fexinidazole could be a key asset in the elimination of this fatal neglected disease. Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative.

[PMID: 22301556]
Safer and more effective oral drugs are required to treat visceral leishmaniasis, a parasitic disease that kills 50,000 to 60,000 people each year in parts of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Here, we report that fexinidazole, a drug currently in phase 1 clinical trials for treating African trypanosomiasis, shows promise for treating visceral leishmaniasis. This 2-substituted 5-nitroimidazole drug is rapidly oxidized in vivo in mice, dogs, and humans to sulfoxide and sulfone metabolites. Both metabolites of fexinidazole were active against Leishmania donovani amastigotes grown in macrophages, whereas the parent compound was inactive. Pharmacokinetic studies with fexinidazole (200 mg/kg) showed that fexinidazole sulfone achieves blood concentrations in mice above the EC(99) (effective concentration inhibiting growth by 99%) value for at least 24 hours after a single oral dose. A once-daily regimen for 5 days at this dose resulted in a 98.4% suppression of infection in a mouse model of visceral leishmaniasis, equivalent to that seen with the drugs miltefosine and Pentostam, which are currently used clinically to treat this tropical disease. In African trypanosomes, the mode of action of nitro drugs involves reductive activation via a NADH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide)-dependent bacterial-like nitroreductase. Overexpression of the leishmanial homolog of this nitroreductase in L. donovani increased sensitivity to fexinidazole by 19-fold, indicating that a similar mechanism is involved in both parasites. These findings illustrate the potential of fexinidazole as an oral drug therapy for treating visceral leishmaniasis.

[PMID: 28552771]
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is a neglected tropical disease, with a population of 70 million at risk. Current treatment options are limited. In the search for new therapeutics, the repurposing of the broad-spectrum antiprotozoal drug fexinidazole has completed Phase III trials with the anticipation that it will be the first oral treatment for HAT. This study used the recently validated bioluminescence imaging model to assess the dose and rate of kill effect of fexinidazole in infected mice, and the dose-dependent effect of fexinidazole on trypanosome infection. Pharmacokinetics of fexinidazole in plasma and central nervous system (CNS) compartments were similar in both infected and uninfected mice. Drug distribution within the CNS was further examined by microdialysis, showing similar levels in the cortex and hippocampus. However, high variability in drug distribution and exposure was found between mice.

[PMID: 27748443]
The insect-transmitted protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi is the causative agent of Chagas disease, and infects 5-8 million people in Latin America. Chagas disease is characterised by an acute phase, which is partially resolved by the immune system, but then develops as a chronic life-long infection. There is a consensus that the front-line drugs benznidazole and nifurtimox are more effective against the acute stage in both clinical and experimental settings. However, confirmative studies have been restricted by difficulties in demonstrating sterile parasitological cure. Here, we describe a systematic study of nitroheterocyclic drug efficacy using highly sensitive bioluminescence imaging of murine infections. Unexpectedly, we find both drugs are more effective at curing chronic infections, judged by treatment duration and therapeutic dose. This was not associated with factors that differentially influence plasma drug concentrations in the two disease stages. We also observed that fexinidazole and fexinidazole sulfone are more effective than benznidazole and nifurtimox as curative treatments, particularly for acute stage infections, most likely as a result of the higher and more prolonged exposure of the sulfone derivative. If these findings are translatable to human patients, they will have important implications for treatment strategies.

[PMID: 25409760]
Introduction: The armamentarium of antileishmanial drugs is small. It is further being threatened by the development of resistance and decreasing sensitivity to the available drugs. The development of newer drugs is sorely needed. Areas covered: The authors have based their review on a literature search performed using PubMed. The article specifically looks at investigational drugs, which have demonstrated, at the very least, in vitro and in vivo activities against the leishmania species that cause visceral leishmaniasis. Specifically, the authors review the nitroimidazole compound fexinidazole, which is one of the few drugs which have reached Phase II trials. The article also discusses the R enantiomer of (S)-PA-824, which has shown good antileishmanial activity. Finally, the article also highlights the many novel delivery systems and oral formulations of amphotericin B, which are both cheap and less toxic and are currently under investigation. Expert opinion: Very few new drugs have reached the clinic for this neglected tropical disease and there is an urgent need for new efficacious therapeutics. The authors believe that support from public-private partnerships would help in enabling the prompt development of drug candidates that could potentially make the clinic.

[PMID: 24535888]
Fexinidazole is a 5-nitroimidazole recently included in a clinical efficacy trial as an oral drug for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis (HAT). Preclinical studies showed it acts as a pharmacologically active pro-drug with two key active metabolites: sulfoxide and sulfone (the most active metabolite). The present studies aimed to determine the best dose regimen for the treatment of stage 2 sleeping sickness patients, which could eventually also treat stage 1 patients. Fexinidazole was assessed in 154 healthy adult male subjects of sub-Saharan African origin. Three initial first-in-human studies and two additional studies assessed a single ascending dose and multiple ascending doses (both under fasted conditions), tablet versus suspension formulation and food effect (fasted vs. high-fat meal and field-adapted food), and multiple ascending doses with a loading dose regimen under fed conditions. Fexinidazole was well-tolerated in a single dose from 100 to 3,600 mg, with quick absorption of the parent drug and rapid metabolism into sulfoxide [time to maximum concentration (t max) 2-5 h] and sulfone (t max 18-24 h). The tablet formulation was approximately 25 % less bioavailable than the suspension, and food intake increased drug absorption and plasma concentrations of fexinidazole and its two metabolites by approximately 200 %. Fourteen-day multiple ascending dosing administered up to 3,600 mg/day in fasted conditions showed that fexinidazole was generally well-tolerated (mild to moderate, spontaneously reversible drug-related adverse events). Following the high-fat food effect finding, another study was conducted to evaluate the impact of a low-fat regimen closer to that of the target population, showing that the type of meal does not influence fexinidazole absorption. The last study showed that a loading dose of 1,800 mg/day for 4 days followed by a 1,200 mg/day regimen for 6 days with a normal meal provided the desired exposure of fexinidazole and its metabolites, particularly sulfone, with good tolerability. Based on preclinical evidence from a chronic infection mouse model, systemic drug concentrations obtained are expected to be clinically effective in stage 2 HAT. These studies show that fexinidazole can be safely assessed in patients as a potential oral cure for both stages of HAT.

[PMID: 21200426]
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), also known as sleeping sickness, is a fatal parasitic disease caused by trypanosomes. Current treatment options for HAT are scarce, toxic, no longer effective, or very difficult to administer, in particular for the advanced, fatal stage of the disease (stage 2, chronic HAT). New safe, effective and easy-to-use treatments are urgently needed. Here it is shown that fexinidazole, a 2-substituted 5-nitroimidazole rediscovered by the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi) after extensive compound mining efforts of more than 700 new and existing nitroheterocycles, could be a short-course, safe and effective oral treatment curing both acute and chronic HAT and that could be implemented at the primary health care level. To complete the preclinical development and meet the regulatory requirements before initiating human trials, the anti-parasitic properties and the pharmacokinetic, metabolic and toxicological profile of fexinidazole have been assessed. Standard in vitro and in vivo anti-parasitic activity assays were conducted to assess drug efficacy in experimental models for HAT. In parallel, a full range of preclinical pharmacology and safety studies, as required by international regulatory guidelines before initiating human studies, have been conducted. Fexinidazole is moderately active in vitro against African trypanosomes (IC₅₀ against laboratory strains and recent clinical isolates ranged between 0.16 and 0.93 µg/mL) and oral administration of fexinidazole at doses of 100 mg/kg/day for 4 days or 200 mg/kg/day for 5 days cured mice with acute and chronic infection respectively, the latter being a model for the advanced and fatal stage of the disease when parasites have disseminated into the brain. In laboratory animals, fexinidazole is well absorbed after oral administration and readily distributes throughout the body, including the brain. The absolute bioavailability of oral fexinidazole was 41% in mice, 30% in rats, and 10% in dogs. Furthermore, fexinidazole is rapidly metabolised in vivo to at least two biologically active metabolites (a sulfoxide and a sulfone derivative) that likely account for a significant portion of the therapeutic effect. Key pharmacokinetic parameter after oral absorption in mice for fexinidazole and its sulfoxide and sulfone metabolites are a C(max) of 500, 14171 and 13651 ng/mL respectively, and an AUC₀₋₂₄ of 424, 45031 and 96286 h.ng/mL respectively. Essentially similar PK profiles were observed in rats and dogs. Toxicology studies (including safety pharmacology and 4-weeks repeated-dose toxicokinetics in rat and dog) have shown that fexinidazole is well tolerated. The No Observed Adverse Event Levels in the 4-weeks repeated dose toxicity studies in rats and dogs was 200 mg/kg/day in both species, with no issues of concern identified for doses up to 800 mg/kg/day. While fexinidazole, like many nitroheterocycles, is mutagenic in the Ames test due to bacterial specific metabolism, it is not genotoxic to mammalian cells in vitro or in vivo as assessed in an in vitro micronucleus test on human lymphocytes, an in vivo mouse bone marrow micronucleus test, and an ex vivo unscheduled DNA synthesis test in rats. The results of the preclinical pharmacological and safety studies indicate that fexinidazole is a safe and effective oral drug candidate with no untoward effects that would preclude evaluation in man. The drug has entered first-in-human phase I studies in September 2009. Fexinidazole is the first new clinical drug candidate with the potential for treating advanced-stage sleeping sickness in thirty years.

[PMID: 21911566]
Fexinidazole is a 5-nitroimidazole drug currently in clinical development for the treatment of human sleeping sickness (human African trypanosomiasis [HAT]), caused by infection with species of the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei. The compound and its two principal metabolites, sulfoxide and sulfone, have been assessed for their ability to kill a range of T. brucei parasite strains in vitro and to cure both acute and chronic HAT disease models in the mouse. The parent molecule and both metabolites have shown trypanocidal activity in vitro in the 0.7-to-3.3 μM (0.2-to-0.9 μg/ml) range against all parasite strains tested. In vivo, fexinidazole is orally effective in curing both acute and chronic diseases in the mouse at doses of 100 mg/kg of body weight/day for 4 days and 200 mg/kg/day for 5 days, respectively. Pharmacokinetic data indicate that it is likely that the sulfoxide and sulfone metabolites provide most, if not all, of the in vivo killing activity. Fexinidazole and its metabolites require up to 48 h exposure in order to induce maximal trypanocidal efficacy in vitro. The parent drug and its metabolites show no in vitro cross-reactivity in terms of trypanocidal activity with either themselves or other known trypanocidal drugs in use in humans. The in vitro and in vivo antitrypanosomal activities of fexinidazole and its two principal metabolites provide evidence that the compound has the potential to be an effective oral treatment for both the T. b. gambiense and T. b. rhodesiense forms of human sleeping sickness and both stages of the disease.

[PMID: 25694261]
To review current and emerging tools for Gambiense HAT control and elimination, and propose strategies that integrate these tools with epidemiological evidence. We reviewed the scientific literature to identify contemporary and emerging tools and strategies for controlling and eliminating Gambiense HAT. Through an iterative process involving key stakeholders, we then developed comprehensive scenarios leading to elimination, considering both established and new tools for diagnosis, case treatment and vector control. Core components of all scenarios include detecting and treating cases with established or emerging techniques. Relatively more intensive scenarios incorporate vector control. New tools considered include tiny targets for tsetse fly control, use of rapid diagnostic tests and oral treatment with fexinidazole or oxaboroles. Scenarios consider the time when critical new tools are expected to become ready for deployment by national control programmes. Based on a review of the latest epidemiological data, we estimate the various interventions to cover 1,380,600 km(2) and 56,986,000 people. A number of new tools will fill critical gaps in the current armamentarium for diagnosing and treating Gambiense HAT. Deploying these tools in endemic areas will facilitate the comprehensive and sustainable control of the disease considerably and contribute to the ultimate goal of elimination.

[PMID: 24841257]
This study was designed to verify the in vivo efficacy of sulfoxide and sulfone fexinidazole metabolites following oral administration in a murine model of Chagas disease. Female Swiss mice infected with the Y strain of Trypanosoma cruzi were treated orally once per day with each metabolite at doses of 10 to 100 mg/kg of body weight for a period of 20 days. Parasitemia was monitored throughout, and cures were detected by parasitological and PCR assays. The results were compared with those achieved with benznidazole treatment at the same doses. Fexinidazole metabolites were effective in reducing the numbers of circulating parasites and protecting mice against death, compared with untreated mice, but without providing cures at daily doses of 10 and 25 mg/kg. Both metabolites were effective in curing mice at 50 mg/kg/day (30% to 40%) and 100 mg/kg/day (100%). In the benznidazole-treated group, parasitological cure was detected only in animals treated with the higher dose of 100 mg/kg/day (80%). Single-dose pharmacokinetic parameters for each metabolite were obtained from a parallel group of uninfected mice and were used to estimate the profiles following repeated doses. Pharmacokinetic data suggested that biological efficacy most likely resides with the sulfone metabolite (or subsequent reactive metabolites formed following reduction of the nitro group) following administration of either the sulfoxide or the sulfone and that prolonged plasma exposure over the 24-h dosing window is required to achieve high cure rates. Fexinidazole metabolites were effective in treating T. cruzi in a mouse model of acute infection, with cure rates superior to those achieved with either fexinidazole itself or benznidazole.

[PMID: 27611920]
Fexinidazole (FEX) is a nitroimidazole being developed as a new trypanocide treatment for human African trypanosomiasis/sleeping sickness. Its main metabolites, fexinidazole sulfoxide (M1) and fexinidazole sulfone (M2), show the same in vitro pharmacological activity as FEX. An LC-MS/MS assay was developed for quantitation of FEX in DBS, collected via finger-prick from healthy subjects. The DBS assay was specific, accurate and reproducible for FEX, M1 and M2 when validated against the current plasma assay. DBS samples were stable for 24 h at 37°C with 95% relative humidity, and 58 weeks desiccated at room temperature. DBS finger-prick sampling offers a simple, practical method for determining FEX, M1 and M2 concentrations in clinical studies in Africa.

[PMID: 22539226]
The parasitic disease human African trypanomiasis (HAT), also known as sleeping sickness, is a highly neglected fatal condition endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, which is poorly treated with medicines that are toxic, no longer effective or very difficult to administer. New, safe, effective and easy-to-use treatments are urgently needed. Many nitroimidazoles possess antibacterial and antiprotozoal activity and examples such as tinidazole are used to treat trichomoniasis and guardiasis, but concerns about toxicity including genotoxicity limit their usefulness. Fexinidazole, a 2-substituted 5-nitroimidazole rediscovered by the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi) after extensive compound mining of public and pharmaceutical company databases, has the potential to become a short-course, safe and effective oral treatment, curing both acute and chronic HAT. This paper describes the genotoxicity profile of fexinidazole and its two active metabolites, the sulfoxide and sulfone derivatives. All the three compounds are mutagenic in the Salmonella/Ames test; however, mutagenicity is either attenuated or lost in Ames Salmonella strains that lack one or more nitroreductase(s). It is known that these enzymes can nitroreduce compounds with low redox potentials, whereas their mammalian cell counterparts cannot, under normal conditions. Fexinidazole and its metabolites have low redox potentials and all mammalian cell assays to detect genetic toxicity, conducted for this study either in vitro (micronucleus test in human lymphocytes) or in vivo (ex vivo unscheduled DNA synthesis in rats; bone marrow micronucleus test in mice), were negative. Thus, fexinidazole does not pose a genotoxic hazard to patients and represents a promising drug candidate for HAT. Fexinidazole is expected to enter Phase II clinical trials in 2012.

[PMID: 23133682]
New safe and effective treatments for Chagas disease (CD) are urgently needed. Current chemotherapy options for CD have significant limitations, including failure to uniformly achieve parasitological cure or prevent the chronic phase of CD, and safety and tolerability concerns. Fexinidazole, a 2-subsituted 5-nitroimidazole drug candidate rediscovered following extensive compound mining by the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative and currently in Phase I clinical study for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis, was evaluated in experimental models of acute and chronic CD caused by different strains of Trypanosoma cruzi. We investigated the in vivo activity of fexinidazole against T. cruzi, using mice as hosts. The T. cruzi strains used in the study were previously characterized in murine models as susceptible (CL strain), partially resistant (Y strain), and resistant (Colombian and VL-10 strains) to the drugs currently in clinical use, benznidazole and nifurtimox. Our results demonstrated that fexinidazole was effective in suppressing parasitemia and preventing death in infected animals for all strains tested. In addition, assessment of definitive parasite clearance (cure) through parasitological, PCR, and serological methods showed cure rates of 80.0% against CL and Y strains, 88.9% against VL-10 strain, and 77.8% against Colombian strain among animals treated during acute phase, and 70% (VL-10 strain) in those treated in chronic phase. Benznidazole had a similar effect against susceptible and partially resistant T. cruzi strains. Fexinidazole treatment was also shown to reduce myocarditis in all animals infected with VL-10 or Colombian resistant T. cruzi strains, although parasite eradication was not achieved in all treated animals at the tested doses. Fexinidazole is an effective oral treatment of acute and chronic experimental CD caused by benznidazole-susceptible, partially resistant, and resistant T. cruzi. These findings illustrate the potential of fexinidazole as a drug candidate for the treatment of human CD.