[PMID: 21991951]
Teriflunomide is a new oral disease-modifying therapy for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis. We concluded a randomized trial involving 1088 patients with multiple sclerosis, 18 to 55 years of age, with a score of 0 to 5.5 on the Expanded Disability Status Scale and at least one relapse in the previous year or at least two relapses in the previous 2 years. Patients were randomly assigned (in a 1:1:1 ratio) to placebo, 7 mg of teriflunomide, or 14 mg of teriflunomide once daily for 108 weeks. The primary end point was the annualized relapse rate, and the key secondary end point was confirmed progression of disability for at least 12 weeks. Teriflunomide reduced the annualized relapse rate (0.54 for placebo vs. 0.37 for teriflunomide at either 7 or 14 mg), with relative risk reductions of 31.2% and 31.5%, respectively (P<0.001 for both comparisons with placebo). The proportion of patients with confirmed disability progression was 27.3% with placebo, 21.7% with teriflunomide at 7 mg (P=0.08), and 20.2% with teriflunomide at 14 mg (P=0.03). Both teriflunomide doses were superior to placebo on a range of end points measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Diarrhea, nausea, and hair thinning were more common with teriflunomide than with placebo. The incidence of elevated alanine aminotransferase levels (≥1 times the upper limit of the normal range) was higher with teriflunomide at 7 mg and 14 mg (54.0% and 57.3%, respectively) than with placebo (35.9%); the incidence of levels that were at least 3 times the upper limit of the normal range was similar in the lower- and higher-dose teriflunomide groups and the placebo group (6.3%, 6.7%, and 6.7%, respectively). Serious infections were reported in 1.6%, 2.5%, and 2.2% of patients in the three groups, respectively. No deaths occurred. Teriflunomide significantly reduced relapse rates, disability progression (at the higher dose), and MRI evidence of disease activity, as compared with placebo. (Funded by Sanofi-Aventis; TEMSO ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00134563.).

[PMID: 24321165]
Teriflunomide is a new active drug which has recently been approved as a first-line treatment of relapsing forms of MS in the US, Australia, Argentina, and the European Union. It is characterized by a once-daily oral application and a well-established long-term safety profile. The main therapeutic effect is considered to be mediated via the inhibition of the de novo synthesis of pyrimidine in proliferating immune cells. Two phase III clinical trials (TEMSO, TOWER) tested teriflunomide in patients with relapsing forms of MS: efficacy was shown, with positive effects on relapse rates and disease progression for 14 mg/day. Overall, the safety profile in these studies was favorable. In patients treated with teriflunomide, the regular monitoring of blood cell counts and liver enzymes is required. Teriflunomide must not be used during pregnancy. In this article, we review recent phase II and phase III clinical trial data, and discuss the potential of teriflunomide for the treatment of relapsing forms of MS.

[PMID: 23852658]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) relapses impose a substantial clinical and economic burden. Teriflunomide is a new oral disease-modifying therapy approved for the treatment of relapsing MS. We evaluated the effects of teriflunomide treatment on relapse-related neurological sequelae and healthcare resource use in a post hoc analysis of the Phase III TEMSO study. Confirmed relapses associated with neurological sequelae [defined by an increase in Expanded Disability Status Scale/Functional System (sequelae-EDSS/FS) ≥ 30 days post relapse or by the investigator (sequelae-investigator)] were analyzed in the modified intention-to-treat population (n = 1086). Relapses requiring hospitalization or intravenous (IV) corticosteroids, all hospitalizations, emergency medical facility visits (EMFV), and hospitalized nights for relapse were also assessed. Annualized rates were derived using a Poisson model with treatment, baseline EDSS strata, and region as covariates. Risks of sequelae and hospitalization per relapse were calculated as percentages and groups were compared with a χ(2) test. Compared with placebo, teriflunomide reduced annualized rates of relapses with sequelae-EDSS/FS [7 mg by 32 % (p = 0.0019); 14 mg by 36 % (p = 0.0011)] and sequelae-investigator [25 % (p = 0.071); 53 % (p < 0.0001)], relapses leading to hospitalization [36 % (p = 0.015); 59 % (p < 0.0001)], and relapses requiring IV corticosteroids [29 % (p = 0.001); 34 % (p = 0.0003)]. Teriflunomide-treated patients spent fewer nights in hospital for relapse (p < 0.01). Teriflunomide 14 mg also decreased annualized rates of all hospitalizations (p = 0.01) and EMFV (p = 0.004). The impact of teriflunomide on relapse-related neurological sequelae and relapses requiring healthcare resources may translate into reduced healthcare costs.

[PMID: 27937746]
Teriflunomide, a once-daily, oral disease-modifying therapy, has demonstrated efficacy in patients with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS) and patients with a first clinical episode suggestive of MS. As the only disease-modifying therapy with positive disability results in two Phase III trials, teriflunomide significantly slowed disability in patients with relapsing forms of MS. We highlight data from the Phase II study and the TEMSO, TOWER, TOPIC and TENERE teriflunomide studies. TEMSO MRI outcomes have been supported with Structural Image Evaluation Using Normalization of Atrophy analyses. We present data from long-term extensions of the Phase II study, TEMSO and TOWER, as well as results from patients who switched from other disease-modifying therapies to teriflunomide, patient-reported outcomes and supplementary measures of response.

[PMID: 26944956]
Three oral disease-modifying drugs-fingolimod, teriflunomide, and dimethyl fumarate (DMF)-are available for treatment of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). All three agents were approved in the last decade, primarily on the basis of a moderate to substantial reduction in the occurrence of MS relapses and central nervous system lesion formation detected by MRI. In the trials leading to approval, the first oral disease-modifying drug, fingolimod, reduced the annualized relapse rate (ARR) from 0.40 in placebo-treated patients to 0.18 (FREEDOMS) and from 0.33 in patients treated with interferon β1a intramuscularly to 0.16 (TRANSFORMS). Teriflunomide, approved on the basis of the two placebo-controlled trials TEMSO and TOWER, demonstrated a reduction in the ARR from 0.54 to 0.37 and from 0.50 to 0.32 respectively. The latest oral MS medication, approved in 2014, is DMF, which had been used in a different formulation for treatment of psoriasis for decades. In the 2-year DEFINE study, the proportion of patients with a relapse was reduced to 27 %, compared with 46 % in placebo arm, whereas in the CONFIRM trial, the ARR was reduced from 0.40 (placebo) to 0.22 in the DMF-treated group of patients. In this review, we will elucidate the mechanisms of action of these three medications and compare their efficacy, safety, and tolerability as a practical guideline for their use. We will further discuss effects other than relapse reduction these small molecules may exert, including potential activities within the central nervous system, and briefly summarize emerging data on new oral MS drugs in clinical development.

[PMID: 26758290]
Teriflunomide is a once-daily oral agent that has been licensed in the EU since August 2013 for the treatment of adult patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS). More recently (September 2014), the EU summary of product characteristics (SmPC) was updated to include data from patients with a first clinical demyelinating event. This review examines the EU SmPC for teriflunomide, with reference to key clinical and safety outcomes and practical considerations for prescribing physicians. In two phase III trials (TEMSO and TOWER) in patients with relapsing forms of MS, teriflunomide 14 mg significantly reduced the annualized relapse rate and the risk of confirmed disability progression sustained for at least 12 weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) total lesion volume, gadolinium-enhancing lesions, and unique active lesions were reduced with teriflunomide treatment in TEMSO. In the TOPIC study, in patients with a first clinical demyelinating event, teriflunomide treatment significantly reduced the time to a second clinical episode (relapse). Across the clinical studies, teriflunomide was generally well tolerated; adverse events reported in ≥ 10% of teriflunomide-treated patients were diarrhea, nausea, increased alanine aminotransferase, and alopecia. Data from the clinical development program support the use of teriflunomide in a broad spectrum of patients with RRMS.

[PMID: 22723573]
The Teriflunomide Multiple Sclerosis Oral (TEMSO) trial, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study, demonstrated that teriflunomide significantly reduced annualized relapse rate (ARR), disease progression and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) activity, with a favorable safety profile in relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS) patients. The purpose of this study was to report the effects of teriflunomide on ARR and disability progression in pre-specified subgroups. RMS patients (n=1088) were randomized to placebo or teriflunomide, 7 mg or 14 mg, once daily, for 108 weeks. Subgroup analyses were performed for ARR and disability progression by baseline demographics (gender, race, age), disease characteristics (Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) strata, relapse history, multiple sclerosis (MS) subtype), MRI parameters (gadolinium-enhancing lesions, total lesion volume) and prior use of MS drugs. A generalized estimating equation method and Cox regression model were used to assess consistency of the treatment effect across subgroups, utilizing a treatment-by-subgroup interaction test for each factor separately. Reductions in ARR and disability progression were consistent across subgroups in favor of teriflunomide, with no treatment-by-subgroup interaction test reaching statistical significance. The positive effects of teriflunomide were demonstrated consistently across subgroups in TEMSO.

[PMID: 21157651]
Teriflunomide, being developed as a potential oral treatment for multiple sclerosis (MS) by sanofi-aventis, is the active metabolite of the rheumatoid arthritis drug leflunomide. Both teriflunomide and leflunomide are inhibitors of the mitochondrial enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, which is critically involved in pyrimidine synthesis. The production of activated T-cells largely depends on de novo pyrimidine synthesis, and thus pyrimidine depletion is thought to result in the inhibition of immune cell proliferation. Therapeutic efficacy of teriflunomide has been demonstrated in vivo in an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model of MS using Dark Agouti rats. In a phase II, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of patients with relapsing-remitting MS, treatment with teriflunomide reduced the number of active lesions in the brain and preliminary evidence indicated a slowing in the development of disability. Recently reported data from the phase III TEMSO clinical trial support these initial findings. Compared with current therapies, teriflunomide has the advantage of oral administration. Thus, if good efficacy is demonstrated, teriflunomide may have a role to play in the future treatment of MS.

[PMID: 26434194]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the autoimmune, demyelinating, neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system (CNS). There are nine drugs available in Hungary reimbursed by the National Health Insurance Fund of Hungary (OEP) to reduce the activity of the disease, from which seven can be used as first line therapies. We have approximately 20 years of experience with the interferon beta-1a/1b and glatiramer-acetate products. Though in case of approximately 30% of the patients using one of the first line drugs, the disease remains active, that we call break-through disease. The reasons for breakthrough disease could be the insufficient adherence and compliance, the appearance of neutralizing antibodies or the high activity of the disease. One of the oral immunomodulating drugs for MS, teriflunomide, was registered in Europe in 2013. Because of the anti-proliferative and anti-inflammatory effect of teriflunomide, it can be used for the reduction of the disease activity in the relapsing-remitting course of MS. The effect of teriflunomide was proved in one Phase II. and four Phase III. (TEMSO, TOWER, TENERE, TOPIC) studies. Teriflunomide 14 mg once daily was able to demonstrate in two consecutive placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trials that significantly reduces the relapse rate (31.5% and 36.3%) and in both studies significantly reduces the sustained disability progression (29.8% and 31.5%) moreover delays the appearance of the clinically definitive MS in patients with clinically isolated syndrome (CIS). According to the TENERE study there were no significant differences observed between teriflunomide 14 mg and IFNβ-α a s.c. in time to failure and annualized relapse rate but the treatment satisfaction domains of global satisfaction, side-effects and convenience were significantly improved with teriflunomide compared with s.c. IFNβ-α.

[PMID: 26865517]
To report safety and efficacy outcomes from up to 9 years of treatment with teriflunomide in an extension (NCT00803049) of the pivotal phase 3 Teriflunomide Multiple Sclerosis Oral (TEMSO) trial (NCT00134563). A total of 742 patients entered the extension. Teriflunomide-treated patients continued the original dose; those previously receiving placebo were randomized 1:1 to teriflunomide 14 mg or 7 mg. By June 2013, median (maximum) teriflunomide exposure exceeded 190 (325) weeks per patient; 468 patients (63%) remained on treatment. Teriflunomide was well-tolerated with continued exposure. The most common adverse events (AEs) matched those in the core study. In extension year 1, first AEs of transient liver enzyme increases or reversible hair thinning were generally attributable to patients switching from placebo to teriflunomide. Approximately 11% of patients discontinued treatment owing to AEs. Twenty percent of patients experienced serious AEs. There were 3 deaths unrelated to teriflunomide. Soon after the extension started, annualized relapse rates and gadolinium-enhancing T1 lesion counts fell in patients switching from placebo to teriflunomide, remaining low thereafter. Disability remained stable in all treatment groups (median Expanded Disability Status Scale score ≤2.5; probability of 12-week disability progression ≤0.48). In the TEMSO extension, safety observations were consistent with the core trial, with no new or unexpected AEs in patients receiving teriflunomide for up to 9 years. Disease activity decreased in patients switching from placebo and remained low in patients continuing on teriflunomide. This study provides Class III evidence that long-term treatment with teriflunomide is well-tolerated and efficacy of teriflunomide is maintained long-term.

[PMID: 26365096]
The purpose was to summarize US prescribing information for teriflunomide in the treatment of patients with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (RMS), with reference to clinical efficacy and safety outcomes. In September 2012, the US Food and Drug Administration granted approval for the use of teriflunomide, 14 mg and 7 mg once daily, to treat RMS on the basis of the results of a Phase II study and the Phase III TEMSO (Teriflunomide Multiple Sclerosis Oral) trial. After recent updates to the prescribing information (October 2014), key findings from these and 2 other Phase III clinical trials, TOWER (Teriflunomide Oral in People With Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis) and TOPIC (Oral Teriflunomide for Patients with a First Clinical Episode Suggestive of Multiple Sclerosis), and practical considerations for physicians are summarized. Teriflunomide, 14 mg and 7 mg, significantly reduced mean number of unique active lesions on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; P < 0.05 for both doses) in the Phase II study. In the TEMSO and TOWER studies, the 14-mg dose of teriflunomide significantly reduced annualized relapse rate (31% and 36% relative risk reduction compared with placebo, respectively; both P < 0.001) and risk of disability progression sustained for 12 weeks (hazard ratio vs placebo 0.70 and 0.69, respectively; both P < 0.05). The 7-mg dose significantly (P < 0.02) reduced annualized relapse rate in both studies, although the reduction in risk of disability progression was not statistically significant. Teriflunomide treatment was also associated with significant efficacy on MRI measures of disease activity in TEMSO; both doses significantly reduced total lesion volume and number of gadolinium-enhancing T1 lesions. TOPIC evaluated patients with a first clinical event consistent with acute demyelination and brain MRI lesions characteristic of multiple sclerosis. More patients were free of relapse in the teriflunomide 14-mg and 7-mg groups than in the placebo group (P < 0.05 for both comparisons). In safety data pooled from the 4 studies, adverse events occurring in ≥2% of patients and ≥2% higher than in the placebo group were headache, alanine aminotransferase increase, diarrhea, alopecia (hair thinning), nausea, paresthesia, arthralgia, neutropenia, and hypertension. Routine monitoring procedures before and on treatment are recommended to assess potential safety issues. Women of childbearing potential must use effective contraception and, in the event of pregnancy, undergo an accelerated elimination procedure to reduce plasma concentrations of teriflunomide. Clinical evidence suggests that teriflunomide is an effective therapeutic choice for patients with RMS, both as an initial treatment and as an alternative for patients who may have experienced intolerance or inadequate response to a previous or current disease-modifying therapy.

[PMID: 23695001]
Interferon beta and glatiramer acetate are still considered to be the first-line therapeutics for treatment of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). The use of new compounds, such as natalizumab or fingolimod, is restricted to severe forms of relapsing MS or cases refractory to first-line treatment owing to substance-specific risk-benefit considerations. Teriflunomide is a new compound which has recently been approved as a first-line treatment of relapsing forms of MS in the USA and Australia. It is characterized by a once daily oral administration and a comparably well-established long-term safety profile. The main therapeutic effect is considered to be mediated via the inhibition of the de novo synthesis of pyrimidine in proliferating immune cells. The pro-drug of teriflunomide, leflunomide, has a label for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for many years. Two recently published phase III clinical trials (TEMSO, TOWER) tested teriflunomide in patients with relapsing forms of MS and efficacy was demonstrated, with positive effects on relapse rates and disease progression using 14 mg/day. Overall, the safety profile in these studies was favorable as expected from experiences with leflunomide in RA. In patients treated with teriflunomide regular monitoring of blood cell counts and liver enzymes is required. Teriflunomide must not be used during pregnancy. In this article the recent phase II and phase III clinical trial data are reviewed and the potential of teriflunomide for the treatment of relapsing forms of MS is discussed.

[PMID: 27919491]
Dimethyl fumarate (DMF), fingolimod, and teriflunomide are oral disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) indicated for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Despite well-established limitations of cross-trial comparisons, DMTs are still frequently compared in terms of relative reductions in specific endpoints, most commonly annualized relapse rate. Consideration of absolute risk reduction and number needed to treat (NNT) provides an alternative approach to assess the magnitude of treatment effect and can provide valuable additional information on therapeutic gain. Using data from pivotal studies of DMF (DEFINE, NCT00420212; CONFIRM, NCT00451451), fingolimod (FREEDOMS, NCT00289978; FREEDOMS II, NCT00355134), and teriflunomide (TEMSO, NCT00134563; TOWER, NCT00751881), we calculated NNTs to prevent any relapse, more severe relapses (such as those leading to hospitalization or requiring intravenous corticosteroids), and disability worsening. Higher relative reductions were reported for DMF and fingolimod vs placebo on overall relapse and relapses requiring intravenous corticosteroids in both individual and pooled studies (pooled data unavailable for fingolimod). However, NNTs for each outcome were similar for DMF and teriflunomide, with marginally lower NNTs observed with fingolimod. By contrast, for relapses requiring hospitalization, relative reductions were higher and NNTs were substantially lower for teriflunomide compared with DMF. For fingolimod, there were inconsistent outcomes between the two studies for relapses requiring hospitalization; thus, comparative conclusions against DMF or teriflunomide cannot be clearly established. The risk of disability worsening was significantly reduced in both teriflunomide studies, but only in a single study for DMF (DEFINE) and fingolimod (FREEDOMS). NNTs to prevent one patient from experiencing disability worsening were similar in DEFINE, FREEDOMS, and TEMSO and TOWER but were higher in CONFIRM and FREEDOMS II. This NNT analysis demonstrates broadly comparable effects for DMF, fingolimod, and teriflunomide across key clinical outcomes. These observations are clinically relevant and may help to inform treatment decisions by providing additional information on therapeutic gain beyond informal assessments of relative reductions alone.