[PMID: 7994803]
The Romano-Ward long-QT Syndrome (LQTS) is an autosomal dominant inherited trait characterized by prolonged QT interval on ECG, life-threatening arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden death in affected individuals. A gene responsible for this disorder has been shown to be linked to the Harvey ras-1 locus (H-ras-1) DNA marker on the short arm of chromosome 11 (11p) in 7 families. The purpose of this study was to determine, by analyzing 23 families with LQTS for linkage to chromosome 11p, whether evidence exists for more than one gene causing LQTS (ie, locus heterogeneity). Twenty-three families (262 family members) were clinically evaluated using medical histories, ECGs, and Holter recordings. Each corrected QT interval (QTc) were determined using Bazett's formula. Blood for DNA extraction and cell line immortalization was obtained after informed consent. Southern blotting and polymerase chain reaction were performed, and linkage analysis carried out using the LINKAGE computer program (v 5.03). Genetic heterogeneity was determined using the HOMOG 2 (v 2.51) computer program. Twenty-three families were studied for evidence of linkage to chromosome 11p using the H-ras-1 locus probe pTBB-2 and multiple flanking markers, including tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). Two-point linkage analysis using pTBB-2 and TH markers was consistent with linkage in 15 of 23 families, with the maximum single-family LOD score of +3.038 occurring at theta = 0. However, 8 of 23 families had negative LOD scores, with the values in 4 families being less than -2 at theta = 0, consistent with exclusion of linkage. Analysis with the HOMOG program was consistent with genetic heterogeneity (P < .0001). Multipoint linkage data using pTBB-2 and TH were also examined for evidence of heterogeneity. HOMOG analysis of multipoint LOD scores from 100 cM surrounding the H-ras-1 locus also supported heterogeneity (P < .001). In the 23 families with LQTS analyzed for linkage to the H-ras-1 locus on chromosome 11p15.5, 15 of 23 families had LOD scores consistent with linkage. The remaining 8 of 23 families had negative LOD scores, 4 of which were definitively excluded from linkage. Thus, genetic heterogeneity is definitively (P < .001) demonstrated for this disorder.

[PMID: 10593671]
Recurrent syncope, malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death are complications of the long QT syndrome (LQTS). Two well-known syndromes with long QT intervals are known. The Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is characterized by prolongation of the QT interval, deafness, and autosomal-recessive inheritance, and the Romano-Ward syndrome is characterized by a prolonged QT interval, autosomal-dominant inheritance, and no deafness. In the present study assessment was performed of the diagnostic importance of the ventricular derepolarization parameters, clinical features, and prevalence of JLNS among 132 children with congenital hearing loss (CHL). In the CHL group the mean QT, QTc, JT, and JTc intervals and the dispersion values (QT-d, JT-d, QTc-d, and JTc-d) were significantly longer than those of control subjects (n = 96) (P < 0.05). Patients with CHL and JLNS (n = 5) had significantly longer mean values of QT, QTc, JT, and JTc intervals and dispersion values than those of CHL without JLNS (n = 127) and control subjects (P < 0.05). The results suggest that assessment of ventricular derepolarization parameters in children with CHL will be helpful in the early detection of JLNS because infants with CHL cannot accurately describe the symptoms of syncope.

[PMID: 8048706]
Loss of consciousness in childhood may be due to cardiovascular causes, and the Long Q-T syndromes can present with seizures. The Romano-Ward syndrome is of autosomal dominant inheritance, and the Jervell and Lange-Nielson syndrome, with associated deafness, of autosomal recessive inheritance. The diagnosis is often delayed, but a careful history can avoid this. The syndromes can appear to be due to an imbalance in the sympathetic nerve to the ventricular myocardium, and precipitating causes such as stress suggest a CNS influence on this. The electrocardiogram can confirm the prolonged Q-T interval, but this is not always present, at least without an exercise test. Treatment with beta-blockers is often successful. If a wrong diagnosis of epilepsy is made a chance may be missed of avoiding sudden death, quite apart from all the medical, and social consequences that can result from such a diagnosis.

[PMID: 8098062]
Romano-Ward syndrome is a subtype of prolonged QT syndrome with autosomal dominant inheritance. Stress-induced syncope and sudden death are secondary to ventricular tachydysrhythmias. A case report of Romano-Ward syndrome complicating pregnancy is presented. Successful therapy with propranolol for life-threatening dysrhythmias was achieved. An excellent neonatal outcome occurred.

[PMID: 19862833]
Long QT and short QT syndromes (LQTS and SQTS) are cardiac repolarization abnormalities that are characterized by length perturbations of the QT interval as measured on electrocardiogram (ECG). Prolonged QT interval and a propensity for ventricular tachycardia of the torsades de pointes (TdP) type are characteristic of LQTS, while SQTS is characterized by shortened QT interval with tall peaked T-waves and a propensity for atrial fibrillation. Both syndromes represent a high risk for syncope and sudden death. LQTS exists as a congenital genetic disease (cLQTS) with more than 700 mutations described in 12 genes (LQT1-12), but can also be acquired (aLQTS). The genetic forms of LQTS include Romano-Ward syndrome (RWS), which is characterized by isolated LQTS and an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, and syndromes with LQTS in association with other conditions. The latter includes Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS), Andersen syndrome (AS), and Timothy syndrome (TS). The genetics are further complicated by the occurrence of double and triple heterozygotes in LQTS and a considerable number of nonpathogenic rare polymorphisms in the involved genes. SQTS is a very rare condition, caused by mutations in five genes (SQTS1-5). The present mutation update is a comprehensive description of all known LQTS- and SQTS-associated mutations.

[PMID: 15950200]
Hereditary long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by prolonged QT intervals and an increased risk for ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel subunit KCNQ1 induce the most common form of LQTS. KCNQ1 is associated with two different entities of LQTS, the autosomal-dominant Romano-Ward syndrome (RWS), and the autosomal-recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) characterized by bilateral deafness in addition to cardiac arrhythmias. In this study, we investigate and discuss dominant-negative I(Ks) current reduction by a KCNQ1 deletion mutation identified in a RWS family. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing were used to screen LQTS genes for mutations. Mutant KCNQ1 channels were heterologously expressed in Xenopus oocytes, and potassium currents were recorded using the two-microelectrode voltage clamp technique. A heterozygous deletion of three nucleotides (CTT) identified in the KCNQ1 gene caused the loss of a single phenylalanine residue at position 339 (KCNQ1-deltaF339). Electrophysiological measurements in the presence and absence of the regulatory beta-subunit KCNE1 revealed that mutant and wild type forms of an N-terminal truncated KCNQ1 subunit (isoform 2) caused much stronger dominant-negative current reduction than the mutant form of the full-length KCNQ1 subunit (isoform 1). This study highlights the functional relevance of the truncated KCNQ1 splice variant (isoform 2) in establishment and mode of inheritance in long QT syndrome. In the RWS family presented here, the autosomal-dominant trait is caused by multiple dominant-negative effects provoked by heteromultimeric channels formed by wild type and mutant KCNQ1-isoforms in combination with KCNE1.

[PMID: 8223759]
The Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a relatively rare disorder. It has a major clinical impact as affected individuals are prone to syncope and sudden arrhythmogenic cardiac death. The LQTS comprises three groups of patients. The Jervell-Lange-Nielsen syndrome is characterized by an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance and congenital neural deafness. The Romano-Ward syndrome shows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and normal hearing. Patients with the sporadic form of LQTS have no evidence of familial transmission and have normal hearing. Imbalance of sympathetic cardiac innervation with predominance of the left stellate ganglion and an intrinsic myocardial defect leading to early afterdepolarization are the two pathogenetic mechanisms of LQTS discussed today. More recently a genetic basis for the Romano-Ward LQTS has been reported. The genetic linkage to the Harvey ras-1 gene provides the basis for a new hypothesis that an impairment of guanine nucleotide binding proteins is responsible for symptoms observed in LQTS. This paper discusses the genetic basis, pathology and pathophysiology of LQTS and tries to unify the different theories.

[PMID: 2771275]
A family with the Romano-Ward syndrome is presented. This family showed typical features of this syndrome with QT prolongation, torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia, sudden death and an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The index case presented with an exacerbation of torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia from diuretic induced hypokalaemia, and responded to diuretic withdrawal and beta blocker therapy.

[PMID: 7695867]
Two forms of the inherited long QT syndrome have been known for many years: the autosomal recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen form and the autosomal dominant Romano-Ward form. A gene marker at the 11p 15.5 locus has been identified for some, but not all, families with the autosomal dominant form, but as yet the gene has not been identified. It is apparent that mutations of at least four genes, and possibly more, can cause the syndrome. The molecular biology of the syndrome is not yet clarified, but abnormalities of ion channel function are likely, particularly the potassium delayed rectifier current. Proposals for the pathophysiology include an abnormality of a G protein which controls ion channel and adrenergic pathway function, as well as a disturbance of the sympathetic nervous system. The identification of the abnormal gene(s) and the gene products will provide precise information on the molecular physiology of the syndrome.

[PMID: 10560244]
Romano-Ward syndrome is an autosomal dominant long-QT syndrome (LQTS) that predisposes affected individuals to sudden death from tachyarrhythmias. We investigated the molecular basis of LQTS in a Taiwanese kindred. Clinical and genetic analyses revealed that a mutation was linked to the human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG). The coding sequences and exon-intron borders of HERG were amplified by means of polymerase chain reaction and subjected to single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. An exon with an aberrant SSCP pattern was cloned and sequenced to study the molecular lesion. A C-->T transition in codon 614, leading to substitution of a valine for an alanine residue in the pore region of the HERG protein, was identified. Analysis with Bsp12861 endonuclease digestion showed the mutation to be present in all affected family members. Given that an unaffected paternal uncle had inherited the same allele from the grandfather as the proband's father, a de novo mutation had apparently occurred in the father and was transmitted to his offspring. In addition to offering presymptomatic genetic diagnosis, identification of the disease-causing mutation may suggest new therapeutic approaches for treatment and prevention of this cardiovascular disease.

[PMID: 9302275]
The inherited long QT syndrome (LQTS), characterized by a prolonged QT interval in the electrocardiogram and cardiac arrhythmia, is caused by mutations in at least four different genes, three of which have been identified and encode cardiac ion channels. The most common form of LQTS is due to mutations in the potassium channel gene KVLQT1, but their effects on associated currents are still unknown. Different mutations in KVLQT1 cause the dominant Romano-Ward (RW) syndrome and the recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen (JLN) syndrome, which, in addition to cardiac abnormalities, includes congenital deafness. Co-expression of KvLQT1 with the IsK protein elicits slowly activating potassium currents resembling the cardiac Iks current. We now show that IsK not only changes the kinetics of KvLQT1 currents, but also its ion selectivity. Several mutations found in RW, including a novel mutation (D222N) in the putative channel pore, abolish channel activity and reduce the activity of wild-type KvLQT1 by a dominant-negative mechanism. By contrast, a JLN mutation truncating the carboxyterminus of the KvLQT1 channel protein abolishes channel function without having a dominant-negative effect. This fully explains the different patterns of inheritance. Further, we identified a novel splice variant of the KVLQT1 gene, but could not achieve functional expression of this nor of a previously described heart-specific isoform.

[PMID: 9272155]
The Romano Ward long QT syndrome (LQTS) has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Patients suffer from syncopal attacks often resulting in sudden cardiac death. The main diagnostic parameter is a prolonged QT(c) interval as judged by electro-cardiographic investigation. LQTS is a genetically heterogeneous disease with four loci having been identified to date: chromosome 11p15.5 (LQT1), 7q35-36 (LQT2), 3p21-24 (LQT3) and 4q25-26 (LQT4). The corresponding genes code for potassium channels KVLQT1 (LQT1) and HERG (LQT2) and the sodium channel SCN5A (LQT3). The KVLQT1 gene is characterized by six transmembrane domains (S1-S6), a pore region situated between the S5 and S6 domains and a C-terminal domain accounting for approximately 60% of the channel. This domain is thought to be co-associated with another protein, viz. minK (minimal potassium channel). We have studied a Romano Ward family with several affected individuals showing a severe LQTS phenotype (syncopes and occurrence of sudden death). Most affected individuals had considerable prolongations of QT(c). By using haplotyping with a set of markers covering the four LQT loci, strong linkage was established to the LQT1 locus, whereas the other loci (LQT2, LQT3 and LQT4) could be excluded. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing were used to screen the KVLQT1 gene for mutations in the S1-S6 region, including the pore domain. We identified a Gly-216-Arg substitution in the S6 transmembrane domain of KVLQT1. The mutation was present in all affected family members but absent in normal control individuals, providing evidence that the mutated KVLQT1-gene product indeed caused LQTS in this family. The mutated KVLQT1-gene product thus probably results in a dominant negative suppression of channel activity.

[PMID: 8180509]
The Romano-Ward long QT syndrome, an autosomal dominant inherited disorder, is an increasingly recognized cause of sudden cardiac death in children and adults. Sudden death may or may not be preceded by a history of "seizures" and recurrent syncope; the diagnosis relies on electrocardiographic evidence, including prolongation of the QT interval corrected for heart rate, T wave abnormalities, sinus bradycardia, and polymorphous ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes). Recently, a gene responsible for causing long QT syndrome was localized (using molecular genetic methods) to the short arm of chromosome 11 (11p15.5) in the region near the Harvey ras-1 locus. The purpose of this report is to describe the current molecular genetic understanding of long QT syndrome, including information regarding gene mapping, genetic heterogeneity, and prenatal or presymptomatic diagnosis.