[PMID: 23603217]
A novel form of ovomacroglobulin/ovostatin (OVOS2) predicted from EST data was previously identified in the chicken ovarian cancer model using a mass spectrometry-based shotgun label-free proteomics strategy. The quantitative label-free data from plasma showed a significant increase over time with the spontaneous onset and progression of ovarian cancer making it a potential protein biomarker for further study. Two other proteins of interest identified from this initial study included vitellogenin-1 (Vit-1), a lipid-transport protein tied to egg production, and transthyretin (TTR), a retinol binding transport protein currently used in the clinical management of ovarian cancer. A multiplexed protein cleavage isotope dilution mass spectrometry (PC-IDMS) assay was developed to quantify OVOS2, Vit-1, and TTR by selected reaction monitoring (SRM). A total of 6 stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptide standards were used in the assay with three tryptic peptides from OVOS2, one for Vit-1, and two for TTR. The assay was developed for use with un-depleted raw plasma combined with the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) method and its use was also demonstrated for matched ovary tissue samples. The PC-IDMS data for the two TTR peptides did not correlate with each other with more than a 10-fold difference in concentration for all 5 time points measured. The PC-IDMS data from the longitudinal plasma samples correlated well for OVOS2 and Vit-1 whereas TTR was inconclusive. Interestingly, the absolute amount for one of the OVOS2 SIL peptides was 2-fold less compared with the other two SIL peptides. These data illustrate the successes and challenges of qualifying quantitative levels of proteins from an in-gel digestion sample preparation followed by LC-MS/MS (GeLC) label-free discovery-based approach to a targeted SRM-based quantitative assay in plasma and tissues.

[PMID: 22949036]
Zymogen granule (ZG) constituents play important roles in pancreatic injury and disease. In previous studies, proteomic analyses with rat zymogen granules were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis or one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. In order to overcome the disadvantage of in-gel digestion and to carry out further in-depth proteomic analysis of the zymogen granules, in this study, by combining a filter-aided sample preparation method and fully automated 2D-LC-MS/MS technique, 800 ZG proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides for each protein, 75% of which have not been previously reported. The identified proteins revealed broad diversity in protein identity and function. This is the largest dataset of ZG proteome, and also the first dataset of the mouse ZG proteome, which may help elucidate on the molecular architecture of ZGs and their functions.

[PMID: 24051509]
Primary tissue samples are valuable resources for investigators interested in understanding disease. In order to maximize the information content that can be gained from these precious samples, proper storage, handling, and preparation are essential. Some tissue preservation techniques utilize the cryopreservation medium, optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound. While this medium provides benefits for traditional molecular studies, certain components can interfere with mass spectrometric analyses. Mass spectrometry based proteomics is a growing field with many applications for disease research. Our goal is to determine a reliable method for separating the proteins from the contaminating species in OCT embedded samples, thus making these samples compatible with mass spectrometric analyses. The novel applications of ether-methanol precipitation, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), and SDS-PAGE provide researchers with protocols for removing OCT contaminating species from valuable samples. The results presented in this study show that all three methods reproducibly remove OCT; however, precipitation and FASP outperform SDS-PAGE by common proteomic metrics.

[PMID: 24022122]
Preserved clinical material is a unique source for proteomic investigation of human disorders. Here we describe an optimized protocol allowing large scale quantitative analysis of formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue. The procedure comprises four distinct steps. The first one is the preparation of sections from the FFPE material and microdissection of cells of interest. In the second step the isolated cells are lysed and processed using 'filter aided sample preparation' (FASP) technique. In this step, proteins are depleted from reagents used for the sample lysis and are digested in two-steps using endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. After each digestion, the peptides are collected in separate fractions and their content is determined using a highly sensitive fluorescence measurement. Finally, the peptides are fractionated on 'pipette-tip' microcolumns. The LysC-peptides are separated into 4 fractions whereas the tryptic peptides are separated into 2 fractions. In this way prepared samples allow analysis of proteomes from minute amounts of material to a depth of 10,000 proteins. Thus, the described workflow is a powerful technique for studying diseases in a system-wide-fashion as well as for identification of potential biomarkers and drug targets.

[PMID: 24288579]
Discovery-based proteomic studies aim to answer important biological questions by identifying as many proteins as possible. In order to accomplish this lofty goal, an effort must be placed on determining an optimal workflow that maximizes protein identifications. In this study, we compare protein extraction, digestion and fractionation methods for bottom-up proteomics using a human colon cancer cell line as our model system. Four different buffers for protein extraction, two digestion approaches, as well as three sample fractionation methods were evaluated in order to determine an accessible workflow that gives maximal protein identifications. Samples comparing these workflows were analyzed via UPLC paired with tandem MS on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Our goal is to determine an optimal workflow to enable users to maximize protein identifications. Our results show that an increased number of confident protein identifications are attained with a filter-aided digestion approach as compared to an in-solution digestion. Overall SDS-PAGE fractionation leads to higher numbers of identifications than SCX SpinTip and reverse phased cartridge platforms. The novel aspect of this work is the comparison of two readily available, offline platforms for fractionation in reference to a traditional technique, SDS-PAGE.

[PMID: 23126408]
The expanding use of surfactants for proteome sample preparations has prompted the need to systematically optimize the application and removal of these MS-deleterious agents prior to proteome measurements. Here we compare four detergent cleanup methods (trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation, chloroform/methanol/water (CMW) extraction, a commercial detergent removal spin column method (DRS) and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)) to provide efficiency benchmarks with respect to protein, peptide, and spectral identifications in each case. Our results show that for protein-limited samples, FASP outperforms the other three cleanup methods, while at high protein amounts, all the methods are comparable. This information was used to investigate and contrast molecular weight-based fractionated with unfractionated lysates from three increasingly complex samples ( Escherichia coli K-12, a five microbial isolate mixture, and a natural microbial community groundwater sample), all of which were prepared with an SDS-FASP approach. The additional fractionation step enhanced the number of protein identifications by 8% to 25% over the unfractionated approach across the three samples.

[PMID: 22324799]
Analytical advantages of using multiple enzymes for sample digestion (MED), primarily an increase of sequence coverage, have been reported in several studies. However, this approach is only rarely used, mainly because it requires additional sample and mass spectrometric measurement time. We have previously described Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP), a type of proteomic reactor, in which samples dissolved in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) are digested in an ultrafiltration unit. In FASP, such as in any other preparation protocol, a portion of sample remains after digestion and peptide elution. Making use of this fact, we here develop a protocol enabling consecutive digestion of the sample with two or three enzymes. By use of the FASP method, peptides are liberated after each digestion step and remaining material is subsequently cleaved with the next proteinase. We observed excellent performance of the ultrafiltration devices in this mode, allowing efficient separation of orthogonal populations of peptides, resulting in an increase in the numbers of identified peptides and proteins. At the low microgram level, we found that the consecutive use of endoproteinases LysC and trypsin enabled identification of up to 40% more proteins and phosphorylation sites in comparison to the commonly used one-step tryptic digestion. MED-FASP offers efficient exploration of previously unused sample material, increasing depth of proteomic analyses and sequence coverage.

[PMID: 23784971]
This work presents a comparative evaluation of several detergent-based sample preparation workflows for the MS-based analysis of bacterial proteomes, performed using the model organism Escherichia coli. Initially, RapiGest- and SDS-based buffers were compared for their protein extraction efficiency and quality of the MS data generated. As a result, SDS performed best in terms of total protein yields and overall number of MS identifications, mainly due to a higher efficiency in extracting high molecular weight (MW) and membrane proteins, while RapiGest led to an enrichment in periplasmic and fimbrial proteins. Then, SDS extracts underwent five different MS sample preparation workflows, including: detergent removal by spin columns followed by in-solution digestion (SC), protein precipitation followed by in-solution digestion in ammonium bicarbonate or urea buffer, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), and 1DE separation followed by in-gel digestion. On the whole, about 1000 proteins were identified upon LC-MS/MS analysis of all preparations (>1100 with the SC workflow), with FASP producing more identified peptides and a higher mean sequence coverage. Each protocol exhibited specific behaviors in terms of MW, hydrophobicity, and subcellular localization distribution of the identified proteins; a comparative assessment of the different outputs is presented.

[PMID: 24289162]
Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues is a common post-translational modification. Researchers often rely on mass spectrometric based proteomic techniques for the identification of these post-translational sites. Mass spectral analysis of deamidated peptides is complicated and often misassigned due to overlapping (13)C peak of the amidated form with the deamidated monoisotopic peak; these two peaks are only separated by 19.34 mDa. For proper assignment, it is inherently important to use a mass spectrometer with high mass measurement accuracy and high resolving power. Herein, mouse brain tissue lysate was prepared using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method and Stage Tip fractionation followed by analysis on a nanoLC coupled with a quadrupole orbitrap (Q-Exactive) mass spectrometer to accurately identify more than 5400 proteins. Mass spectral data was processed using MASCOT and ProteoIQ for accurate identification of peptides and proteins. MASCOT search values for precursor and MS/MS mass tolerances were investigated, and it was determined that data searched with greater than 5 ppm precursor mass tolerance resulted in the misassignment of deamidated peptides. Peptides that were identified with a mass measurement accuracy of ±5 ppm were correctly assigned.

[PMID: 23436586]
An important problem involves isolating subpopulations of cells defined by protein markers in clinical tissue samples for proteomic studies. We describe a method termed Immunohistochemical staining, laser capture microdissection (LCM) and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)-Assisted Proteomic analysis of Target cell populations within tissue samples (ILFAPT). The principle of ILFAPT is that a target cell population expressing a protein of interest can be lit up by immunohistochemical staining and isolated from tissue sections using LCM for FASP and proteomic analysis. Using this method, we isolated a small population of CD90(+) stem-like cells from glioblastoma multiforme tissue sections and identified 674 high-confidence (false discovery rate < 0.01) proteins from 32 nL of CD90(+) cells by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. We further quantified the relative abundance of proteins identified from equal volumes of LCM-captured CD90(+) and CD90(-) cells, where 109 differentially expressed proteins were identified. The major group of these differentially expressed proteins was relevant to cell adhesion and cellular movement. This ILFAPT method has demonstrated the ability to provide in-depth proteome analysis of a very small specific cell population within tissues. It can be broadly applied to the study of target cell populations within clinical specimens.

[PMID: 24309553]
In this work, for the first time, hydrazide functionalized PAMAM was designed and synthesized for efficient and selective enrichment of N-linked glycopeptides from complex biological samples using FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) mode.

[PMID: 23214492]
The performance of two proteomic sample preparation methods, "pseudoshotgun" (PSG) and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) were compared in terms of the number of identified proteins, representation of cellular component GO (gene ontology) categories in the obtained list of proteins, and the efficiency of both methods in the proteomic analysis of a very low number of cells. Both methods were combined to obtain a proteomic profile of a short-term culture (passage 3) of melanoma cells, established in our laboratory from a human metastatic melanoma lesion. The data revealed that with FASP, usually more proteins are identified than with PSG when analyzing a higher number of cells (≥ 5000/injection), whereas PSG is favorable when analyzing only a very small amount of cells (250-500/injection). PSG and FASP, however, are complementary techniques, as combining both methods further increases the number of identified proteins. Moreover, we show that it is feasible to identify a substantial number of proteins from only 250 cells/injection that is equivalent to 60 ng of protein.

[PMID: 22092713]
Chlorobaculum (Cba.) tepidum is a green sulfur bacterium that oxidizes sulfide, elemental sulfur, and thiosulfate for photosynthetic growth. To gain insight into the sulfur metabolism, the proteome of Cba. tepidum cells sampled under different growth conditions has been quantified using a rapid gel-free, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with an in-solution isotopic labeling strategy. Among the 2245 proteins predicted from the Cba. tepidum genome, approximately 970 proteins were detected in unlabeled samples, whereas approximately 630-640 proteins were detected in labeled samples comparing two different growth conditions. Wild-type cells growing on thiosulfate had an increased abundance of periplasmic cytochrome c-555 and proteins of the periplasmic thiosulfate-oxidizing SOX enzyme system when compared with cells growing on sulfide. A dsrM mutant of Cba. tepidum, which lacks the dissimilatory sulfite reductase DsrM protein and therefore is unable to oxidize sulfur globules to sulfite, was also investigated. When compared with wild type, the dsrM cells exhibited an increased abundance of DSR enzymes involved in the initial steps of sulfur globule oxidation (DsrABCL) and a decreased abundance of enzymes putatively involved in sulfite oxidation (Sat-AprAB-QmoABC). The results show that Cba. tepidum regulates the cellular levels of enzymes involved in sulfur metabolism and other electron-transferring processes in response to the availability of reduced sulfur compounds.