[PMID: 21596106]
Hydrogen sulfide (H₂S), a gasotransmitter, facilitates pain sensation by targeting Ca(v)3.2 T-type calcium channels. The H₂S/Ca(v)3.2 pathway appears to play a role in the maintenance of surgically evoked neuropathic pain. Given evidence that chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain is blocked by ethosuximide, known to block T-type calcium channels, we examined if more selective T-type calcium channel blockers and also inhibitors of cystathionine-γ-lyase (CSE), a major H₂S-forming enzyme in the peripheral tissue, are capable of reversing the neuropathic pain evoked by paclitaxel, an anti-cancer drug. It was first demonstrated that T-type calcium channel blockers, NNC 55-0396, known to inhibit Ca(v)3.1, and mibefradil inhibited T-type currents in Ca(v)3.2-transfected HEK293 cells. Repeated systemic administration of paclitaxel caused delayed development of mechanical hyperalgesia, which was reversed by single intraplantar administration of NNC 55-0396 or mibefradil, and by silencing of Ca(v)3.2 by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Systemic administration of dl-propargylglycine and β-cyanoalanine, irreversible and reversible inhibitors of CSE, respectively, also abolished the established neuropathic hyperalgesia. In the paclitaxel-treated rats, upregulation of Ca(v)3.2 and CSE at protein levels was not detected in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), spinal cord or peripheral tissues including the hindpaws, whereas H(2)S content in hindpaw tissues was significantly elevated. Together, our study demonstrates the effectiveness of NNC 55-0396 in inhibiting Ca(v)3.2, and then suggests that paclitaxel-evoked neuropathic pain might involve the enhanced activity of T-type calcium channels and/or CSE in rats, but not upregulation of Ca(v)3.2 and CSE at protein levels, differing from the previous evidence for the neuropathic pain model induced by spinal nerve cutting in which Ca(v)3.2 was dramatically upregulated in DRG.

[PMID: 15078185]
Several types of voltage- or ligand-activated calcium channels contribute to the excitability of neuronal cells. Low-voltage-activated (LVA), T-type calcium channels are characterised by relatively negative threshold of activation and therefore they can generate low-threshold spikes, which are essential for burst firing. At least three different proteins form T-type calcium current in neurons: Ca(v)3.1, Ca(v)3.2 and Ca(v)3.3. Expression of these proteins in various brain regions is complementary. Individual channel types could be distinguished by different sensitivity towards inorganic cations. This inhibition can contribute to the toxicity of some heavy metals. Selective inhibition of T-type calcium channels by organic blockers may have clinical importance in some forms of epilepsy. Mibefradil inhibits the expressed Ca(v2)3.1, Ca(v)3.2 and Ca(v)3.3 channels in nanomolar concentrations with Ca(v)3.3 channel having lowest affinity. The sensitivity of the expressed Ca(v)3.1 channel to the antiepileptic drugs, valproate and ethosuximide, is low. Ca(v)3.1 channel is moderately sensitive to phenytoin. The Ca(v)3.2 channel is sensitive to ethosuximide, amlodipine and amiloride. All three LVA calcium channels are moderately sensitive to active metabolites of methosuximide, i.e. alpha-methyl-alpha-phenylsuccinimide. Several neuroleptics inhibit all three LVA channels in clinically relevant concentrations. All three channels are also inhibited by the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide. A high affinity peptide blocker for these Ca channels is the scorpion toxin kurtoxin which inhibits the Ca(v)3.1 and Ca(v)3.2, but not the Ca(v)3.3 channel in nanomolar concentrations. Nitrous oxide selectively inhibits the Ca(v)3.2, but not the Ca(v)3.1 channel. The Ca(v)3.2, but not the Ca(v)3.1 channel is potentiated by stimulation of Ca(2+)/CaM-dependent protein kinase.

[PMID: 15638774]
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), one of the main inhibitory neurotransmitters in the brain, interacts with three types of receptors for GABA--GABA(A), GABA(B) and GABA(C). GABA(A) receptors, associated with binding sites for benzodiazepines and barbiturates in the form of a receptor complex, control opening of the chloride channel. When GABA binds to the receptor complex, the channel is opened and chloride anions enter the neuron, which is finally hyperpolarized. GABA(B) receptors are metabotropic, linked to a cascade of second messengers whilst the physiological meaning of ionotropic GABA(C) receptors, mainly located in the retina, is generally unknown. Novel antiepileptic drugs acting selectively through the GABA-ergic system are tiagabine and vigabatrin. The former inhibits neuronal and glial uptake of GABA whilst the latter increases the synaptic concentration of GABA by inhibition of GABA-aminotransferase. Gabapentin, designed as a precursor of GABA easily entering the brain, was shown to increase brain synaptic GABA. This antiepileptic drug also decreases influx of calcium ions into neurons via a specific subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channels. Conventional antiepileptics generally inhibit sodium currents (carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, valproate) or enhance GABA-ergic inhibition (benzodiazepines, phenobarbital, valproate). Ethosuximide, mainly controlling absences, reduces calcium currents via T-type calcium channels. Novel antiepileptic drugs, mainly associated with an inhibition of voltage-dependent sodium channels are lamotrigine and oxcarbazepine. Since glutamate-mediated excitation is involved in the generation of seizure activity, some antiepileptics are targeting glutamatergic receptors--for instance, felbamate, phenobarbital, and topiramate. Besides, they also inhibit sodium currents. Zonisamide, apparently sharing this common mechanism, also reduces the concentration of free radicals. Novel antiepileptic drugs are better tolerated by epileptic patients and practically are devoid of important pharmacokinetic drug interactions.

[PMID: 17291698]
Cochlear noise injury is the second most frequent cause of sensorineural hearing loss, after aging. Because calcium dysregulation is a widely recognized contributor to noise injury, we examined the potential of calcium channel blockers to reduce noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) in mice. We focused on two T-type calcium blockers, trimethadione and ethosuximide, which are anti-epileptics approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Young C57BL/6 mice of either gender were divided into three groups: a 'prevention' group receiving the blocker via drinking water before noise exposure; a 'treatment' group receiving the blocker via drinking water after noise exposure; and controls receiving noise alone. Trimethadione significantly reduced NIHL when applied before noise exposure, as determined by auditory brainstem recording. Both ethosuximide and trimethadione were effective in reducing NIHL when applied after noise exposure. Results were influenced by gender, with males generally receiving greater benefit than females. Quantitation of hair cell and neuronal density suggested that preservation of outer hair cells could account for the observed protection. Immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR suggested that this protection involves direct action of T-type blockers on alpha1 subunits comprising one or more Ca(v)3 calcium channel types in the cochlea. Our findings provide a basis for clinical studies testing T-type calcium blockers both to prevent and treat NIHL.

[PMID: 24933286]
Chronic alcohol abuse depresses the nervous system and, upon cessation, rebound hyperexcitability can result in withdrawal seizure. Withdrawal symptoms, including seizures, may drive individuals to relapse, thus representing a significant barrier to recovery. Our lab previously identified an upregulation of the thalamic T-type calcium (T channel) isoform CaV3.2 as a potential contributor to the generation and propagation of seizures in a model of withdrawal. In the present study, we examined whether ethosuximide (ETX), a T-channel antagonist, could decrease the severity of ethanol withdrawal seizures by evaluating electrographical and behavioral correlates of seizure activity. DBA/2J mice were exposed to an intermittent ethanol exposure paradigm. Mice were treated with saline or ETX in each withdrawal period, and cortical EEG activity was recorded to determine seizure severity. We observed a progression in seizure activity with each successive withdrawal period. Treatment with ETX reduced ethanol withdrawal-induced spike and wave discharges (SWDs), in terms of absolute number, duration of events, and contribution to EEG power in the 6-10 Hz frequency range. We also evaluated the effects of ETX on handling-induced convulsions. Overall, we observed a decrease in handling-induced convulsion severity in mice treated with ETX. Our findings suggest that ETX may be a useful pharmacological agent for studies of alcohol withdrawal and treatment of resulting seizures.

[PMID: 11641441]
Inhibition of T-type Ca(2+) channels has been proposed to play a role in the therapeutic action of succinimide antiepileptic drugs. Despite the widespread acceptance of this hypothesis, recent studies using rat and cat neurons have failed to confirm inhibition of T-type currents at therapeutically relevant concentrations. The present study re-examines this issue using the three cloned human channels that constitute the T-type family: alpha 1G, alpha 1H, and alpha 1I. The cloned cDNAs were stably transfected and expressed into mammalian cells, leading to the appearance of typical T-type currents. The results demonstrate that both ethosuximide and the active metabolite of methsuximide, alpha-methyl-alpha-phenylsuccinimide (MPS), block human T-type channels in a state-dependent manner, with higher affinity for inactivated channels. In contrast, succinimide analogs that are not anticonvulsive were relatively poor blockers. The apparent affinity of MPS for inactivated states of the three channels was estimated using two independent measures: K(I) for alpha 1G and alpha 1I was 0.3 to 0.5 mM and for alpha 1H was 0.6 to 1.2 mM. T-type channels display current at the end of long pulses (persistent current), and this current was especially sensitive to block (ethosuximide IC(50) = 0.6 mM). These drugs also reduced both the size of the T-type window current region and the currents elicited by a mock low threshold spike. We conclude that succinimide antiepileptic drugs are capable of blocking human T-type channels at therapeutically relevant concentrations.

[PMID: 10882031]
Briefly after withdrawal of the (T-type) calcium channel blocker mibefradil from the market, four cases of life-threatening interaction of mibefradil with dihydropyridines were reported. We investigated in vitro whether mibefradil interacts with a dihydropyridine, as described for other non-dihydropyridine compounds. Rat working hearts were used to examine functional interactions between amlodipine and mibefradil. Gallopamil and another T-type-channel blocker, ethosuximide, were included for comparison. Effects of mibefradil, (+)- and (-)-gallopamil on [3H](+)-isradipine binding were studied in membranes from tsA201-cells transfected with alpha(1c)-, alpha(2)delta-, and beta(1a)- or beta(2a)-calcium channel subunits. Mibefradil increased negative inotropic effect of amlodipine, but not of gallopamil. Gallopamil and ethosuximide showed no influence on contractile effects of amlodipine. Furthermore, mibefradil concentration-dependently caused bradycardic rhythm disturbance. The same type of arrhythmia was observed combining low concentrations of mibefradil with amlodipine, or with gallopamil, respectively. Amlodipine alone, or the combination of gallopamil or ethosuximide with amlodipine did not cause any arrhythmia. Binding studies showed a concentration-dependent positive allosteric interaction between [3H](+)-isradipine and mibefradil, but not with [3H](+)-isradipine and gallopamil enantiomers. Molecular and functional evidence points to an interaction between a dihydropyridine and mibefradil. Mibefradil caused rhythm disturbances and potentiation of negative inotropy when combined with amlodipine.

[PMID: 19005061]
Central pain syndrome (CPS) is defined as pain associated with a lesion of the CNS and is a common consequence of spinal cord injuries. We generated a rodent model of CPS by making unilateral electrolytic or demyelinating lesions centered on the spinothalamic tract in rats. Thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia occurred in both hind paws and forepaws by 7 d postlesion and were maintained >31 d. Field potentials in the ventral posterior lateral nucleus (VPL) in thalamic brain slices from lesioned animals displayed an increased probability of burst responses. Ethosuximide, a T-type calcium channel blocker, eliminated busting in lesioned thalamic slices and attenuated lesion-induced hyperalgesia and allodynia. We conclude that CPS in this model results from an increase in the excitability of thalamic nuclei that have lost normal ascending inputs as the result of a spinal cord injury and suggest that ethosuximide will relieve human CPS by restoring normal thalamic excitability.

[PMID: 26089446]
T-type Ca(2+) channels (TCC) are important for pain transmission, especially the Ca(V)3.2 subtype. In this study, we examined the effects of intrathecal TCC blockers in the L5/6 spinal nerve ligation pain rat model. Under isoflurane anaesthesia, rats received right L5/6 spinal nerve ligation and intrathecal catheters (attached to an infusion pump) were sited. After surgery, saline, mibefradil, ethosuximide or NiCl2 were given intrathecally for seven days. The right hindpaw withdrawal thresholds to von Frey hair stimuli and withdrawal latencies to radiant heat were measured before and once daily for seven days after surgery. Double immunofluorescence and western blotting were used to examine the expression of Ca(V)3.2 in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and spinal cord. On post-ligation day seven, rats receiving mibefradil, ethosuximide or NiCl2 had significant higher median withdrawal thresholds (15.0, 10.2, and 10.9 g) and latencies (8.0, 7.6 and 7.6 s) than saline-treated rats (1.6 g and 4.3 s, respectively). Ca(V)3.2 was expressed in parvalbumin(+), IB4(+), CGRP(+) and VR1(+) neurones in DRG and most neurones in spinal dorsal horn. Ca(V)3.2 was up-regulated in the right L5/6 DRG and spinal cord seven days after nerve ligation. In this study, we demonstrated that intrathecal TCC blockers attenuate the development of nerve injury-induced mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia. Our data suggest that continuous intrathecal infusion of TCC or Ca(V)3.2 blockers may be a promising alternative for the management of nerve injury-induced pain.

[PMID: 22924591]
The Ca(v) 3.2 isoform of T-type Ca(2+) channels (T channels) is sensitized by hydrogen sulfide, a pro-nociceptive gasotransmitter, and also by PKA that mediates PGE(2) -induced hyperalgesia. Here we examined and analysed Ca(v) 3.2 sensitization via the PGE(2) /cAMP pathway in NG108-15 cells that express Ca(v) 3.2 and produce cAMP in response to PGE(2) , and its impact on mechanical nociceptive processing in rats. In NG108-15 cells and rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, T-channel-dependent currents (T currents) were measured with the whole-cell patch-clamp technique. The molecular interaction of Ca(v) 3.2 with A-kinase anchoring protein 150 (AKAP150) and its phosphorylation were analysed by immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting in NG108-15 cells. Mechanical nociceptive threshold was determined by the paw pressure test in rats. In NG108-15 cells and/or rat DRG neurons, dibutyryl cAMP (db-cAMP) or PGE(2) increased T currents, an effect blocked by AKAP St-Ht31 inhibitor peptide (AKAPI) or KT5720, a PKA inhibitor. The effect of PGE(2) was abolished by RQ-00015986-00, an EP(4) receptor antagonist. AKAP150 was co-immunoprecipitated with Ca(v) 3.2, regardless of stimulation with db-cAMP, and Ca(v) 3.2 was phosphorylated by db-cAMP or PGE(2) . In rats, intraplantar (i.pl.) administration of db-cAMP or PGE(2) caused mechanical hyperalgesia, an effect suppressed by AKAPI, two distinct T-channel blockers, NNC 55-0396 and ethosuximide, or ZnCl(2) , known to inhibit Ca(v) 3.2 among T channels. Oral administration of RQ-00015986-00 suppressed the PGE(2) -induced mechanical hyperalgesia. Our findings suggest that PGE(2) causes AKAP-dependent phosphorylation and sensitization of Ca(v) 3.2 through the EP(4) receptor/cAMP/PKA pathway, leading to mechanical hyperalgesia in rats.

[PMID: 21112351]
T-type calcium channels are strongly associated with the generation of rhythmic firing patterns in the CNS. Blockers of these channels may have therapeutic potential for treating various types of tremor. The present study aimed to study the effects of a range of T-type calcium channel blockers in a parkinsonian tremor model in rats. We tested the effects of several T-type calcium channel blockers, including zonisamide (ZNS), ethosuximide, lomerizine, amiloride, mibefradil, and NCC 55-0396, a mibefradil derivative, on tacrine-induced tremulous jaw movements (TJMs), an animal model of parkinsonian tremor. Among the tested drugs, only ZNS and NCC 55-0396 significantly suppressed TJMs when given at a non-sedating dose. The transitivity of drugs to the central nervous system (CNS) may at least partially explain their differential anti-TJM effects. However, further studies are necessary to reveal other factors, since ethosuximide failed to show anti-TJM effects despite being known to cross the blood brain barrier. The present results suggest that T-type calcium channels in the CNS may be a suitable target for developing new therapeutic strategies for treating parkinsonian tremor.

[PMID: 16171802]
The purpose of the present study was to explore the analgesic effects of the low voltage-activated T-type Ca2+ channel blockers ethosuximide, trimethadione, and mibefradil in persistent and acute nociceptive tests. The anticonvulsant effects of the compounds were also determined in the intravenous pentylenetetrazol seizure model. Following intraperitoneal administration, ethosuximide and trimethadione dose-dependently reversed capsaicin-induced mechanical hyperalgesia. Similarly, the highest dose of mibefradil tested (30 microg, intracisternal) reversed capsaicin-induced mechanical hyperalgesia. Ethosuximide and mibefradil produced statistically significant analgesic effects in both early and late phase formalin-induced behaviors and trimethadione reduced late phase behaviors. Additionally, ethosuximide and trimethadione produced antinociceptive effects in the rat-tail flick reflex test. In contrast, following intracisternal administration, mibefradil had no effect in the tail flick reflex test. In addition, the anticonvulsants ethosuximide and trimethadione increased the doses of pentylenetetrazol required to produce both first twitch and clonic seizures. In contrast however, mibefradil had no anticonvulsant effect. The present results demonstrate that the clinically used anticonvulsants ethosuximide and trimethadione provide analgesic effects at doses, which are anticonvulsant. Furthermore, the data further supports the idea that T-type Ca2+ channels may be important targets for treating persistent pain syndromes.

[PMID: 21148095]
Chronic ethanol exposure produces profound disruptions in both brain rhythms and diurnal behaviors. The thalamus has been identified as a neural pacemaker of both normal and abnormal rhythms with low-threshold, transient (T-type) Ca(2+) channels participating in this activity. We therefore examined T-type channel gene expression and physiology in the thalamus of C57Bl/6 mice during a 4-wk schedule of chronic intermittent ethanol exposures in a vapor chamber. We found that chronic ethanol disrupts the normal daily variations of both thalamic T-type channel mRNA levels and alters thalamic T-type channel gating properties. The changes measured in channel expression and function were associated with an increase in low-threshold bursts of action potentials during acute withdrawal periods. Additionally, the observed molecular and physiological alterations in the channel properties in wild-type mice occurred in parallel with a progressive disruption in the normal daily variations in theta (4-9 Hz) power recorded in the cortical electroencephalogram. Theta rhythms remained disrupted during a subsequent week of withdrawal but were restored with the T-type channel blocker ethosuximide. Our results demonstrate that a key ion channel underlying the generation of thalamic rhythms is altered during chronic ethanol exposure and withdrawal and may be a novel target in the management of abnormal network activity due to chronic alcoholism.