[PMID: 20981509]
The authors report a 6 yr old boy with Barth syndrome who presented with cardiomyopathy, neutropenia and hypotonia. Urine gas chromatography showed high level of 3-methylglutaconic acid. The DNA of both the patient and the mother showed a heterozygous 3 bp deletion in exon 8 of the tafazzin gene. This abnormality involves the deletion of the bases TGA starting at cDNA nucleotide 891 (c891_893delTGA), resulting in the absence of glutamic acid at codon 202 from a highly conserved area of the tafazzin protein, consistent with the diagnosis of Barth syndrome. This is the first case report of Barth syndrome in Arab population emphasizing the importance of detailed investigations in cases of hereditary cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 24342716]
Barth syndrome is caused by mutations in the TAZ (tafazzin) gene on human chromosome Xq28. The human tafazzin gene produces four major mRNA splice variants; two of which have been shown to be functional (TAZ lacking exon 5 and full-length) in complementation studies with yeast and Drosophila. This study characterizes the multiple alternative splice variants of TAZ mRNA and their proportions in blood samples from a cohort of individuals with Barth syndrome (BTHS). Because it has been reported that collection and processing methods can affect the expression of various genes, we tested and chose a stabilizing medium for collecting, shipping and processing of the blood samples of these individuals. In both healthy controls and in BTHS individuals, we found a greater variety of alternatively spliced forms than previously described, with a sizeable proportion of minor splice variants besides the four dominant isoforms. Individuals with certain exonic and intronic splice mutations produce additional mutant mRNAs that could be translated into two or more proteins with different amino acid substitutions in a single individual. A fraction of the minor splice variants is predicted to be non-productive.

[PMID: 23523468]
Cardiolipin is a mitochondrion-specific phospholipid that stabilizes the assembly of respiratory chain complexes, favoring full-yield operation. It also mediates key steps in apoptosis. In Barth syndrome, an X chromosome-linked cardiomyopathy caused by tafazzin mutations, cardiolipins display acyl chain modifications and are present at abnormally low concentrations, whereas monolysocardiolipin accumulates. Using immortalized lymphoblasts from Barth syndrome patients, we showed that the production of abnormal cardiolipin led to mitochondrial alterations. Indeed, the lack of normal cardiolipin led to changes in electron transport chain stability, resulting in cellular defects. We found a destabilization of the supercomplex (respirasome) I+III2+IVn but also decreased amounts of individual complexes I and IV and supercomplexes I+III and III+IV. No changes were observed in the amounts of individual complex III and complex II. We also found decreased levels of complex V. This complex is not part of the supercomplex suggesting that cardiolipin is required not only for the association/stabilization of the complexes into supercomplexes but also for the modulation of the amount of individual respiratory chain complexes. However, these alterations were compensated by an increase in mitochondrial mass, as demonstrated by electron microscopy and measurements of citrate synthase activity. We suggest that this compensatory increase in mitochondrial content prevents a decrease in mitochondrial respiration and ATP synthesis in the cells. We also show, by extensive flow cytometry analysis, that the type II apoptosis pathway was blocked at the mitochondrial level and that the mitochondria of patients with Barth syndrome cannot bind active caspase-8. Signal transduction is thus blocked before any mitochondrial event can occur. Remarkably, basal levels of superoxide anion production were slightly higher in patients' cells than in control cells as previously evidenced via an increased protein carbonylation in the taz1Δ mutant in the yeast. This may be deleterious to cells in the long term. The consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations to apoptosis signal transduction are considered in light of the potential for the development of future treatments.

[PMID: 24813252]
Study of monogenic mitochondrial cardiomyopathies may yield insights into mitochondrial roles in cardiac development and disease. Here, we combined patient-derived and genetically engineered induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with tissue engineering to elucidate the pathophysiology underlying the cardiomyopathy of Barth syndrome (BTHS), a mitochondrial disorder caused by mutation of the gene encoding tafazzin (TAZ). Using BTHS iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs), we defined metabolic, structural and functional abnormalities associated with TAZ mutation. BTHS iPSC-CMs assembled sparse and irregular sarcomeres, and engineered BTHS 'heart-on-chip' tissues contracted weakly. Gene replacement and genome editing demonstrated that TAZ mutation is necessary and sufficient for these phenotypes. Sarcomere assembly and myocardial contraction abnormalities occurred in the context of normal whole-cell ATP levels. Excess levels of reactive oxygen species mechanistically linked TAZ mutation to impaired cardiomyocyte function. Our study provides new insights into the pathogenesis of Barth syndrome, suggests new treatment strategies and advances iPSC-based in vitro modeling of cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 24093814]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder that is caused by mutations in Taffazin gene (TAZ), leading to severe cardiolipin deficiency which results in respiratory chain dysfunction. Barth syndrome is characterized by cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, growth deficiency and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. In this paper, we present clinical, biochemical and molecular data of the first four Czech patients from four unrelated families diagnosed with this rare disease. The mean age of onset was 5.5 ± 3.8 months. One child suffered from sudden cardiac death at the age of 2 years, the age of living patients is between 3 and 13 years. Muscle hypotonia was present in all four patients; cardiomyopathy and growth retardation in three and neutropenia in two of them. Two patients manifested a dilated and one patient a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A characteristic laboratory abnormality was the intermittently increased excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid. Three novel hemizygous mutations in the TAZ gene were found (c.584G>T; c.109+6T>C; c.86G>A). We conclude that Barth syndrome should be included in differential diagnosis of cardiomyopathy in childhood, especially in the cooccurrence of dilated cardiomyopathy and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.

[PMID: 24801725]
Cardiolipin is a major membrane phospholipid in the mitochondria and is essential for cellular energy metabolism mediated through mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Recent studies indicate that it plays a diverse role in cellular metabolism. Eukaryotic cardiolipin is synthesized de novo from phosphatidic acid via the cytidine-5'-diphosphate-1,2-diacyl-sn-glycerol pathway and is deacylated to monolysocardiolipin in order for it to be remodelled into the form that is observed in mitochondrial membranes. This resynthesis of deacylated cardiolipin from monolysocardiolipin occurs via the Barth Syndrome gene product tafazzin and acyllysocardiolipin acyltransferase-1, monolysocardiolipin acyltransferase-1 and the alpha subunit of trifunctional protein. Heart failure is a disease condition in which the amount and type of cardiolipin is altered. Several animal models have been generated to study the role of altered cardiolipin in heart failure. In many of these models loss of the tetralinoleoyl-cardiolipin species is observed during the development of the heart failure. In the doxycycline inducible short hairpin RNA tafazzin knock down mouse, loss of tetralinoleoyl-cardiolipin is associated with a mitochondrial bioenergetic disruption. Reduction in mitochondrial supercomplex formation and NADH dehydrogenase activity within these supercomplexes is observed. Modulation of CL fatty acyl composition may serve as a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of several pathologies including cardiac dysfunction.We propose that increasing cardiolipin may improve mitochondrial function and potentially serve as a therapy for diseases which exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction involving reduced cardiolipin.

[PMID: 25941633]
Tafazzin is a mitochondrial phospholipid transacylase, and its mutations cause Barth syndrome (BTHS). Human tafazzin gene produces four distinct alternatively spliced transcripts. To understand the molecular mechanisms of tafazzin deficiency, we performed an atomic resolution analysis of the influence of the BTHS mutations and of alternative splicing on the structure and function of tafazzin. From the three-dimensional (3D) homology modeling of tafazzin, we identified candidate amino acid residues that contribute to cardiolipin binding and to mitochondrial membrane associations that facilitate acyl-transfer reactions. Primate specific exon 5, which is alternatively spliced, is predicted to correspond to an intrinsically unstructured region in the protein. We proposed that this region should change the substrate-binding affinity and/or contribute to primate-specific molecular interactions. Exon 7, another alternatively spliced exon, encodes a region forming a part of the putative substrate-binding cleft, suggesting that the gene products lacking exon 7 will lose their substrate-binding ability. We demonstrate a clear localization of the BTHS mutations at residues responsible for membrane association, substrate binding, and the conformational stability of tafazzin. These findings provide new insights into the function of defective tafazzin and the pathogenesis of BTHS at the level of protein 3D structure and the evolution of alternatively spliced exons in primates.

[PMID: 16857210]
Mutations in the human TAZ gene are associated with Barth Syndrome, an often fatal X-linked disorder that presents with cardiomyopathy and neutropenia. The TAZ gene encodes Tafazzin, a putative phospholipid acyltranferase that is involved in the remodeling of cardiolipin, a phospholipid unique to the inner mitochondrial membrane. It has been shown that the disruption of the Tafazzin gene in yeast (Taz1) affects the assembly and stability of respiratory chain Complex IV and its supercomplex forms. However, the implications of these results for Barth Syndrome are restricted due to the additional presence of Complex I in humans that forms a supercomplex with Complexes III and IV. Here, we investigated the effects of Tafazzin, and hence cardiolipin deficiency in lymphoblasts from patients with Barth Syndrome, using blue-native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Digitonin extraction revealed a more labile Complex I/III(2)/IV supercomplex in mitochondria from Barth Syndrome cells, with Complex IV dissociating more readily from the supercomplex. The interaction between Complexes I and III was also less stable, with decreased levels of the Complex I/III(2) supercomplex. Reduction of Complex I holoenzyme levels was observed also in the Barth Syndrome patients, with a corresponding decrease in steady-state subunit levels. We propose that the loss of mature cardiolipin species in Barth Syndrome results in unstable respiratory chain supercomplexes, thereby affecting Complex I biogenesis, respiratory activities and subsequent pathology.

[PMID: 22023389]
Barth syndrome (BTHS), a rare, X-linked, recessive disease, is characterized by neutropenia and cardiomyopathy. BTHS is caused by loss-of-function mutations of the tafazzin (TAZ) gene. We developed a model of BTHS by transfecting human HL60 myeloid progenitor cells with TAZ-specific shRNAs. Results demonstrate a significant downregulation in TAZ expression, mimicking the effects of naturally occurring truncation mutations in TAZ. Flow cytometry analyses of cells with TAZ-specific, but not scrambled, shRNAs demonstrate nearly twofold increase in the proportion of annexin V-positive cells and significantly increased dissipation of mitochondrial membrane potential as determined by DIOC6 staining. Transfection of TAZ-specific shRNA had similar effects in U937 myeloid cells but not in lymphoid cell lines. Further studies in HL60 myeloid progenitor cells revealed aberrant release of cytochrome c from mitochondria and significantly elevated levels of activated caspase-3 in response to TAZ knockdown. Treatment with caspase-specific inhibitor zVAD-fmk resulted in substantially reduced apoptosis to near-normal levels. These data suggest that neutropenia in BTHS is attributable to increased dissipation of mitochondrial membrane potential, aberrant release of cytochrome c, activation of caspase-3, and accelerated apoptosis of myeloid progenitor cells, and that this defect can be partially restored in vitro by treatment with caspase-specific inhibitors.

[PMID: 16442164]
Many advances have occurred in the field of Barth Syndrome biology in the 26 years since it was first described as an X-linked cardiomyopathy. Barth Syndrome is the first human disease recognized in which the primary causative factor is an alteration in cardiolipin remodeling. Cardiolipin is required for the optimal function of many proteins within the mitochondria, particularly in the respiratory chain and is involved in the mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic process. The appropriate content of cardiolipin appears to be critical for these functions. Cardiolipin is synthesized de novo in mitochondria and is rapidly remodeled to produce CL enriched in linoleic acid. The Barth Syndrome gene TAZ has been identified and expression of the gene yields proteins known as tafazzins. Mutations in TAZ result in a decrease in tetra-linoleoyl species of cardiolipin and an accumulation of monolysocardiolipin within cells from Barth Syndrome patients. Although the protein product of the TAZ gene shows sequence homology to the glycerolipid acyltransferase family of enzymes, its precise biochemical function remains to be elucidated. In this review we highlight some of the recent literature on cardiolipin metabolism and Barth Syndrome.

[PMID: 16794186]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked disorder characterized by cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, neutropenia, organic aciduria, and growth retardation caused by mutations in tafazzin. The sequence similarity of tafazzin to acyltransferases suggests a role in mitochondrial phospholipid metabolism. To study the role of tafazzin in heart function and development, we created a knockdown zebrafish model. Zebrafish tafazzin mRNA is first evident at 7 hours post-fertilization (hpf). At 10 and 24 hpf, tafazzin mRNA is ubiquitous, with highest levels in the head. By 51 hpf, expression becomes cardiac restricted. The tafazzin knockdown created by antisense morpholino yolk injection resulted in dose-dependent lethality, severe developmental and growth retardation, marked bradycardia and pericardial effusions, and generalized edema, signs that resemble human Barth syndrome heart failure. This knockdown phenotype was rescued by concomitant injection of normal tafazzin mRNA. Abnormal cardiac development, with a linear, nonlooped heart, and hypomorphic tail and eye development proves that tafazzin is essential for overall zebrafish development, especially of the heart. The tafazzin knockdown zebrafish provides an animal model similar to Barth syndrome to analyze the severity of human mutants and to test potential treatments.

[PMID: 25247053]
Tafazzin, a mitochondrial acyltransferase, plays an important role in cardiolipin side chain remodeling. Previous studies have shown that dysfunction of tafazzin reduces cardiolipin content, impairs mitochondrial function, and causes dilated cardiomyopathy in Barth syndrome. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been implicated in the development of cardiomyopathy and are also the obligated byproducts of mitochondria. We hypothesized that tafazzin knockdown increases ROS production from mitochondria, and a mitochondria-targeted antioxidant prevents tafazzin knockdown induced mitochondrial and cardiac dysfunction. We employed cardiac myocytes transduced with an adenovirus containing tafazzin shRNA as a model to investigate the effects of the mitochondrial antioxidant, mito-Tempo. Knocking down tafazzin decreased steady state levels of cardiolipin and increased mitochondrial ROS. Treatment of cardiac myocytes with mito-Tempo normalized tafazzin knockdown enhanced mitochondrial ROS production and cellular ATP decline. Mito-Tempo also significantly abrogated tafazzin knockdown induced cardiac hypertrophy, contractile dysfunction, and cell death. We conclude that mitochondria-targeted antioxidant prevents cardiac dysfunction induced by tafazzin gene knockdown in cardiac myocytes and suggest mito-Tempo as a potential therapeutic for Barth syndrome and other dilated cardiomyopathies resulting from mitochondrial oxidative stress.

[PMID: 25776009]
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked recessive disease primarily affecting males. Clinically, the disease is characterized by hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, chronic/cyclic neutropenia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, growth retardation and respiratory chain dysfunction. It is caused by mutations in the TAZ gene coding for the tafazzin protein which is responsible for cardiolipin remodeling. In this work, we present a novel pathogenic TAZ mutation c.83T>A, p.Val28Glu, found in mosaic form in almost all female members of a Polish family. Sanger sequencing of DNA from peripheral blood and from epithelial cells showed female mosaicism in three generations. This appears to be a new mechanism of inheritance and further research is required in order to understand the mechanism of this mosaicism. We conclude that BTHS genetic testing should include two or more tissues for women that appear to be noncarriers when blood DNA is initially tested. The results of our study should not only be applicable to BTHS families, but also to families with other X-linked diseases.