[PMID: 26336102]
Francisella tularensis has been the focus of much research over the last two decades mainly because of its potential use as an agent of bioterrorism. F. tularensis is the causative agent of zoonotic tularemia and has a worldwide distribution. The different subspecies of F. tularensis vary in their biogeography and virulence, making early detection and diagnosis important in both the biodefense and public health sectors. Recent genome sequencing efforts reveal aspects of genetic diversity, evolution and phylogeography previously unknown for this relatively small organism, and highlight a role for detection by various PCR assays. This review explores the advances made in understanding the evolution and genetic diversity of F. tularensis and how these advances have led to better PCR assays for detection and identification of the subspecies.

[PMID: 21607086]
Francisella tularensis is a facultative intracellular pathogen that causes the disease tularemia. F. tularensis subsp. tularensis causes the most severe disease in humans and has been classified as a Category A select agent and potential bioweapon. There is currently no vaccine approved for human use, making genetic manipulation of this organism critical to unraveling the genetic basis of pathogenesis and developing countermeasures against tularemia. The development of genetic techniques applicable to F. tularensis have lagged behind those routinely used for other bacteria, primarily due to lack of research and the restricted nature of the biocontainment required for studying this pathogen. However, in recent years, genetic techniques, such as transposon mutagenesis and targeted gene disruption, have been developed, that have had a dramatic impact on our understanding of the genetic basis of F. tularensis virulence. In this review, we describe some of the methods developed for genetic manipulation of F. tularensis.

[PMID: 26189939]
Francisella tularensis, the agent of tularemia, is a Gram-negative coccobacillus primarily pathogen for animals and occasionally for humans. The clinical manifestations of tularemia include pneumonia, ulceroglandular, oropharyngeal, or typhoidal disease. Rare manifestations are also described, but to our knowledge, we describe here the first case of F. tularensis aortitis in a human. Diagnosis was confirmed by the presence of F. tularensis in blood culture, by the presence of F. tularensis DNA in the aortic biopsy and by specific IgG and IgM responses against the bacteria. The outcome was favorable after surgery and specific antimicrobial therapy.

[PMID: 18304778]
Francisella tularensis is a highly virulent bacterium that causes tularemia, a disease that is often fatal if untreated. A live vaccine strain (LVS) of this bacterium is attenuated for virulence in humans but produces lethal disease in mice. F. tularensis has been classified as a Category A agent of bioterrorism. Despite this categorization, little is known about the components of the organism that are responsible for causing disease in its hosts. Here, we report the deletion of a well-characterized lipoprotein of F. tularensis, designated LpnA (also known as Tul4), in the LVS. An LpnA deletion mutant was comparable to the wild-type strain in its ability to grow intracellularly and cause lethal disease in mice. Additionally, mice inoculated with a sublethal dose of the mutant strain were afforded the same protection against a subsequent lethal challenge with the LVS as were mice initially administered a sublethal dose of the wild-type bacterium. The LpnA-deficient strain showed an equivalent ability to promote secretion of chemokines by human monocyte-derived macrophages as its wild-type counterpart. However, recombinant LpnA potently stimulated primary cultures of human macrophages in a Toll-like receptor 2-dependent manner. Although human endothelial cells were also activated by recombinant LpnA, their response was relatively modest. LpnA is clearly unnecessary for multiple functions of the LVS, but its inflammatory capacity implicates it and other Francisella lipoproteins as potentially important to the pathogenesis of tularemia.

[PMID: 21687806]
The tularemia-causing bacterium Francisella tularensis is a facultative intracellular organism with a complex intracellular lifecycle that ensures its survival and proliferation in a variety of mammalian cell types, including professional phagocytes. Because this cycle is essential to Francisella pathogenesis and virulence, much research has focused on deciphering the mechanisms of its intracellular survival and replication and characterizing both bacterial and host determinants of the bacterium's intracellular cycle. Studies of various strains and host cell models have led to the consensual paradigm of Francisella as a cytosolic pathogen, but also to some controversy about its intracellular cycle. In this review, we will detail major findings that have advanced our knowledge of Francisella intracellular survival strategies and also attempt to reconcile discrepancies that exist in our molecular understanding of the Francisella-phagocyte interactions.

[PMID: 25494920]
Francisella tularensis causes disease (tularemia) in a large number of mammals, including man. We previously demonstrated enhanced efficacy of conventional antibiotic therapy for tularemia by postexposure passive transfer of immune sera developed against a F. tularensis LVS membrane protein fraction (MPF). However, the protein composition of this immunogenic fraction was not defined. Proteomic approaches were applied to define the protein composition and identify the immunogens of MPF. MPF consisted of at least 299 proteins and 2-D Western blot analyses using sera from MPF-immunized and F. tularensis LVS-vaccinated mice coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry identified 24 immunoreactive protein spots containing 45 proteins. A reverse vaccinology approach that applied labeling of F. tularensis LVS surface proteins and bioinformatics was used to reduce the complexity of potential target immunogens. Bioinformatics analyses of the immunoreactive proteins reduced the number of immunogen targets to 32. Direct surface labeling of F. tularensis LVS resulted in the identification of 31 surface proteins. However, only 13 of these were reactive with MPF and/or F. tularensis LVS immune sera. Collectively, this use of orthogonal proteomic approaches reduced the complexity of potential immunogens in MPF by 96% and allowed for prioritization of target immunogens for antibody-based immunotherapies against tularemia.

[PMID: 22662210]
Tularemia, caused by the gram-negative bacterium Francisella tularensis, is a severe, sometimes fatal disease. Interest in tularemia has increased over the last decade due to its history as a biological weapon. In particular, development of novel vaccines directed at protecting against pneumonic tularemia has been an important goal. Previous work has demonstrated that, when delivered at very high inoculums, administration of live, highly attenuated strains of virulent F. tularensis can protect against tularemia. However, lower vaccinating inoculums did not offer similar immunity. One concern of using live vaccines is that the host may develop mild tularemia in response to infection and use of high inoculums may contribute to this issue. Thus, generation of a live vaccine that can efficiently protect against tularemia when delivered in low numbers, e.g. <100 organisms, may address this concern. Herein we describe the ability of three defined, attenuated mutants of F. tularensis SchuS4, deleted for FTT0369c, FTT1676, or FTT0369c and FTT1676, respectively, to engender protective immunity against tularemia when delivered at concentrations of approximately 50 or fewer bacteria. Attenuated strains for use as vaccines were selected by their inability to efficiently replicate in macrophages in vitro and impaired replication and dissemination in vivo. Although all strains were defective for replication in vitro within macrophages, protective efficacy of each attenuated mutant was correlated with their ability to modestly replicate and disseminate in the host. Finally, we demonstrate the parenteral vaccination with these strains offered superior protection against pneumonic tularemia than intranasal vaccination. Together our data provides proof of principle that low dose attenuated vaccines may be a viable goal in development of novel vaccines directed against tularemia.

[PMID: 25847026]
Tularemia is a zoonosis caused by Francisella tularensis that can be transmitted by several ways to human being and cause different clinical manifestations. We report three clinical cases of tularemia with ulceroglandular presentation in young males acquired during outdoor activities in Southern Belgium. Confirmation of the diagnosis was established by serology. Only three cases of tularemia have been reported in Belgium between 1950 and 2012 by the National Reference Laboratory CODA-CERVA (Ref Lab CODA-CERVA) but re-emergence of tularemia is established in several European countries and F. tularensis is also well known to be present in animal reservoirs and vectors in Belgium. The diagnosis of tularemia has to be considered in case of suggestive clinical presentation associated with epidemiological risk factors.

[PMID: 25266682]
The bacterium Francisella tularensis causes the vector-borne zoonotic disease tularemia, and may infect a wide range of hosts including invertebrates, mammals and birds. Transmission to humans occurs through contact with infected animals or contaminated environments, or through arthropod vectors. Tularemia has a broad geographical distribution, and there is evidence which suggests local emergence or re-emergence of this disease in Europe. This review was developed to provide an update on the geographical distribution of F. tularensis in humans, wildlife, domestic animals and vector species, to identify potential public health hazards, and to characterize the epidemiology of tularemia in Europe. Information was collated on cases in humans, domestic animals and wildlife, and on reports of detection of the bacterium in arthropod vectors, from 38 European countries for the period 1992-2012. Multiple international databases on human and animal health were consulted, as well as published reports in the literature. Tularemia is a disease of complex epidemiology that is challenging to understand and therefore to control. Many aspects of this disease remain poorly understood. Better understanding is needed of the epidemiological role of animal hosts, potential vectors, mechanisms of maintenance in the different ecosystems, and routes of transmission of the disease.

[PMID: 20885922]
Tularemia, caused by the bacterium Francisella tularensis, where F. tularensis subspecies holarctica has long been the cause of endemic disease in parts of northern Sweden. Despite this, our understanding of the natural life-cycle of the organism is still limited. During three years, we collected surface water samples (n = 341) and sediment samples (n = 245) in two areas in Sweden with endemic tularemia. Real-time PCR screening demonstrated the presence of F. tularenis lpnA sequences in 108 (32%) and 48 (20%) of the samples, respectively. The 16S rRNA sequences from those samples all grouped to the species F. tularensis. Analysis of the FtM19InDel region of lpnA-positive samples from selected sampling points confirmed the presence of F. tularensis subspecies holarctica-specific sequences. These sequences were detected in water sampled during both outbreak and nonoutbreak years. Our results indicate that diverse F. tularensis-like organisms, including F. tularensis subsp. holarctica, persist in natural waters and sediments in the investigated areas with endemic tularemia.

[PMID: 23473220]
Tularemia is a bacterial zoonotic disease that is caused by Francisella tularensis and among the infectious reasons that cause fever of unknown origin (FUO) in children. Typhoidal or pneumonic tularemia can manifest predominantly as FUO. However, presentation of oropharyngeal tularemia as FUO is uncommon. Here, we report a case of an 11-month-old infant with oropharyngeal tularemia presenting as FUO. To the best of our knowledge, this clinical presentation of oropharyngeal tularemia has not been previously reported in literature.

[PMID: 19863554]
Francisella tularensis is a highly infectious intracellular bacterium that causes the fulminating disease tularemia, which can be transmitted between mammals by arthropod vectors. Genomic studies have shown that the F. tularensis has been undergoing genomic decay with the most virulent strains having the lowest number of functional genes. Entry of F. tularensis into macrophages is mediated by looping phagocytosis and is associated with signalling through Syk tyrosine kinase. Within macrophages and arthropod-derived cells, the Francisella-containing phagosome matures transiently into an acidified late endosome-like phagosome with limited fusion to lysosomes followed by rapid bacterial escape into the cytosol within 30-60 min, and bacterial proliferation within the cytosol. The Francisella pathogenicity island, which potentially encodes a putative type VI secretion system, is essential for phagosome biogenesis and bacterial escape into the cytosol within macrophages and arthropod-derived cells. Initial sensing of F. tularensis in the cytosol triggers IRF-3-dependent IFN-beta secretion, type I IFNR-dependent signalling, activation of the inflammasome mediated by caspase-1, and a pro-inflammatory response, which is suppressed by triggering of SHIP. The past few years have witnessed a quantum leap in our understanding of various aspects of this organism and this review will discuss these remarkable advances.

[PMID: 24351753]
Francisella tularensis, the Gram-negative bacterium that causes tularemia, is considered a potential bioterrorism threat due to its low infectivity dose and the high morbidity and mortality from respiratory disease. We previously characterized two mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific for the O-polysaccharide (O antigen [OAg]) of F. tularensis lipopolysaccharide (LPS): Ab63, which targets a terminal epitope at the nonreducing end of OAg, and Ab52, which targets a repeating internal OAg epitope. These two MAbs were protective in a mouse model of respiratory tularemia. To determine whether these epitope types are also targeted by humans, we tested the ability of each of 18 blood serum samples from 11 tularemia patients to inhibit the binding of Ab63 or Ab52 to F. tularensis LPS in a competition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Although all serum samples had Ab63- and Ab52-inhibitory activities, the ratios of Ab63 to Ab52 inhibitory potencies varied 75-fold. However, the variation was only 2.3-fold for sequential serum samples from the same patient, indicating different distributions of terminal- versus internal-binding antibodies in different individuals. Western blot analysis using class-specific anti-human Ig secondary antibodies showed that both terminal- and internal-binding OAg antibodies were of the IgG, IgM, and IgA isotypes. These results support the use of a mouse model to discover protective B-cell epitopes for tularemia vaccines or prophylactic/therapeutic antibodies, and they present a general strategy for interrogating the antibody responses of patients and vaccinees to microbial carbohydrate epitopes that have been characterized in experimental animals.