[PMID: 21797865]
Impaired metal ion homeostasis causes synaptic dysfunction and treatments for Alzheimer's disease (AD) that target metal ions have therefore been developed. The leading compound in this class of therapeutic, PBT2, improved cognition in a clinical trial with AD patients. The aim of the present study was to examine the cellular mechanism of action for PBT2. We show PBT2 induces inhibitory phosphorylation of the α- and β-isoforms of glycogen synthase kinase 3 and that this activity is dependent on PBT2 translocating extracellular Zn and Cu into cells. This activity is supported when Aβ:Zn aggregates are the source of extracellular Zn and adding PBT2 to Aβ:Zn preparations promotes Aβ degradation by matrix metalloprotease 2. PBT2-induced glycogen synthase kinase 3 phosphorylation appears to involve inhibition of the phosphatase calcineurin. Consistent with this, PBT2 increased phosphorylation of other calcineurin substrates, including cAMP response element binding protein and Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. These data demonstrate PBT2 can decrease Aβ levels by sequestering the Zn that promotes extracellular formation of protease resistant Aβ:Zn aggregates, and that subsequent intracellular translocation of the Zn by PBT2 induces cellular responses with synapto-trophic potential. Intracellular translocation of Zn and Cu via the metal chaperone activity of PBT2 may be an important mechanism by which PBT2 improves cognitive function in people with AD.

[PMID: 18953111]
The recent report of positive results from a Phase IIa clinical trial of PBT2, a novel drug that targets amyloid-beta-metal interactions, underscores the value of abnormal transition metal metabolism as a potential therapeutic target in Alzheimer's disease. The Metals Hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease is based upon observations of the precipitation of amyloid-beta by zinc and its radicalization by copper. Both metals are markedly enriched in plaques. The Hypothesis involves the perturbance of these endogenous brain metals, and it does not consider toxicological exposure part of pathogenesis. Recent descriptions of the release of ionic zinc and copper in the cortical glutamatergic synapse, modulating the response of the NMDA receptor, may explain the vulnerability of amyloid-beta to abnormal interaction with these metal ions in the synaptic region leading to aggregation and fostering toxicity. Increasingly sophisticated medicinal chemistry approaches are being tested which correct the abnormalities without causing systemic disturbance of these essential minerals. PBT2, clioquinol and related compounds are ionophores rather than chelators. PBT2 is a once per day, orally bioavailable, second generation 8-OH quinoline derivative of clioquinol. It has performed very satisfactorily in toxicology and Phase I clinical trials and is advancing as a disease-modifying candidate drug for Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 21504115]
Clioquinol (CQ), a once popular antibiotic, was used to inhibit the growth of microorganisms. Recently, CQ and its analog PBT2 have shown encouraging effects in the animal and clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the mechanism by which this class of molecules works remains controversial. In this work, we used the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model to study how CQ affects molecular and cellular functions and particularly, copper, iron, and zinc homeostasis. We observed a CQ-induced inhibition of yeast growth, which could be slightly relieved by supplementation of copper or iron. Microarray results indicated that yeast cells treated with CQ sense a general deficiency in metals, despite elevated total cellular contents of copper and iron. Consistent with this, reduced activities of some metal-sensitive enzymes were observed. Intriguingly, CQ can increase the SOD1 activity, likely through Ccs1's accessibility to CQ-bound copper ions. Further studies revealed that CQ sequestrates copper and iron at the cellular membrane, likely the plasma membrane, resulting overall metal accumulation but cytosolic metal depletion. CQ's effects on metal-sensitive metalloenzymes were also verified in mammalian cell line SH-SY5Y. Together, our results revealed that CQ can regulate metal homeostasis by binding metal ions, resulting the cell sensing a state of deficiency of bioavailable metal ions while simultaneously increasing available metals to SOD1 (via Ccs1) and possibly some other metalloproteins that can access CQ-bound metals. We hope this regulation of metal homeostasis may be helpful in explaining the therapeutic effects of CQ used in disease treatment.

[PMID: 21739113]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) represents a major public health challenge. It is the most common cause of dementia, the worldwide prevalence of which will double every 20 years in the foreseeable future. It would be good if it were possible to treat AD early to diminish its impact, but current evidence does not support early intervention. Vitamin E was no more effective than placebo in a study of vitamin E and donepezil against placebo in mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Vitamin E is associated with a higher rate of haemorrhagic events than is placebo. Neither donepezil nor galantamine has been shown to be helpful in retarding progression from MCI to AD. Gingko biloba was ineffective in delaying the onset of AD in a large prospective trial involving over 6,000 participants. Gamma secretase inhibitors have not yet been shown to retard the progression of AD and they seem to have a high incidence of adverse effects, especially rashes. Antibody therapy has not yet been shown to be helpful in the treatment of established AD, let alone its prevention. Metalloproteinase modifiers such as PBT2 may be useful AD therapies, but current evidence gives no support to their immediate use in pre-symptomatic AD. No evidence can yet be adduced to support the use of antibody therapies in MCI or early AD. Thus, it is clear that the early treatment of AD cannot be justified as yet, no matter how desirable this goal may be. Treatment of established AD with cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine, coupled with referral of interested patients to evaluative drug trials, is the best we can do at present.

[PMID: 20164561]
PBT2 is a copper/zinc ionophore that rapidly restores cognition in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD). A recent Phase IIa double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial found that the 250 mg dose of PBT2 was well-tolerated, significantly lowered cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of amyloid-beta42, and significantly improved executive function on a Neuro-psychological Test Battery (NTB) within 12 weeks of treatment in patients with AD. In the post-hoc analysis reported here, the cognitive, blood marker, and CSF neurochemistry outcomes from the trial were subjected to further analysis. Ranking the responses to treatment after 12 weeks with placebo, PBT2 50 mg, and PBT2 250 mg revealed that the proportions of patients showing improvement on NTB Composite or Executive Factor z-scores were significantly greater in the PBT2 250 mg group than in the placebo group. Receiver-operator characteristic analyses revealed that the probability of an improver at any level coming from the PBT2 250 mg group was significantly greater, compared to placebo, for Composite z-scores (Area Under the Curve [AUC] =0.76, p=0.0007), Executive Factor z-scores (AUC =0.93, p=1.3 x 10(-9)), and near-significant for the ADAS-cog (AUC =0.72, p=0.056). There were no correlations between changes in CSF amyloid-beta or tau species and cognitive changes. These findings further encourage larger-scale testing of PBT2 for AD.

[PMID: 18672400]
PBT2 is a metal-protein attenuating compound (MPAC) that affects the Cu2(+)-mediated and Zn2(+)-mediated toxic oligomerisation of Abeta seen in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Strong preclinical efficacy data and the completion of early, clinical safety studies have preceded this phase IIa study, the aim of which was to assess the effects of PBT2 on safety, efficacy, and biomarkers of AD. Between December 6, 2006, and September 21, 2007, community-dwelling patients over age 55 years were recruited to this 12-week, double-blind, randomised trial of PBT2. Patients were randomly allocated to receive 50 mg PBT2, 250 mg PBT2, or placebo. Inclusion criteria were early AD (mini-mental state examination [MMSE] score between 20 and 26 points or Alzheimer's disease assessment scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) score between 10 and 25 points), taking a stable dose of acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (donepezil, galantamine, or rivastigmine) for at least 4 months, a modified Hachinski score of 4 points or less, and CT or MRI results that were consistent with AD. The principal outcomes were safety and tolerability. Secondary outcomes were plasma and CSF biomarkers and cognition. Analysis was intention to treat. The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00471211. 78 patients were randomly assigned (29 to placebo, 20 to PBT2 50 mg, and 29 to PBT2 250 mg) and 74 (95%) completed the study. 42 (54%) patients had at least one treatment emergent adverse event (10 [50%] on PBT2 50 mg, 18 [62%] on PBT2 250 mg, and 14 [48%] on placebo). No serious adverse events were reported by patients on PBT2. Patients treated with PBT2 250 mg had a dose-dependent (p=0.023) and significant reduction in CSF Abeta(42) concentration compared with those treated with placebo (difference in least squares mean change from baseline was -56.0 pg/mL, 95% CI -101.5 to -11.0; p=0.006). PBT2 had no effect on plasma biomarkers of AD or serum Zn(2+) and Cu(2+) concentrations. Cognition testing included ADAS-cog, MMSE, and a neuropsychological test battery (NTB). Of these tests, two executive function component tests of the NTB showed significant improvement over placebo in the PBT2 250 mg group: category fluency test (2.8 words, 0.1 to 5.4; p=0.041) and trail making part B (-48.0 s, -83.0 to -13.0; p=0.009). The safety profile is favourable for the ongoing development of PBT2. The effect on putative biomarkers for AD in CSF but not in plasma is suggestive of a central effect of the drug on Abeta metabolism. Cognitive efficacy was restricted to two measures of executive function. Future trials that are larger and longer will establish if the effects of PBT2 on biomarkers and cognition that are reported here translate into clinical effectiveness.

[PMID: 18625454]
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia in the elderly, and it is characterized by elevated brain iron levels and accumulation of copper and zinc in cerebral beta-amyloid deposits (e.g., senile plaques). Both ionic zinc and copper are able to accelerate the aggregation of Abeta, the principle component of beta-amyloid deposits. Copper (and iron) can also promote the neurotoxic redox activity of Abeta and induce oxidative cross-linking of the peptide into stable oligomers. Recent reports have documented the release of Abeta together with ionic zinc and copper in cortical glutamatergic synapses after excitation. This, in turn, leads to the formation of Abeta oligomers, which, in turn, modulates long-term potentiation by controlling synaptic levels of the NMDA receptor. The excessive accumulation of Abeta oligomers in the synaptic cleft would then be predicted to adversely affect synaptic neurotransmission. Based on these findings, we have proposed the "Metal Hypothesis of Alzheimer's Disease," which stipulates that the neuropathogenic effects of Abeta in Alzheimer's disease are promoted by (and possibly even dependent on) Abeta-metal interactions. Increasingly sophisticated pharmaceutical approaches are now being implemented to attenuate abnormal Abeta-metal interactions without causing systemic disturbance of essential metals. Small molecules targeting Abeta-metal interactions (e.g., PBT2) are currently advancing through clinical trials and show increasing promise as disease-modifying agents for Alzheimer's disease based on the "metal hypothesis."

[PMID: 16370917]
This review examines key pharmacological strategies that have been clinically studied for the primary or secondary prevention of Alzheimer's disease. Much information (neuropsychological, genetic and imaging) is already available to characterise an individual's risk for developing Alzheimer's disease. However, regulatory pathways for obtaining a prevention indication are less well charted, and such trials tend to involve 3- to 7-year studies of 1000 - 5000 individuals, depending on baseline status. Treatments developed for prevention will also need to have superior safety. For these reasons, > 100 proprietary pharmacological products are currently being developed for an Alzheimer's disease treatment, but only a few are being studied for prevention. Randomised trial data are available for antihypertensive agents (calcium channel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors), pravastatin, simvastatin, conjugated oestrogen, raloxifene, rofecoxib, CX516 (AMPA agonist) and cholinesterase inhibitors regarding efficacy for Alzheimer's disease prevention. At least four large prevention trials of conjugated oestrogen, selenium and vitamin E, Ginkgo biloba and statins are currently underway. Strategies using other agents have not yet been evaluated in Alzheimer's disease prevention clinical trials. These include anti-amyloid antibodies, active immunisation, selective secretase inhibitors and modulators, microtubule stabilisers (e.g., paclitaxel), R-flurbiprofen, xaliproden, ONO-2506, FK962 (somatostatin releaser), SGS 742 (GABA(B) antagonist), TCH 346 (apoptosis inhibitor), Alzhemedtrade mark, phophodiesterase inhibitors, rosiglitazone, leuprolide, interferons, metal-protein attenuating compounds (e.g., PBT2), CX717, rasagaline, huperzine A, antioxidants and memantine. Studies combining lifestyle modification and drug therapy have not been conducted. Full validation of surrogate markers for disease progression (such as amyloid imaging) should further facilitate drug development. Reducing the complexity of prevention trials and gaining regulatory consensus of design is a high priority for the field.

[PMID: 22592705]
Alzheimer's dementia (AD) may be caused by the formation of extracellular senile plaques comprised of beta-amyloid (Aß). In vitro and mouse model studies have demonstrated that metal protein attenuating compounds (MPACs) promote the solubilisation and clearance of Aß. To evaluate the efficacy of metal protein attenuating compounds (MPACs) for the treatment of cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's dementia. We searched ALOIS, the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group Specialized Register, on 29 July 2010 using the terms: Clioquinol OR PBT1 OR PBT2 OR "metal protein" OR MPACS OR MPAC. Randomised double-blind trials in which treatment with an MPAC was administered to participants with Alzheimer's dementia in a parallel group comparison with placebo were included. Three review authors (RM, LJ, ELS) independently assessed the quality of trials according to the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.The primary outcome measure of interest was cognitive function (as measured by psychometric tests). The secondary outcome measures of interest were in the following areas: quality of life, functional performance, effect on carer, biomarkers, safety and adverse effects, and death. Two MPAC trials were identified. One trial compared clioquinol (PBT1) with placebo in 36 patients and 32 had sufficient data for per protocol analysis. There was no statistically significant difference in cognition (as measured on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - Cognition (ADAS-Cog)) between the active treatment and placebo groups at 36 weeks. The difference in mean change from baseline ADAS-Cog score in the clioquinol arm compared with the placebo arm at weeks 24 and 36 was a difference of 7.37 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.51 to 13.24) and 6.36 (95% CI -0.50 to 13.23), respectively.There was no significant impact on non-cognitive symptoms or clinical global impression. One participant in the active treatment group developed neurological symptoms (impaired visual acuity and colour vision) which resolved on cessation of treatment and were possibly attributable to the drug.In the second trial a successor compound, PBT2, was compared with placebo in 78 participants with mild Alzheimer's dementia; all were included in the intention-to-treat analysis. There was no significant difference in the Neuropsychological Test Battery (NTB) composite, memory or executive scores between placebo and PBT2 in the least squares mean change from baseline at week 12. However, two executive function component tests of the NTB showed significant improvement over placebo in the PBT2 250 mg group from baseline to week 12: category fluency test (2.8 words, 95% CI 0.1 to 5.4; P = 0.041) and trail making part B (-48.0 s, 95% CI -83.0 to -13.0; P = 0.009). There was no significant effect on cognition on Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or ADAS-Cog scales. PBT2 had a favourable safety profile. There is an absence of evidence as to whether clioquinol (PBT1) has any positive clinical benefit for patients with AD, or whether the drug is safe. We have some concerns about the quality of the study methodology; there was an imbalance in treatment and control groups after randomisation (participants in the active treatment group had a higher mean pre-morbid IQ) and the secondary analyses of results stratified by baseline dementia severity. The planned phase III trial of PBT1 has been abandoned and this compound has been withdrawn from development. The second trial of PBT2 was more rigorously conducted and showed that after 12 weeks this compound appeared to be safe and well tolerated in people with mild Alzheimer's dementia. Larger trials are now required to demonstrate cognitive efficacy.

[PMID: 20545360]
Tacrine and PBT2 (an 8-hydroxyquinoline derivative) are well-known drugs that inhibit cholinesterases and decrease beta-amyloid (Abeta) levels by complexation of redox-active metals, respectively. In this work, novel tacrine-8-hydroxyquinoline hybrids have been designed, synthesized, and evaluated as potential multifunctional drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. At nano- and subnanomolar concentrations they inhibit human acetyl- and butyrylcholinesterase (AChE and BuChE), being more potent than tacrine. They also displace propidium iodide from the peripheral anionic site of AChE and thus could be able to inhibit Abeta aggregation promoted by AChE. They show better antioxidant properties than Trolox, the aromatic portion of vitamin E responsible for radical capture, and display neuroprotective properties against mitochondrial free radicals. In addition, they selectively complex Cu(II), show low cell toxicity, and could be able to penetrate the CNS, according to an in vitro blood-brain barrier model.

[PMID: 22747493]
Currently, therapeutics that modify Alzheimer's disease (AD)are not available. Increasing age is the primary risk factor for AD and due to an aging global population the urgent need for effective therapeutics increases every year. This Account presents the development of an AD treatment strategy that incorporates diverse compounds with a common characteristic: the ability to redistribute metal ions within the brain. Central to cognitive decline in AD is the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) that accumulates in the AD brain. A range of therapeutic strategies have been developed based on the premise that decreasing the brain Aβ burden will attenuate the severity of the disease symptoms. Unfortunately these treatments have failed to show any positive outcomes in large-scale clinical trials, raising many questions regarding whether therapeutics for AD can rely solely on decreasing Aβ levels. An alternate strategy is to target the interaction between Aβ and metal ions using compounds with the potential to redistribute metal ions within the brain. The original rationale for this strategy came from studies showing that metal ions promote Aβ toxicity and aggregation. In initial studies using the prototype metal-chelating compound clioquinol (CQ), CQ prevented Aβ toxicity in vitro, out-competed Aβ for metal ions without affecting the activity of metal-dependent enzymes, and attenuated the rate of cognitive decline in AD subjects in a small phase II clinical trial. All these outcomes were consistent with the original hypothesized mechanism of action for CQ where prevention or reversal of the extracellular Aβ-metal interactions could prevent Aβ toxicity. Soon after the completion of these studies, a new body of work began to suggest that this hypothesized mechanism of action for CQ was simplistic and that other factors were also important for the positive therapeutic outcomes. Perhaps most significantly, it was shown that after CQ sequesters metal ions the neutral CQ-metal complex crosses cell membranes to increase intracellular levels of the metals, thereby initiating protective cell signaling cascades. The activity of CQ therefore appeared to be two-fold: it prevented toxic interactions between Aβ and metal ions outside the cell, and it redistributed the metal ions into the cell to promote healthy cell function. To determine the significance of redistributing metal ions into the cell, glyoxalbis(N(4)-methylthiosemicarbazonato)Cu(II) [Cu(II)(gtsm)] was tested in models of AD. Cu(II)(gtsm) delivers Cu into cells, but, unlike CQ, it cannot out-compete Aβ for metal ions. When tested in AD model mice, the Cu(II)(gtsm) treatment restored cognitive function back to levels expected for cognitively healthy mice. The most advanced compound from this therapeutic strategy, PBT2, can sequester metal ions from Aβ and redistribute them into the cell like CQ. PBT2 improved cognition in a phase II clinical trial with AD patients, and further clinical testing is currently underway.

[PMID: 21232050]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common age related neurodegenerative disease. Currently, there are no disease modifying drugs, existing therapies only offer short-term symptomatic relief. Two of the pathognomonic indicators of AD are the presence of extracellular protein aggregates consisting primarily of the Aβ peptide and oxidative stress. Both of these phenomena can potentially be explained by the interactions of Aβ with metal ions. In addition, metal ions play a pivotal role in synaptic function and their homeostasis is tightly regulated. A breakdown in this metal homeostasis and the generation of toxic Aβ oligomers are likely to be responsible for the synaptic dysfunction associated with AD. Therefore, approaches that are designed to prevent Aβ metal interactions, inhibiting the formation of toxic Aβ species as well as restoring metal homeostasis may have potential as disease modifying strategies for treating AD. This review summarizes the physiological and pathological interactions that metal ions play in synaptic function with particular emphasis placed on interactions with Aβ. A variety of therapeutic strategies designed to address these pathological processes are also described. The most advanced of these strategies is the so-called 'metal protein attenuating compound' approach, with the lead molecule PBT2 having successfully completed early phase clinical trials. The success of these various strategies suggests that manipulating metal ion interactions offers multiple opportunities to develop disease modifying therapies for AD.

[PMID: 19742190]
The prevention and treatment of cognitive impairment in the elderly has assumed increasing importance in an aging population. This article presents a qualitative review of recent research on experimental interventions for the prevention and treatment of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease in elderly subjects. Interventions addressed range from lifestyle measures to pharmacological treatments. Epidemiological studies suggest that dietary measures, physical exercise, and mental activity may reduce the risk of cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease in elderly subjects. Statins may protect against incident dementia, and lithium may convey similar benefits to bipolar patients. Ginkgo appears ineffective as a primary preventive measure. Donepezil but not Vitamin E may benefit persons with mild cognitive impairment. Experimental treatments potentially useful for Alzheimer's disease include dimebon, PBT2 and etanercept; the safety and efficacy of the Alzheimer's vaccine remains to be proven, and growth hormone secretagogue and tarenflurbil are likely ineffective. Herbal treatments merit study in elderly subjects with cognitive syndromes.

[PMID: 22403554]
As evidence for the role of metal ion dysregulation in the pathogenesis of multiple CNS disorders grows, it has become important to more precisely identify and differentiate the biological effects of various pharmacological modulators of metal ion homeostasis. This is particularly evident in disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), where the use of metal chaperones (that transport metals), as opposed to chelators (which exclude metals from biological interactions), may prove to be the first truly disease modifying approach for this condition. The purpose of this mini-review is to highlight the emerging notion that metal chaperones, such as PBT2 (Prana Biotechnology), modulate a variety of critical pathways affecting key aspects of the AD cascade to provide a more "holistic" approach to the treatment of this disease.