[PMID: 9356244]
Although some viroid-like satellite RNAs possess self-cleavage and self-ligation activities, we show that the peach latent mosaic viroid (PLMVd) is unique among all known viroids since it also has such activities. These catalytic activities should have important roles in the rolling circle replication of PLMVd. According to this proposed mechanism, self-cleavage of the multimeric strands occurs via hammerhead structures producing monomers possessing 2',3'-cyclic phosphate and 5'-hydroxyl termini. In the most stable predicted secondary structure for PLMVd these two extremities are juxtaposed, in order for self-ligation to occur. To establish the nature of the phosphodiester bond produced by self-ligation, we followed the classical procedure of complete enzymatic RNA hydrolysis coupled with thin layer chromatography fractionation. Using this procedure, we report that the self-ligation of PLMVd transcripts produces almost exclusively the 2',5' isomer (>96%). Primer extension assays also revealed that reverse transcriptase can read througth this 2', 5' linkage, suggesting that it does not prevent further replication of the viroid. Moreover, we have observed that this 2',5' linkage is resistant to the debranching activity contained in nuclear extracts, as well as being capable of preventing further viroid self-cleavage. Thus, if viroids do indeed self-ligate in vivo, the resulting 2', 5'-phosphodiester bond could contribute to the stability of these RNA species. Finally, an analysis of both the sequence and the structural requirements for hammerhead self-cleavage and self-ligation suggests that these two RNA processes may be interrelated. We hypothesize that the intramolecular self-ligation which produces circular conformers may contribute to the circularization step of the rolling circle replication, while the intermolecular non-enzymatic ligation is a potential mechanism for the sequence reassortment of viroids and viroid-like species.

[PMID: 18370255]
Viroids, as a consequence of not encoding any protein, are extremely dependent on their hosts. Replication of these minimal genomes, composed exclusively by a circular RNA of 246-401 nt, occurs in the nucleus (family Pospiviroidae) or in the chloroplast (family Avsunviroidae) by an RNA-based rolling-circle mechanism with three steps: (1) synthesis of longer-than-unit strands catalyzed by host DNA-dependent RNA polymerases recruited and redirected to transcribe RNA templates, (2) cleavage to unit-length, which in family Avsunviroidae is mediated by hammerhead ribozymes, and (3) circularization through an RNA ligase or autocatalytically. This consistent but still fragmentary picture has emerged from a combination of studies with in vitro systems (analysis of RNA preparations from infected plants, transcription assays with nuclear and chloroplastic fractions, characterization of enzymes and ribozymes mediating cleavage and ligation of viroid strands, dissection of 5' terminal groups of viroid strands, and in situ hybridization and microscopy of subcellular fractions and tissues), and in vivo systems (tissue infiltration studies, protoplasts, studies in planta and use of transgenic plants expressing viroid RNAs).

[PMID: 15448723]
Viroids are small (about 300 nucleotides), single-stranded, circular, non-encapsidated pathogenic RNA molecules. They do not code for proteins and thus depend on plant host enzymes for their replication and other functions. They induce plant diseases by direct interaction with host factors but the mechanism of pathogenicity is still unknown. They can alter the expression of selected plant genes important for growth and development. Viroids belong to two families, the Avsunviroidae and the Pospiviroidae. Viroids of the Avsunviroidae family adopt a branched or quasi rod-like secondary structure in their native state. Members of the Pospiviroidae family adopt a rod-like secondary structure. In such native structures five structural/functional domains have been identified: central (C), pathogenicity, variable and two terminal domains. The central conserved region (CCR) within the C domain characterizes viroids of the Pospiviroidae. Specific secondary structures of this region play an important role in viroid replication and processing. Viroids of the Avsunviroidae family lack a CCR but possess self-cleaving properties by forming hammerhead ribozyme structures; they accumulate and replicate in chloroplasts, whereas members of the Pospiviroidae family have a nuclear localization. Viroid replication occurs via a rolling circle mechanism using either a symmetric or asymmetric pathway in three steps, RNA transcription, processing and ligation.

[PMID: 25287502]
Viroids are noncoding RNA pathogens inducing severe to mild disease symptoms on agriculturally important crop plants. Viroid replication is entirely dependent on host transcription machinery, and their replication/accumulation in the infected cells can activate RNA silencing-a host defense mechanism that targets the viroid itself. RNA silencing produces in the cell large amounts of viroid-specific small RNAs of 21-24-nucleotides by cleaving (or "dicing") entire molecules of viroid RNA. However, viroid replication is resistant to the effects of RNA silencing and disrupts the normal regulation of host gene expression, finally resulting in the development of disease symptoms on infected plant. The molecular mechanisms of biological processes involving RNA silencing and underlying various aspects of viroid-host interaction, such as symptom expression, are of special interests to both basic and applied areas of viroid research. Here we present a method to create infectious viroid cDNA clones and RNA transcripts, the starting material for such analyses, using Hop stunt viroid as an example. Next we describe methods for the preparation and analysis of viroid-specific small RNAs by deep sequencing using tomato plants infected with Potato spindle tuber viroid as an example. Finally we introduce bioinformatics tools and methods necessary to process, analyze, and characterize these viroid-specific small RNAs. These bioinformatic methods provide a powerful new tool for the detection and discovery of both known and new viroid species.

[PMID: 1717335]
Contrary to earlier beliefs, viruses are not the smallest causative agents of infectious diseases. Single-stranded RNAs as small as 246 nucleotides exist in certain higher plants and cause more than a dozen crop diseases. These RNAs have been termed viroids. Despite their extremely limited information content, viroids replicate autonomously in susceptible cells--that is, they do not require helper functions from simultaneously replicating conventional viruses. Viroids are covalently closed circular molecules with a characteristic rodlike secondary structure in which short helical regions are interrupted by internal and bulge loops. Viroids are not translated; they are replicated by a host enzyme (or enzymes) (probably RNA polymerase II) via oligomeric RNA intermediates by a rolling circle mechanism. Viroidlike satellite RNAs resemble viroids in size and molecular structure, but are found within the capsids of specific helper viruses on which they depend for their own replication. These RNAs are of great interest to molecular biology for at least two reasons: 1) they are the smallest and simplest replicating molecules known, and 2) they may represent living fossils of precellular evolution in a hypothetical RNA world.

[PMID: 21994552]
Viroids, due to their small size and lack of protein-coding capacity, must rely essentially on their hosts for replication. Intriguingly, viroids have evolved the ability to replicate in two cellular organella, the nucleus (family Pospiviroidae) and the chloroplast (family Avsunviroidae). Viroid replication proceeds through an RNA-based rolling-circle mechanism with three steps that, with some variations, operate in both polarity strands: i) synthesis of longer-than-unit strands catalyzed by either the nuclear RNA polymerase II or a nuclear-encoded chloroplastic RNA polymerase, in both instances redirected to transcribe RNA templates, ii) cleavage to unit-length, which in the family Avsunviroidae is mediated by hammerhead ribozymes embedded in both polarity strands, while in the family Pospiviroidae the oligomeric RNAs provide the proper conformation but not the catalytic activity, and iii) circularization. The host RNA polymerases, most likely assisted by additional host proteins, start transcription from specific sites, thus implying the existence of viroid promoters. Cleavage and ligation in the family Pospiviroidae is probably catalyzed by an RNase III-like enzyme and an RNA ligase able to circularize the resulting 5' and 3' termini. Whether a chloroplastic RNA ligase mediates circularization in the family Avsunviroidae, or this reaction is autocatalytic, remains an open issue.

[PMID: 3860809]
On the basis of sequence homology a model is proposed for five structural and functional domains in viroids. These domains include (i) a conserved central region capable of forming two alternative structures that may regulate two phases of the viroid replication cycle, (ii) a region associated with pathogenicity, (iii) a domain with high sequence variability, (iv and v) two terminal domains that are interchangeable between viroids. That the evolution of viroids has involved RNA rearrangements of domains is supported by the partial duplication of coconut cadang cadang viroid, which arises de novo during each infection. Similar RNA rearrangements have been established for animal viral defective interfering RNAs, which arise by some form of discontinuous transcription. This mechanism could account for the origin of viroids and also RNA viruses, whereby modules of genetic information may have undergone repeated exchange between RNA pathogens and the RNA of their hosts.

[PMID: 9601006]
The replication of many viral and subviral pathogens as well as the amplification of certain cellular genes proceeds via a rolling circle mechanism. For potato spindle tuber (PSTVd) and related viroids, the possible role of a circular (-)strand RNA as a template for synthesis of (+)strand progeny is unclear. Infected plants appear to contain only multimeric linear (-)strand RNAs, and attempts to initiate infection with multimeric (-)PSTVd RNAs generally have failed. To examine critically the infectivity of monomeric (-)strand viroid RNAs, we have developed a ribozyme-based expression system for the production of precisely full length (-)strand RNAs whose termini are capable of undergoing facile circularization in vitro. Mechanical inoculation of tomato seedlings with electrophoretically purified (-)PSTVd RNA led to a small fraction of plants becoming infected whereas parallel assays with an analogous tomato planta macho viroid (-)RNA resulted in a much larger fraction of infected plants. Ribozyme-mediated production of (-)PSTVd RNA in transgenic plants led to the appearance of monomeric circular (-)PSTVd RNA and large amounts of (+)PSTVd progeny. No monomeric circular (-)PSTVd RNA could be detected in naturally infected plants by using either ribonuclease protection or electrophoresis under partially denaturing conditions. Although not a component of the normal replicative pathway, precisely full length (-)PSTVd RNA appears to contain all of the structural and regulatory elements necessary for initiation of viroid replication.

[PMID: 6760914]
The RNA genome of potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) is transcribed in vitro into complementary DNA and RNA by DNA-dependent DNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase, respectively, from Escherichia coli. In vitro synthesis of complementary RNA produces distinct transcripts larger than unit length thus reflecting the in vivo mechanism of viroid replication. The influence of varying experimental conditions on the transcription process is studied; actinomycin D is found to drastically reduce complementary RNA synthesis from the PSTV RNA template by RNA polymerase.

[PMID: 11907231]
Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) contains a viroid-like circular RNA that is presumed to replicate via a rolling circle replication mechanism mediated by cellular RNA polymerases. However, the exact mechanism of rolling circle replication for HDV RNA and viroids is not clear. Using our recently described cDNA-free transfection system (L. E. Modahl and M. M. Lai, J. Virol. 72:5449-5456, 1998), we have succeeded in detecting HDV RNA replication by metabolic labeling with [32P]orthophosphate in vivo and obtained direct evidence that HDV RNA replication generates high-molecular-weight multimeric species of HDV RNA, which are processed into monomeric and dimeric forms. Thus, these multimeric RNAs are the true intermediates of HDV RNA replication. We also found that HDV RNA synthesis is highly temperature sensitive, occurring most efficiently at 37 to 40 degrees C and becoming virtually undetectable at temperatures below 30 degrees C. Moreover, genomic HDV RNA synthesis was found to occur at a rate roughly 30-fold higher than that of antigenomic RNA synthesis. Finally, in lysolecithin-permeabilized cells, the synthesis of full-length antigenomic HDV RNA was completely resistant to high concentrations (100 microg/ml) of alpha-amanitin. In contrast, synthesis of genomic HDV RNA was totally inhibited by alpha-amanitin at concentrations as low as 2.5 microg/ml. Thus, these results suggest that genomic and antigenomic HDV RNA syntheses are performed by two different host cell enzymes. This observation, combined with our previous finding that hepatitis delta antigen mRNA synthesis is likely performed by RNA polymerase II, suggests that the different HDV RNA species are synthesized by different cellular transcriptional machineries.

[PMID: 7231549]
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II purified from healthy plant tissue is capable of synthesizing linear (-)-viroid RNA copies of full length from (+)-viroid RNA templates in vitro. Together with the specific alpha-amanitin sensitivity of viroid replication observed in vivo, these findings suggest that viroids replicate by an entirely novel mechanism in which infecting viroid RNA molecules are copied by the host enzyme which is normally responsible for the synthesis of nuclear precursors to messenger RNA.

[PMID: 18190946]
Viroids replicate through a rolling circle mechanism that is exclusively RNA dependent. In this study, we initially revisited the determination of the replication initiation sites of peach latent mosaic viroid (PLMVd). A universal initiation site for each of the PLMVd polarities (position A50/C51 and U284 for the plus and minus strands, respectively) that is shared by a relatively wide repertoire of viroid variants was identified, in agreement with a previous report based on a different methodology. Subsequently, an in vitro selection procedure based on a model rolling circle replication assay was developed. This latter experiment led to the identification of a highly conserved CAGACG box which is reminiscent of the sequence found in the vicinity of the PLMVd initiation sites. The conserved sequence contributes to delineating the initiation site and provides an explanation for the presence of a specific universal initiation site on the PLMVd molecule.

[PMID: 17438124]
Viroids replicate via a rolling circle mechanism, and cleavage/ligation requires extensive rearrangement of the highly base-paired native structure. For Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd), the switch from cleavage to ligation is driven by the change from a multibranched tetraloop structure to a loop E conformation. Here we present evidence that processing of Citrus viroid III (CVd-III), a member of a related group of viroids that also replicate in the nucleus, may proceed via a distinct pathway. Chemical probing of PSTVd and CVd-III miniRNAs with DMS and CMCT revealed that the loop E motifs of these two viroids have quite different tertiary structures. As shown by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis, the presence of two likely Watson-Crick GC pairs results in a significant overall stabilization of the CVd-III loop E-like motif. Unlike PSTVd, the upper strand of the CVd-III loop E-like motif cannot fold into a GNRA tetraloop, and comparison of suboptimal structures indicates that the initial cleavage event could occur on the 5' side of the only GU wobble pair in a helix involving a nearby pair of inverted repeats. According to our model, rearrangement of 3' sequences into a hairpin stem containing an identical arrangement of GC, GU, and CG base pairs and a second cleavage event is followed by formation of loop E, which serves to align the 5' and 3' termini of the CVd-III monomer prior to ligation. Because ligation would occur within loop E itself, stabilization of this motif may be needed to hold the 5' and 3' termini of CVd-III in position for the host ligase.

[PMID: 7747427]
Nucleotides within the pathogenicity domain of potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) are known to play an important role in regulating symptom expression, but the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. In order to determine more precisely how structural features within the pathogenicity domain regulate symptom expression, we have characterized a series of mutations that progressively stabilize premelting region 1 and the rest of the "virulence modulating" region. The structural effects of these mutations were monitored by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis of circularized RNA transcripts, and their biological effects were assessed by quantitative bioassays in tomato. Closure of a 4-nucleotide loop within the premelting region 1 virtually abolished PSTVd infectivity, especially when a nearby 2-nucleotide loop was also closed. Although RNA transcripts containing less stabilizing mutations were readily infectious, none of the four single and one double substitutions examined were stably maintained in vivo. The pattern of spontaneous, apparently compensatory sequence changes observed in the progeny suggests that PSTVd variants with less stable secondary structures enjoy a selective advantage. Mutations which stabilize the pathogenicity domain of PSTVd in vitro also suppressed symptom expression, but at least one other mutation having no obvious structural effects was associated with a similar phenotype. Conformational stability appears to be only one of several factors regulating PSTVd replication and pathogenicity.