[PMID: 18541024]
Lbx/ladybird genes originated as part of the metazoan cluster of Nk homeobox genes. In all animals investigated so far, both the protostome genes and the vertebrate Lbx1 genes were found to play crucial roles in neural and muscle development. Recently however, additional Lbx genes with divergent expression patterns were discovered in amniotes. Early in the evolution of vertebrates, two rounds of whole genome duplication are thought to have occurred, during which 4 Lbx genes were generated. Which of these genes were maintained in extant vertebrates, and how these genes and their functions evolved, is not known. Here we searched vertebrate genomes for Lbx genes and discovered novel members of this gene family. We also identified signature genes linked to particular Lbx loci and traced the remnants of 4 Lbx paralogons (two of which retain Lbx genes) in amniotes. In teleosts, that have undergone an additional genome duplication, 8 Lbx paralogons (three of which retain Lbx genes) were found. Phylogenetic analyses of Lbx and Lbx-associated genes show that in extant, bony vertebrates only Lbx1- and Lbx2-type genes are maintained. Of these, some Lbx2 sequences evolved faster and were probably subject to neofunctionalisation, while Lbx1 genes may have retained more features of the ancestral Lbx gene. Genes at Lbx1 and former Lbx4 loci are more closely related, as are genes at Lbx2 and former Lbx3 loci. This suggests that during the second vertebrate genome duplication, Lbx1/4 and Lbx2/3 paralogons were generated from the duplicated Lbx loci created during the first duplication event. Our study establishes for the first time the evolutionary history of Lbx genes in bony vertebrates, including the order of gene duplication events, gene loss and phylogenetic relationships. Moreover, we identified genetic hallmarks for each of the Lbx paralogons that can be used to trace Lbx genes as other vertebrate genomes become available. Significantly, we show that bony vertebrates only retained copies of Lbx1 and Lbx2 genes, with some Lbx2 genes being highly divergent. Thus, we have established a base on which the evolution of Lbx gene function in vertebrate development can be evaluated.

[PMID: 12588966]
Homeobox-containing (Hox) genes play important roles in development, particularly in the development of neurons and sensory organs, and in specification of body plan. The Hmx gene family is a new class of homeobox-containing genes defined by a conserved homeobox region and a characteristic pattern of expression in the central nervous system that is more rostral than that of the Hox genes. To date, three closely related members of the Hmx family, Hmx1, Hmx2, and Hmx3, have been described. All three Hmx genes are expressed in the craniofacial region of developing embryos. Here we show, for the first time, the expression of the transcription factor Hmx3 in postnatally developing salivary glands. Hmx3 protein is expressed in a cell type-specific manner in rat salivary glands. Hmx3 is present in both the nuclei and cytoplasm of specific groups of duct cells of the submandibular, parotid, and sublingual glands. Hmx3 expression increases during postnatal development of the submandibular gland. The duct cells show increasing concentrations of Hmx3 protein with progressive development of the submandibular gland. In contrast, the acinar cells of the three salivary glands do not exhibit detectable levels of Hmx3 protein.

[PMID: 18056427]
Correct diversification of cell types during development ensures the formation of functional organs. The evolutionarily conserved homeobox genes from ladybird/Lbx family were found to act as cell identity genes in a number of embryonic tissues. A prior genetic analysis showed that during Drosophila muscle and heart development ladybird is required for the specification of a subset of muscular and cardiac precursors. To learn how ladybird genes exert their cell identity functions we performed muscle and heart-targeted genome-wide transcriptional profiling and a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip search for direct Ladybird targets. Our data reveal that ladybird not only contributes to the combinatorial code of transcription factors specifying the identity of muscle and cardiac precursors, but also regulates a large number of genes involved in setting cell shape, adhesion, and motility. Among direct ladybird targets, we identified bric-a-brac 2 gene as a new component of identity code and inflated encoding alphaPS2-integrin playing a pivotal role in cell-cell interactions. Unexpectedly, ladybird also contributes to the regulation of terminal differentiation genes encoding structural muscle proteins or contributing to muscle contractility. Thus, the identity gene-governed diversification of cell types is a multistep process involving the transcriptional control of genes determining both morphological and functional properties of cells.

[PMID: 28843494]
The migration of limb myogenic precursors from limb level somites to their ultimate site of differentiation in the limb is a paradigmatic example of a set of dynamic and orchestrated migratory cell behaviours. The homeobox containing transcription factor ladybird homeobox 1 (Lbx1) is a central regulator of limb myoblast migration, null mutations of Lbx1 result in severe disruptions to limb muscle formation, particularly in the distal region of the limb in mice (Gross et al., 2000). As such Lbx1 has been hypothesized to control lateral migration of myoblasts into the distal limb anlage. It acts as a core regulator of the limb myoblast migration machinery, controlled by Pax3. A secondary role for Lbx1 in the differentiation and commitment of limb musculature has also been proposed (Brohmann et al., 2000; Uchiyama et al., 2000). Here we show that lateral migration, but not differentiation or commitment of limb myoblasts, is controlled by the phosphorylation of three adjacent serine residues of LBX1. Electroporation of limb level somites in the chick embryo with a dephosphomimetic form of Lbx1 results in a specific defect in the lateral migration of limb myoblasts. Although the initial delamination and migration of myoblasts is unaffected, migration into the distal limb bud is severely disrupted. Interestingly, myoblasts undergo normal differentiation independent of their migratory status, suggesting that the differentiation potential of hypaxial muscle is not regulated by the phosphorylation state of LBX1. Furthermore, we show that FGF8 and ERK mediated signal transduction, both critical regulators of the developing limb bud, have the capacity to induce the phosphorylation of LBX1 at these residues. Overall, this suggests a mechanism whereby the phosphorylation of LBX1, potentially through FGF8 and ERK signalling, controls the lateral migration of myoblasts into the distal limb bud.

[PMID: 9342040]
The embryonic heart precursors of Drosophila are arranged in a repeated pattern of segmental units. There is growing evidence that the development of individual elements of this pattern depends on both mesoderm intrinsic patterning information and inductive signals from the ectoderm. In this study, we demonstrate that two homeobox genes, ladybird early and ladybird late, are involved in the cardiogenic pathway in Drosophila. Their expression is specific to a subset of cardioblast and pericardial cell precursors and is critically dependent on mesodermal tinman function, epidermal Wingless signaling and the coordinate action of neurogenic genes. Negative regulation by hedgehog is required to restrict ladybird expression to two out of six cardioblasts in each hemisegment. Overexpression of ladybird causes a hyperplasia of heart precursors and alters the identity of even-skipped-positive pericardial cells. Loss of ladybird function leads to the opposite transformation, suggesting that ladybird participates in the determination of heart lineages and is required to specify the identities of subpopulations of heart cells. We find that both early Wingless signaling and ladybird-dependent late Wingless signaling are required for proper heart formation. Thus, we propose that ladybird plays a dual role in cardiogenesis: (i) during the early phase, it is involved in specification of a segmental subset of heart precursors as a component of the cardiogenic tinman-cascade and (ii) during the late phase, it is needed for maintaining wingless activity and thereby sustaining the heart pattern process. These events result in a diversification of heart cell identities within each segment.

[PMID: 34411410]
Ladybird homeobox (Lbx) transcription factors have crucial functions in muscle and nervous system development in many animals. Amniotes have two Lbx genes, but only Lbx1 is expressed in spinal cord. In contrast, teleosts have three lbx genes and we show here that zebrafish lbx1a, lbx1b, and lbx2 are expressed by distinct spinal cell types, and that lbx1a is expressed in dI4, dI5, and dI6 interneurons, as in amniotes. Our data examining lbx expression in Scyliorhinus canicula and Xenopus tropicalis suggest that the spinal interneuron expression of zebrafish lbx1a is ancestral, whereas lbx1b has acquired a new expression pattern in spinal cord progenitor cells. lbx2 spinal expression was probably acquired in the ray-finned lineage, as this gene is not expressed in the spinal cords of either amniotes or S. canicula. We also show that the spinal function of zebrafish lbx1a is conserved with mouse Lbx1. In zebrafish lbx1a mutants, there is a reduction in the number of inhibitory spinal interneurons and an increase in the number of excitatory spinal interneurons, similar to mouse Lbx1 mutants. Interestingly, the number of inhibitory spinal interneurons is also reduced in lbx1b mutants, although in this case the number of excitatory interneurons is not increased. lbx1a;lbx1b double mutants have a similar spinal interneuron phenotype to lbx1a single mutants. Taken together these data suggest that lbx1b and lbx1a may be required in succession for correct specification of dI4 and dI6 spinal interneurons, although only lbx1a is required for suppression of excitatory fates in these cells.

[PMID: 9716535]
In the mesoderm of Drosophila embryos, a defined number of cells segregate as progenitors of individual body wall muscles. Progenitors and their progeny founder cells display lineage-specific expression of transcription factors but the mechanisms that regulate their unique identities are poorly understood. Here we show that the homeobox genes ladybird early and ladybird late are expressed in only one muscle progenitor and its progeny: the segmental border muscle founder cell and two precursors of adult muscles. The segregation of the ladybird-positive progenitor requires coordinate action of neurogenic genes and an interplay of inductive Hedgehog and Wingless signals from the overlying ectoderm. Unlike so far described progenitors but similar to the neuroblasts, the ladybird-positive progenitor undergoes morphologically asymmetric division. We demonstrate that the ectopic ladybird expression is sufficient to change the identity of a subset of progenitor/founder cells and to generate an altered pattern of muscle precursors. When ectopically expressed, ladybird transforms the identity of neighbouring, Krüppel-positive progenitors leading to the formation of giant segmental border muscles and supernumerary precursors of lateral adult muscles. In embryos lacking ladybird gene function, specification of two ladybird-expressing myoblast lineages is affected. The segmental border muscles do not form or have abnormal shapes and insertion sites while the number of lateral precursors of adult muscles is dramatically reduced. Altogether our results provide new insights into the genetic control of diversification of muscle precursors and indicate a further similarity between the myogenic and neurogenic pathways.

[PMID: 24721834]
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a common rotational deformity of the spine that presents in children worldwide, yet its etiology is poorly understood. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a few candidate risk loci. One locus near the chromosome 10q24.31 LBX1 gene (OMIM #604255) was originally identified by a GWAS of Japanese subjects and replicated in additional Asian populations. To extend this result, and to create larger AIS cohorts for the purpose of large-scale meta-analyses in multiple ethnicities, we formed a collaborative group called the International Consortium for Scoliosis Genetics (ICSG). Here, we report the first ICSG study, a meta-analysis of the LBX1 locus in six Asian and three non-Asian cohorts. We find significant evidence for association of this locus with AIS susceptibility in all nine cohorts. Results for seven cohorts containing both genders yielded P=1.22×10-43 for rs11190870, and P=2.94×10-48 for females in all nine cohorts. Comparing the regional haplotype structures for three populations, we refined the boundaries of association to a ∼25 kb block encompassing the LBX1 gene. The LBX1 protein, a homeobox transcription factor that is orthologous to the Drosophila ladybird late gene, is involved in proper migration of muscle precursor cells, specification of cardiac neural crest cells, and neuronal determination in developing neural tubes. Our results firmly establish the LBX1 region as the first major susceptibility locus for AIS in Asian and non-Hispanic white groups, and provide a platform for larger studies in additional ancestral groups.

[PMID: 15136145]
In Drosophila, neurons and glial cells are produced by neural precursor cells called neuroblasts (NBs), which can be individually identified. Each NB generates a characteristic cell lineage specified by a precise spatiotemporal control of gene expression within the NB and its progeny. Here we show that the homeobox genes ladybird early and ladybird late are expressed in subsets of cells deriving from neuroblasts NB 5-3 and NB 5-6 and are essential for their correct development. Our analysis revealed that ladybird in Drosophila, like their vertebrate orthologous Lbx1 genes, play an important role in cell fate specification processes. Among those cells that express ladybird are NB 5-6-derived glial cells. In ladybird loss-of-function mutants, the NB 5-6-derived exit glial cells are absent while overexpression of these genes leads to supernumerary glial cells of this type. Furthermore, aberrant glial cell positioning and aberrant spacing of axonal fascicles in the nerve roots observed in embryos with altered ladybird function suggest that the ladybird genes might also control directed cell movements and cell-cell interactions within the developing Drosophila ventral nerve cord.

[PMID: 16378763]
The Drosophila melanogaster genes, ladybird early (lbe) and ladybird late (lbl), encode transcriptional regulators, which play an important role in neurogenesis, myogenesis and cardiogenesis. Here, we report an isolation of a novel ladybird family homeobox gene (lbx3) and its expression during chick development. The open reading frame of lbx3 encodes a predicted protein of 213 amino acids including a homeodomain, a PST motif and a nuclear localization signal. The homeodomain of lbx3 protein has 80% identities with the chick and mouse lbx1 homeodomains, and 75% identity with the mouse lbx2 homeodomain. Both lbx1 and lbx3 are expressed in prospective hypaxial myoblasts at cervical and limb level. In addition, lbx3 transcripts are detected in the medial dermomyotomal lips of somites of all axial levels at stage 23, but not detected in the neural tube.

[PMID: 22077099]
Ladybird (Lbx) homeodomain transcription factors function in neural and muscle development--roles conserved from Drosophila to vertebrates. Lbx expression in mice specifies neural cell types, including dorsally located interneurons and association neurons, within the neural tube. Little, however, is known about the regulation of vertebrate lbx family genes. Here we describe the expression pattern of three zebrafish ladybird genes via mRNA in situ hybridization. Zebrafish lbx genes are expressed in distinct but overlapping regions within the developing neural tube, with strong expression within the hindbrain and spinal cord. The Hox family of transcription factors, in cooperation with cofactors such as Pbx and Meis, regulate hindbrain segmentation during embryogenesis. We have identified a novel regulatory interaction in which lbx1 genes are strongly downregulated in Pbx-depleted embryos. Further, we have produced a transgenic zebrafish line expressing dTomato and EGFP under the control of an lbx1b enhancer--a useful tool to acertain neuron location, migration, and morphology. Using this transgenic strain, we have identified a minimal neural lbx1b enhancer that contains key regulatory elements for expression of this transcription factor.

[PMID: 33786818]
The dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN) is a mammalian-specific nucleus of the auditory system. Anatomically, it is classified as a cerebellum-like structure. These structures are proposed to share genetic programs with the cerebellum. Previous analyses demonstrated that inhibitory serial sister cell types (SCTs) of the DCN and cerebellum are derived from the pancreatic transcription factor 1a (Ptf1a) lineage. Postmitotic neurons of the Ptf1a lineage often express the transcription factor Ladybird homeobox protein homolog 1 (Lbx1) which is involved in neuronal cell fate determination. Lbx1 is therefore an attractive candidate for a further component of the genetic program shared between the DCN and cerebellum. Here, we used cell-type specific marker analysis in combination with an Lbx1 reporter mouse line to analyze in both tissues which cell types of the Ptf1a lineage express Lbx1. In the DCN, stellate cells and Purkinje-like cartwheel cells were part of the Lbx1 lineage and Golgi cells were not, as determined by cell counts. In contrast, in the cerebellum, stellate cells and Golgi cells were part of the Lbx1 lineage and Purkinje cells were not. Hence, two out of three phenotypically similar cell types differed with respect to their Lbx1 expression. Our study demonstrates that Lbx1 is differentially recruited to the developmental genetic program of inhibitory neurons both within a given tissue and between the DCN and cerebellum. The differential expression of Lbx1 within the DCN and the cerebellum might contribute to the genetic individuation of the inhibitory SCTs to adapt to circuit specific tasks.

[PMID: 25035933]
Homeobox genes are an evolutionarily conserved class of transcription factors that are critical for development of many organ systems, including the brain and eye. During retinogenesis, homeodomain-containing transcription factors, which are encoded by homeobox genes, play essential roles in the regionalization and patterning of the optic neuroepithelium, specification of retinal progenitors and differentiation of all seven of the retinal cell classes that derive from a common progenitor. Homeodomain transcription factors control retinal cell fate by regulating the expression of target genes required for retinal progenitor cell fate decisions and for terminal differentiation of specific retinal cell types. The essential role of homeobox genes during retinal development is demonstrated by the number of human eye diseases, including colobomas and anophthalmia, which are attributed to homeobox gene mutations. In the following review, we highlight the role of homeodomain transcription factors during retinogenesis and regulation of their gene targets. Understanding the complexities of vertebrate retina development will enhance our ability to drive differentiation of specific retinal cell types towards novel cell-based replacement therapies for retinal degenerative diseases.

[PMID: 19216761]
Skeletal muscle differentiation requires assembly of contractile proteins into organized myofibrils. The Drosophila ladybird homeobox gene (lad) functions in founder cells of the segmental border muscle to promote myoblast fusion and muscle shaping. Tetrapods have two homologous genes (Lbx). Lbx1 functions in migration and/or proliferation of hypaxial myoblasts, whereas the function of Lbx2 is poorly understood. To elucidate the role of Lbx in vertebrate myogenesis, we examined Lbx function in zebrafish. Zebrafish lbx2 transcripts appear in newly formed paraxial mesoderm and become restricted to adaxial cells, precursors of slow muscle. Slow muscles lose lbx2 expression as they differentiate, while a subset of differentiating fast muscle cells transiently expresses lbx2. Fin and hyoid muscle express lbx2 later. In contrast, lbx1b expression first appears lateral to the somites at late segmentation stages and is later restricted to fin muscle. Morpholino knockdown of Lbx1b and Lbx2 suppresses hypaxial muscle development. Moreover, knockdown of Lbx2 results in malformation of muscle fibers and reduced fusion of fast precursors, although no obvious effects on induction or specification are observed. Expression of myofilament genes, including actin and myosin, requires the engrailed repressor domain of Lbx2. Our results elucidate a new function of Lbx2 as a regulator of myofibril formation.