[PMID: 7697953]
Drugs that act on the serotoninergic system have been shown to influence the pupil size. However, the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptor type or subtype that affects pupil diameter has not been defined in humans. With a placebo-controlled, double-blind randomized design, we investigated in healthy volunteers the effect on pupil size of buspirone and sumatriptan, which mainly act on 5-HT1A- and the 5-HT1-like receptors, respectively. The pupil area was measured by means of a videopupillometer before and after a single oral administration of placebo or of three different doses of active drugs. Heart rate and arterial blood pressure were recorded after pupil area measurement. Buspirone (5, 10, and 20 mg) caused a dose-dependent miosis. Sumatriptan (50, 100, and 200 mg) did not affect the pupil size. Twenty milligrams of buspirone reduced the mydriasis induced by pretreatment with homatropine eyedrops. A 20 mg dose of buspirone reduced blood pressure without change in heart rate, whereas buspirone, at doses lower than 20 mg, and sumatriptan did not affect heart rate and blood pressure. This study suggests that buspirone, but not sumatriptan, the selective agonist of 5-HT1-like receptors, causes miosis in humans by activation of 5-HT1A receptors, possibly located in the central nervous system where they inhibit iris sympathetic pathways. Measurement of pupil size seems to provide a valuable and sensitive index of 5-HT1A receptor function in humans.

[PMID: 3423165]
This study tested the hypothesis that the Type A behavior pattern and its components are associated with increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system. To do this, we employed two new markers of sympathetic tone--pupil size and platelet catecholamine content. Thirty-three healthy males were blindly rated for Type A behavior and verbal stylistic components by Structured Interview. Adrenergic tone to the pupils was assessed from pupil diameter recorded by infrared television pupillometry, and pupil alpha-adrenergic sensitivity was estimated from mydriatic response to ophthalmic phenylephrine. Platelet epinephrine and norepinephrine contents were assayed because these levels are associated with chronic, long-term circulating catecholamine levels. The results showed Type As had consistently larger pupil diameters than Type Bs (p = 0.03, 0.03, and 0.01). There was no difference in pupillary response to phenylephrine instillation between groups. Platelet epinephrine content was greater in Type A subjects (chi 2 = 4.25, p less than 0.04, t = 1.6, p = 0.06). Only the component of explosiveness was modestly associated with resting pupil size, and no components significantly predicted platelet catecholamines. We conclude that the results of these two new markers of autonomic activity, namely, pupil size and platelet epinephrine, suggest that Type A behavior is characterized by increased sympathetic nervous system tone although we cannot rule out the possibility of decreased activity of the parasympathetic nervous system.

[PMID: 6881176]
To assess the relationship between aging and autonomic nervous system function, cardiovascular and pupillary autonomic nervous system reflexes were measured in subgroups of 103 normal male subjects ranging in age from 19 to 82 years (mean age = 39 years). Both the plasma norepinephrine level, a measure of cardiovascular sympathetic nervous system activity, and the mean arterial blood pressure increased with age (r = 0.68 and 0.67, respectively, both p less than 0.001). In contrast, the plasma epinephrine level, a measure of adrenomedullary sympathetic nervous system activity, was unrelated to age (r = 0.08, p = NS). Respiratory variation of heart rate during beta-adrenergic blockade, an index of cardiac parasympathetic nervous system activity, was reduced in older subjects (r = -0.54, p less than 0.001). Thus, there was evidence of an age-related increase of cardiovascular sympathetic nervous system activity and a reduction of cardiac parasympathetic nervous system activity. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that there is sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system compensation of cardiovascular function in response to an age-related decrease in baroreceptor sensitivity. However, dark-adapted pupil size during parasympathetic nervous system blockade, an index of iris sympathetic nervous system activity, declined with age (r = -0.81, p less than 0.001). The latency time for the pupillary response to a light stimulus, an index of iris parasympathetic nervous system activity, was prolonged in older subjects (r = 0.58, p less than 0.001). Thus, both sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous system inputs to the iris were diminished in older subjects, findings consistent with the generalized decrease of peripheral somatic nerve function that has been reported with aging in man. It is concluded that autonomic nervous system function also declines with aging, but that other age-related changes such as a decline of baroreceptor sensitivity may lead to compensatory autonomic nervous system response, which could mask underlying functional defects.

[PMID: 21601076]
Pupil size is determined by the interaction of the parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic system conducts the light reaction with its major center in the dorsal midbrain. The sympathetic nervous system acts either directly on the dilator muscle (peripherally) or centrally by inhibiting the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. Psychosensory reactions are transmitted via the sympathetic system. The afferent input of the light reflex system in humans is characteristically wired, allowing a detailed analysis of a lesion of the afferent input. Even in humans a subgroup of ganglion cells containing melansopsin plays an important role as a light sensor for the pupillary system. To diagnose normal pupillary function, pupils need to be isocoric and react bilaterally equally to light. Anisocoria indicates a problem of the efferent pupillary pathway. Pupillary disorders may involve the afferent pathways (relative afferent pupillary defect) or the efferent pathways. Physiological anisocoria is a harmless condition that has to be distinguished from Horner's syndrome. In this case pharmacological testing with cocaine eye-drops is helpful. Disorders of the parasympathetic system will impair the light response. They include dorsal midbrain syndrome, third-nerve palsy, and tonic pupil. Tonic pupils are mainly idiopathic and do not need imaging. Disorders of the iris, including application of cholinergic agents, need also to be considered in impaired pupillary light reaction.

[PMID: 14639139]
The mechanism of reflex pupillary dilation was investigated in eight patients who were declared brain dead after rupture of intracranial vascular malformations and in eight awake volunteers. The authors hypothesized that the reflex was primarily a spinal sympathetic reflex that would be blocked by topical application of the alpha1-adrenergic blocking agent dapiprazole and that it would be present in organ donors with intact spinal reflexes and no history of hypoxia. In volunteers, pupil size was measured with an infrared pupillometer while brief painful electric stimuli were delivered to the finger. Pain was assessed with a visual analog scale and adjusted with each volunteer to equal 3 on a visual analog scale of 0-10. Subjects were studied before and after topical application of the alpha1-adrenergic antagonist dapiprazole. In organ donors, the authors measured pupil size after high-intensity tetanic electric stimulation and in dapiprazole-blocked and -unblocked pupils after surgically induced nociception. In volunteers, the pupil dilated 0.43 +/- 0.23 mm after nociceptive stimuli. Dapiprazole eyedrops blocked this dilation, confirming that the reflex in awake humans is primarily a sympathetic reflex. Baseline diameters were 5.7 +/- 0.5 mm before dapiprazole and 4.1 +/- 0.9 mm after dapiprazole. In organ donors, a tetanic electric current failed to dilate the pupil, whereas the skin incision dilated the pupil 0.4 +/- 0.4 mm, but this dilation was not blocked by dapiprazole. The authors conclude that pupillary reflex dilation, as it is clinically performed in awake subjects by stimulating somatic nociceptors, is a sympathetic reflex. Because it is not present in organ donors, the neural pathway must require a supraspinal component for completion.

[PMID: 9357887]
Estimation of the mu-agonist opioid effect in anesthetized and paralyzed patients is often imprecise and can be obscured by concomitant administration of drugs that affect the sympathetic nervous system, such as beta-adrenergic blocking agents. As an alternative to hemodynamic measures of opioid effect, the authors tested the hypothesis that the pupillary light reflex or pupillary reflex dilation correlated with alfentanil concentrations during isoflurane anesthesia. Six volunteers were anesthetized on 4 days with 0.8% isoflurane. Alfentanil was administered intravenously to target total plasma concentrations of 0, 25, 50, and 100 ng/ml. A 5-s tetanic electrical stimulus was applied to the skin. Pupil size and the pupillary light reflex were recorded before and after alfentanil administration, and before and for 8 min after the stimulus. Alfentanil exponentially impaired reflex pupillary dilation, decreasing the maximum response amplitude from 5 mm at 0 ng/ml, to 2.3 mm at 25 ng/ml, to 1.0 mm at 50 ng/ml, and finally to 0.2 mm at 100 ng/ml. In contrast, only the highest concentration of alfentanil depressed the dilation of the pupil in the first 2 s after the stimulus. Alfentanil administration had no effect on the pupillary light reflex. Dilation of the pupil in response to a noxious stimulus is a measure of opioid effect in isoflurane-anesthetized volunteers. In contrast, the pupillary light reflex is unaffected by alfentanil during isoflurane anesthesia. These data suggest that stimulus-induced pupillary dilation may be used to evaluate the analgesic component of a combined volatile and opioid anesthetic.

[PMID: 11306012]
Vaginocervical mechanostimulation (VS) was shown previously to release oxytocin within the spinal cord and to induce pupillary dilatation. In the present study, (a) injection of oxytocin directly to the spinal cord (10 or 25 microg intrathecally [i.t.] in 5 microl saline) induced pupillary dilatation when observed 1 min after the end of the injection and (b) injection of an oxytocin receptor antagonist ([d(CH2)5-Tyr (Me)2-Orn8]-Vasotocin [OTA]; 25 microg i.t. in 5 microl saline) significantly attenuated the pupillary dilatation response to VS, when VS was applied 3 min after the end of the injection. Since activation of autonomic sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the thoracic spinal cord produces pupillary dilatation, we propose that oxytocin is a central nervous system neurotransmitter that stimulates these neurons directly, or perhaps indirectly, and thus is a mediator of VS-produced pupillary dilatation.

[PMID: 7188336]
The use of quantitative measurements of pupil size as an index of autonomic nervous system (ANS) activity in normal and diabetic subjects is described. The dual innervation of the iris by the parasympathetic (PNS) and sympathetic (SNS) nervous system was demonstrated by measurement of steady-state pupil size before and after changes in ANS activity by pharmacologic agents. In the presence of total PNS blockade, dark-adapted pupil size was a reliable index of SNS activity to the iris. Latency time (time from light stimulation to initial pupil response) appeared to be a good index of PNS activity. However, increased SNS activity may also prolong the latency time. Thus, consideration of SNS activity is necessary when evaluating the latency time. In 25 diabetic subjects, there was evidence of impaired SNS activity (smaller dark-adapted pupil size during total PNS blockade) and PNS activity (prolonged latency time). In a subgroup of diabetic subjects without clinical manifestations of autonomic neuropathy and normal subjects, both dark-adapted pupil size during PNS blockade (SNS index) and latency time (PNS index) were abnormal. The coefficient of variation for these two indices was less than 5% in glycemic stable diabetic subjects. Thus, these two indices are reliable and sensitive measures of the SNS and PNS activity to the iris in normal and diabetic subjects.

[PMID: 6413073]
Pupil size was measured using a pupillograph, and an asymmetric responsiveness to tyramine, instilled bilaterally, was observed in asymptomatic cluster headache patients. Relatives of cluster headache patients showed an anisocoric mydriasis to tyramine, too. This asymmetry was caused by a less marked mydriatic response of one side which, in the cluster headache sufferers, corresponds to the symptomatic side. After three months of treatment with lithium carbonate (900 mg/die), a bilateral decrease of pupil size was noted, possibly due to a reduced sympathergic tone. After six months of continued treatment an unknown mechanism, likely adaptive in nature, attenuated the effect of lithium on pupil size. Lithium also induced a symmetric response to tyramine by increasing tyramine mydriasis on the symptomatic pupil while reducing it on the asymptomatic pupil. It is postulated that lithium improves cluster headache by correcting abnormal bilateral asymmetries in central neuronal systems which regulate autonomic function and pain sensitivity of the structures involved in the cluster attack.

[PMID: 8873544]
Pupil size is determined by an interaction between the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system. Noxious stimulation dilates the pupil in both unanesthetized and anesthetized humans. In the absence of anesthesia, dilation is primarily mediated by the sympathetic nervous system. In contrast, pupillary dilation in cats given barbiturate or cloralose anesthesia is mediated solely by inhibition of the midbrain parasympathetic nucleus. The mechanism by which noxious stimuli dilate pupils during anesthesia in humans remains unknown. Accordingly, the authors tested the hypothesis that the pupillary dilation in response to noxious stimulation during desflurane anesthesia is primarily a parasympathetic reflex. In six volunteers, the alpha-I adrenergic receptors of the iris musculature were blocked by unilateral administration of topical dapiprazole; six other volunteers were given unilateral topical tropicamide to block the muscarinic receptors in the iris. Desflurane anesthesia was subsequently induced in all volunteers. Sympathetic nervous system activation, with reflex dilation of the pupil, was produced by noxious electrical stimulation during 4% and 8% end-tidal desflurane, and by a rapid 4%-to-8% step-up in the desflurane concentration. Pupil diameter and the change in pupil size induced by a light stimulus (light reflex amplitude) were measured with infrared pupillometry. Dapiprazole drops produced a Horner's miosis, but pupils were equally small after induction of anesthesia. Pupillary dilation after noxious stimulation and desflurane step-up was identical in the unblocked and dapiprazole-blocked pupils. After tropicamide administration, the pupil was dilated and the light reflex was completely inhibited. Noxious stimulation nonetheless produced a slight additional dilation. During desflurane anesthesia, pupillary dilation in response to noxious stimulation or desflurane step-up is not mediated by the sympathetic nervous system (as it is in unanesthetized persons). Although inhibition of the pupillo-constrictor nucleus may be the cause of this dilation, the mechanism remains unknown.

[PMID: 3604881]
Psychosomatic elements, behavior, and sympathetic overactivity are presumed to underlie many cardiovascular diseases; the most investigated conditions are borderline hypertension and type A/B behavior. Many patients with borderline hypertension show signs of hyperkinetic circulation, that is, elevated heart rate and cardiac index. This elevation is neurogenic, since it can be abolished with a combination of beta-adrenergic and parasympathetic blockade. Response to such stepwise blockade shows a larger beta-adrenergic and a lower parasympathetic change in cardiac tone, characteristic of the functional organization of the medullary integrative centers of cardiovascular control. The most likely cause for this abnormal integration is psychosomatic. These patients may be expected to respond to treatment with behavioral and/or cardioselective beta-adrenergic blocking agents. There is little doubt that type A behavior is a predictor of coronary heart disease. The description of the pathophysiology of these transient but characteristically excessive cardiovascular episodes is difficult, however. Type A individuals do not always hyperreact in the same way; the response can be limited to heart rate, blood pressure, or occasionally exaggerated urinary or plasma catecholamine responses. In our laboratory we concentrated on steady markers of type A behavior. Type A subjects had reproducibly larger pupil size--indicative of increased sympathetic arousal--higher heart rate and diastolic blood pressure, and significantly elevated platelet epinephrine values when challenged by a mental task. Treatment with behavioral methods, beta-blocking agents, or both might be useful for prevention of coronary heart disease in type A individuals.

[PMID: 9247742]
The vasoconstrictor supplies to different tissues show distinct patterns of ongoing and reflex activity, indicating that they are driven by distinct central pathways. Vasomotor tone depends heavily on connections from the brainstem, so class-specific vasomotor drives have been sought amongst the sympathetic premotor neurons which provide those connections. Premotor neurons of the rostral ventrolateral medulla (subretrofacial nucleus) provide most descending vasomotor drive. Together, they drive the sympathetic supplies to heart, blood vessels and adrenal, but not 'non-cardiovascular' sympathetic responses (sweating, pupil dilatation, piloerection, etc.). Individually, they provide preferential or selective drives to particular classes of 'cardiovascular' sympathetic outflow. Subretrofacial neurons are arranged topographically, forming a neural map of the functional class (target tissue), not the body region, of the driven outflows. It is still unknown whether other premotor cell groups are organised this way. Nor are the premotor pathways to 'non-cardiovascular' sympathetic nerves yet well-defined.

[PMID: 6499637]
Because onset of autonomic neural dysfunction in the diabetic syndrome has not been well established, sensitive and quantitative measures of autonomic nervous system (ANS) function were made in 19 non-insulin-dependent (NIDD) and 14 insulin-dependent (IDD) recent-onset diabetic subjects. The known duration of diabetes mellitus in the NIDD subjects was less than or equal to 12 mo. The duration in the IDD subjects was less than or equal to 24 mo. RR-variation during beta adrenergic blockade (an index of an ANS reflex involving the cardiac parasympathetic nervous system [PNS] pathway) was smaller than that of control subjects in both NIDD (P less than 0.001) and IDD subjects (P less than 0.01). This PNS abnormality was not likely to be due to volume depletion since acute volume depletion induced by furosemide in six normal subjects (1608 +/- 105 ml, mean +/- SEM) did not change RR-variation. Dark-adapted pupil size after topical PNS blockade (an index of iris sympathetic nervous system [SNS] activity) was also smaller in both groups of diabetic subjects (NIDD, P less than 0.01; IDD, P less than 0.05). Pupillary latency time (an index of an ANS reflex involving iris PNS pathway) was prolonged in the NIDD subjects (P less than 0.005) but was not significantly altered in the IDD subjects. Thus, it would appear that the ANS is impaired soon after the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. We hypothesize that early impairment of the ANS is common in IDD and NIDD subjects. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that abnormal carbohydrate metabolism is an important factor in the etiology of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.

[PMID: 1619750]
Pupil is richly innervated by autonomic nerves. Therefore, its size or movement well reflects the autonomic nervous function. By analyzing dynamics of pupil movement for light stimulus followed by infrared video-pupillography, the abnormality of autonomic nervous system can be expressed in a quantitative manner. Clinical applications of pupillography and pharmacological examination to Horner syndrome, Adie syndrome, diabetes mellitus, pupillary involvement of Behçet disease, pupil of brain death and patients with chemical sensitivity have been described. Segmental spasm of iris in Horner and Aide syndrome, especially, nasal side of iridoplegia was seen in early stage of Aide syndrome from pupillary dynamics to light stimulus. An involvement of sympathetic nerve subserving iris dilator muscle was confirmed from pupillography, drug reaction to topically applied l-epinephrine in the diabetics. An involvement of cholinergic nerve which subserve the iris sphincter muscle was seen in Behçet disease when there was no manifest eye involvement. Mild mydriasis in brain death patients was seen under denervation of central nervous system. Dysfunction of sympathetic nerve from pupillary light reflex in chemically sensitive patients for cholinated hydrocarbon pesticides.