[PMID: 24697862]
The annular tendon is commonly named 'annulus of Zinn', from the German anatomist and botanist Johann Gottfried Zinn (1727-1759) who described this structure in his Descriptio anatomica oculi humani (Anatomical Description of the Human Eye, 1755). This structure, however, had been previously discovered not by Zinn, but by Antonio Maria Valsalva (1666-1723) some decades before the publication of Zinn, in his Dissertatio anatomica prima and Dissertatio anatomica altera (First and Second Anatomical Dissertations), inside Valsalva's Opera omnia published in 1740. We advance that this structure could be re-named such as 'annulus of Valsalva-Zinn' because Valsalva, even making a mistake in its functional interpretation, first described this anatomical structure. Likewise, Valsalva, with his discovery, advanced a revolutionary idea for that time on the usefulness of anatomy for clinic and pathology.

[PMID: 17080461]
The microanatomy of the superior orbital fissure (SOF) was studied in 96 sides of cadaver specimens. The SOF is a narrow bony cleft that lies at the apex of the orbit between the greater and lesser wings of the sphenoid. Through this fissure, many important structures enter the orbit from the middle cranial fossa including the third, fourth, sixth cranial nerves, and the ophthalmic branch of the fifth nerve. In addition, the superior opthalmamic vein exits the orbit to drain into the cavernous sinus via the SOF. The fissure can be divided into three anatomical regions by the annulus of Zinn (common annular tendon): the lateral, central, and inferior regions. The lateral wall of the SOF can also be divided between the upper and lower segments, and the angle between them was measured to be 144.27 degrees +/- 20.03 degrees . Defining these regions is useful in describing the course and placement of the nerves and vasculature in the SOF. Managing lesions at the orbital apex requires an extensive knowledge of the cranial base and the intracranial and extracranial relationships of the anatomical structures coursing through the SOF. The goal of this study was to describe the microanatomy of the SOF region in detail and to provide a reference for surgical procedures involving the orbital apex.

[PMID: 9783284]
Tumors of the orbital apex are difficult to approach through a standard lateral orbitotomy exposure. The transcranial approach has been described, but it requires an open craniotomy as well as dissection through the annulus of Zinn in its tight superior segment to reach intraconal and inferior lateral tumors. It is well recognized that the transcranial approach is optimal only for tumors of the superomedial orbital apex. Our study demonstrates that by enlarging the bony incision of a classic lateral orbitotomy to include a generous marginotomy and removing the deep sphenoid wing up to the superior orbital fissure, good exposure of the lateral orbital apex can be obtained. Tumors of the apex, including those that extend slightly into the cavernous sinus, can be removed from the cranial nerves and extraocular muscle origins in en face fashion, providing optimal ability to identify the delicate neurovascular structures of the orbital apex and avoid damage to them. The operating microscope is extremely useful for bony and soft tissue dissection. We report four benign tumors of the orbital apex removed using this approach. Two tumors encroached slightly into the cavernous sinus. Three of four patients were told that they had inoperable tumors. By use of the deep orbital apex approach described, all four tumors were successfully exposed and removed. Visual and motor function was unchanged or improved in all four patients, with the exception of one tumor that incorporated the inferior division of the third cranial nerve; in that patient, the transected nerve was anastomosed microscopically, and partial return of function was noted. The transorbital ophthalmic approach to tumors of the inferolateral orbital apex has significant potential advantages in comparison with a frontal craniotomy approach.

[PMID: 22336122]
Explored the causation of a case of incomitant vertical strabismus accompanied with elevation deficit and globe retraction by surgery. Case report. Orbital imaging study of MRI was used to discover the anatomic feature of extraocular muscle. By released the restrictive structure to treat strabismus. Histopathologic inspection was used to confirm the origin of the abnormal structure. Abnormal extraocular muscle that located within the cone formed by the four recti muscles was the causation of strabismus. It arose at the annulus of Zinn, passing forwards between the inferior rectus muscle and lateral rectus muscle, and insert directly on the sclera. After Released it from eyeball and recession of inferior rectus muscle the strabismus was improved. Elevation deficit was not improved. Histopathologic inspection confirmed that the structure was muscular in origin. The abnormal structure that found by MRI was the cause of elevation deficit and globe retraction. Its histopathologic inspection confirmed the muscular origin. The abnormal structure was an accessory extraocular muscle. For incomitant vertical strabismus accompanied with elevation deficit and globe retraction anomalous orbital structures maybe the causation. Orbital imaging studies should be done to explore the origin of disease.

[PMID: 25744329]
Our aim was to elucidate the etiology of Brown syndrome by evaluating the trochlea position, morphologic characteristics of the extraocular muscles including superior oblique muscle/tendon complex, and the presence of the cranial nerves (CN) III, IV, and VI using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in eight patients with unilateral congenital Brown syndrome and one patient with bilateral congenital Brown syndrome. Nine consecutive patients diagnosed with congenital Brown syndrome had a comprehensive ocular examination and MRI for the CN III, CN VI, and the extraocular muscles. Five of the nine patients underwent additional high resolution MRI for CN IV. The distance from the annulus of Zinn to the trochlea was measured. Normal sized CN III, IV, and VI, as well as all extraocular muscles, could be identified bilaterally in all patients with available MRI. The distance from the annulus of Zinn to the trochlea was the same in both eyes. The findings for our patients, particularly in those who underwent additional high resolution MRI, did not provide evidence of a lack of CN IV as a cause of Brown syndrome.

[PMID: 16917665]
Although resection of the anterior clinoid process (ACP) is valuable in the surgical treatment of aneurysms of the ophthalmic (C6) segment of the internal carotid artery (ICA), quantitative assessment of this adjunct is incomplete. Our morphometric study assesses the effectiveness of the anterior clinoidectomy for exposure of the C6 segment of the ICA. Ten formalin-fixed adult cadaveric heads were dissected bilaterally and pterional craniotomies were performed bilaterally. Measurements before and after resection of the ACP included the length of C6 segment of the ICA on its lateral aspect; C6 segment length on its medial aspect; and medial length of the optic nerve from the optic chiasm to falciform ligament (before ACP resection) then to the annulus of Zinn (after ACP resection). Height and width of the intradural ACP were 8.67 +/- 2.63 and 6.57 +/- 1.68 mm, respectively. After clinoidectomy, mean length of the lateral C6 segment of the ICA increased 60% and mean exposure of the medial C6 segment of the ICA increased 113% (p < 0.001). Exposure of the optic nerve increased 150% (p < 0.001) after clinoidectomy and sectioning of the falciform ligament. No correlations were found between the lengths of the ACP and entire C6 segment, or the ACP size and amount of the C6 segment covered by the clinoid. Exposure of the C6 segment of the ICA is markedly increased by increase of the mobility of the optic nerve with clinoidectomy and section of the falciform ligament.

[PMID: 16955671]
Dissections of the bilateral orbits in a 45-year-old female cadaver, who had no ocular movement disorders in her lifetime, revealed anomalous muscles linking the superior and inferior rectus muscles. The muscles, situated between the optic nerve and the lateral rectus muscle, originated from the annulus of Zinn and branched off two heads; one inserted into the medial inferior side of the superior rectus muscle and the other inserted into the central superior side of the inferior rectus muscle. Each insertion was located on a distal site of the myoneural junction of each rectus muscle. Histological investigations showed that the muscles had a striated muscle structure. No definite nerve insertion was observed in the muscles. Although this type of anomalous muscle has been reported in a few Caucasian cases, the present study is the first report in an Asian person. Anomalous orbital structures, which are a rare cause of strabismus, are important in the differential diagnosis of intra-orbital space-occupying lesions, rather than the differential diagnosis of strabismus.

[PMID: 22581081]
To describe a combined transcranial-orbital approach for en bloc resection of optic nerve gliomas with preservation of the annulus of Zinn that minimizes recurrence and prevents postoperative paralytic ptosis. A retrospective, noncomparative, interventional case series. All patients who underwent optic nerve glioma resections using this technique with the authors between 1994 and 2010. A transcranial-orbital approach is used to resect the intracranial segment of the optic nerve glioma from 2 mm anterior to the chiasm to the posterior extent of annulus of Zinn. The proximal transected edge of the nerve is examined intraoperatively for tumor margin clearance. Through a superior orbitotomy exposure, the entire retrobulbar segment of the tumor is transected from the globe to the annulus of Zinn. A simulation of the procedure in a cadaver and en bloc resection of the orbital apex are performed to demonstrate the subdural plane of dissection within the annulus of Zinn. Postoperative outcome measures include: health of the ipsilateral globe, paralytic ptosis, postoperative complications, and tumor recurrence. Eleven patients underwent resection of optic nerve gliomas using this technique. No patients had tumor recurrence or developed postoperative paralytic ptosis. The combined transcranial-orbital approach with preservation of the annulus of Zinn is a safe and effective way to remove optic nerve gliomas and ensure tumor clearance while avoiding paralytic ptosis.

[PMID: 11601571]
Transient diplopia, blepharoptosis, or both conditions are rare postoperative complications of blepharoplasty performed with the patient under local anesthesia. It has been hypothesized that some cases of postoperative diplopia and blepharoptosis could be attributed to the myotoxic effects of local anesthetics to the extraocular muscles and the levator muscle or to the neurotoxic effects of lidocaine. In 30 cadavers, the superior division of the oculomotor nerve was severed en bloc 1.5 cm anterior to the annulus of Zinn with the levator palpebrae superioris (LPS) and the superior rectus muscles. These muscles were detached from their origins, and their attachments to the scleral and tarsal plates were divided respectively. The specimens were treated in guanidine-hydrochloride and Alizarin Red solution, and were dissected under an operating microscope. The nerve branches of the superior division of the oculomotor nerve innervated the proximal third (type I) in 2 of 30 LPS muscles (6.7%), in 8 of 30 muscles (26.7%) extended to the middle third (type II), and reached the distal third (type III) in 20 of 30 muscles (66.7%). The terminal branches ran through the medial third (type IIIa) in 6 of 20 type III LPS muscles (30%), the central third (type IIIb) in 8 muscles(40%), and the lateral third (type IIIc) in 6 muscles (30%). The oculomotor nerve ends that extend forward to the distal third of the LPS muscle (type III) are exposed and vulnerable to local anesthetics and may be numbed during blepharoplasty. If this is so, postoperative blepharoptosis may be caused by transient paralysis of the LPS muscle, and great care should be taken during the injection of local anesthetics near the LPS.

[PMID: 25650797]
Carcinoid tumors are rare, slow-growing, low-grade neuroendocrine tumors with a propensity for orbital metastatic spread. The typical treatment paradigm for localized orbital disease involves excision, adjuvant radiotherapy, and/or receptor-targeted chemotherapy, followed by delayed evaluation for reconstructive strabismus surgery. We present a 58-year-old female patient with carcinoid tumor metastatic to the right inferior rectus muscle who presented with worsening binocular diplopia. The patient underwent coordinated "tag-team" orbital and strabismus surgeries that included excision of the right inferior rectus muscle to the annulus of Zinn followed immediately by reconstructive strabismus surgery. The patient required 1 additional strabismus surgery 1 year later. Follow up revealed no tumor recurrence at 4 years, and excellent binocular vision with good function. Deep orbital and strabismus surgeries, when performed simultaneously in a "tag-team" approach, may offer superior functional outcomes and improved patient quality of life, with expedited functional recovery. This approach may become a new treatment paradigm for surgical disease processes localized to the extraocular muscles.

[PMID: 21772799]
The sphenoid bony landmarks are important for endoscopic orientation in skull base surgery but show a wide range of variations. We aimed to describe an instructional model for the endoscopic parasellar anatomy in sphenoid sinuses with ill-defined bony landmarks. Five preserved injected cadaveric heads and four sides of dry skulls were studied endoscopically via transethmoid, transsphenoidal approach. The parasellar region was exposed by drilling along the maxillary nerve (V2) canal [the length of the foramen rotundum (FR) between the middle cranial fossa and the pterygopalatine fossa]. This was achieved by drilling in the inferior part of the lateral wall of posterior ethmoids immediately above the sphenopalatine foramen. Cavernous V2 was traced to the paraclival internal carotid artery (ICA). Cavernous sinus (CS) apex was exposed by drilling a triangle bounded by V2 and its canal inferiorly, bone between FR and superior orbital fissure (SOF) anteriorly, and ophthalmic nerve (V1) superiorly. Drilling was continued toward the annulus of Zinn (AZ) and optic nerve superiorly and over the intracavernous ICA posteriorly. Endoscopic measurements between V2, SOF, AZ, and opticocarotid recess were obtained. Endoscopic systematic orientation of parasellar anatomy is presented that can be helpful for approaching sphenoid sinus with ill-defined bony landmarks.

[PMID: 8604741]
To report an elevation deficit, which was caused by an accessory extraocular muscle, in a 6-year-old boy. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging were used to confirm an accessory, fusiform, well-defined, solid structure in the retrobulbar space. A supernumerary intraconal muscle was detected between the annulus of Zinn and the posterior part of the left globe. This rare anomaly may represent an atavistic retractor bulbi muscle.

[PMID: 17667093]
To simulate a transphenoidal medial optic canal decompression and determine the anatomic effect on the optic nerve. A medial optic canal decompression was performed on 5 cadaveric optic canals within 12 hours of death. Two canals were decompressed under direct visualization and 3 were decompressed by a transphenoidal endoscopic approach. The optic canal was subsequently removed en bloc, beginning at the annulus of Zinn and extending to the optic chiasm. Each specimen was processed and examined grossly. Serial coronal step sections of the entire length of the intracanalicular optic nerve were assessed histologically. Microscopic examination of the intracanalicular portion of optic nerve revealed incision in an extraocular muscle at the annulus, incomplete bone removal, fraying of the dural sheath, incomplete dural/arachnoid release, and incision in the pia and optic nerve. Transphenoidal medial wall decompression of the optic nerve canal with dural sheath opening may induce physical damage to the nerve. Any hypothetical value in dural-arachnoid sheath opening must be weighed against the potential for harm to the optic nerve caused by the surgical intervention.

[PMID: 8827557]
Conventional strabismus surgery employs a conjunctival incision to gain access to Tenon's space where a wide variety of procedures are routinely performed on the tendon and anterior aspect of the extraocular muscles. Recently, transnasal endoscopic surgical techniques have gained acceptance as effective means of decompressing the medial wall and floor of the orbit in patients with thyroid-related orbitopathy. The orbital surface of the medial rectus and inferior rectus are exposed from the annulus of Zinn to a position close to where the muscles penetrate Tenon's capsule. In theory, this technique also provides the exposure necessary to locate and retrieve a "lost" medial rectus when the usual sub-Tenon's approach fails to recover the muscle. Cadaver studies demonstrate the feasibility of exposure and suture placement in the stump of a lost medial rectus with passage of the suture through Tenon's capsule to transmit the force of the muscle to the globe, provided that the lost muscle is retrieved before severe contracture develops.