[PMID: 16441420]
Endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) of the uterus is a rare uterine malignancy that has not been characterized in detail. To characterize the phenotype of ESS of the uterus, we extracted RNA from ESS and the stroma of normal endometrium using a tissue microdissection system and compared the expression profiles in the two tissues. After suppression subtractive hybridization and differential screening, we detected the metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT-1) gene as one of the major genes upregulated in ESS, and a full-length placental cDNA clone (CS0DI066YJ10) as one of the major genes downregulated. The results were confirmed by in situ hybridization in four resected specimens of ESS and 36 biopsy specimens of normal endometrial tissue. All ESS (4/4) and all cases of endometrial stromal cells in the proliferative phase (13/13) were positive for MALAT-1, but samples of normal stroma in the secretory phase and menopausal state included some that were negative or weakly positive for MALAT-1 (5/13 and 3/10, respectively). In contrast, all ESS and 12 of 13 cases of stromal cells in the proliferative phase were negative for the full-length placental cDNA clone but 10 of 13 cases of endometrial stromal cells in the secretory phase were positive for transcripts of the gene (P < 0.05). These results indicated that endometrial stromal cells have different phenotypic characteristics between proliferative and secretory phases and the tumor cells of ESS have the phenotypic character of endometrial stromal cells in the proliferative phase.

[PMID: 21266177]
RNA processing is vital for the high fidelity and diversity of eukaryotic transcriptomes and the encoded proteomes. However, control of RNA processing is not fully established. Σ RNA is a class of conserved large non-coding RNAs (murine Hepcarcin; human MALAT-1) up-regulated in carcinomas. Using antisense technology, we identified that RNA post-transcriptional modification is the most significant global function of Σ RNA. Specifically, processing of the pre-mRNAs of genes including Tissue Factor and Endoglin was altered by hydrolysis of Σ RNA/MALAT-1. These results support the hypothesis that Σ RNA/MALAT-1 is a regulatory molecule exerting roles in RNA post-transcriptional modification.

[PMID: 22722759]
Recent studies reveal that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to have important regulatory roles in cancer biology, and lncRNA MALAT-1 expression is upregulated in some tumors. However, the contributions of MALAT-1 to bladder cancer metastasis remain largely unknown. In the present study we evaluated MALAT-1 expression in bladder cancer tissues by real-time PCR, and defined its biological functions. We verified that MALAT-1 levels were upregulated in bladder cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues, and MALAT-1 expression was remarkably increased in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when compared to those primary tumors that did not metastasize. SiRNA-mediated MALAT-1 silencing impaired in vitro bladder cancer cell migration. Downregulation of MALAT-1 resulted in a decrease of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-associated ZEB1, ZEB2 and Slug levels, and an increase of E-cadherin levels. We further demonstrated that MALAT-1 promoted EMT by activating Wnt signaling in vitro. These data suggest an important role for MALAT-1 in regulating metastasis of bladder cancer and the potential application of MALAT-1 in bladder cancer therapy.

[PMID: 15552795]
In early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), a substantial proportion of patients can be cured by surgery. Development of distant metastases is the most frequent cause of therapeutic failure. The possibility to accurately predict a patient's risk for developing distant metastasis would help to identify patients that are candidates for further intervention such as conventional adjuvant chemotherapy or experimental drugs. Current molecular biology techniques allow the genome-wide screening for differentially expressed genes; and adequate bioinformatics approaches are developed at a rapid pace to improve prognosis prediction. Genes associated with metastasis do not necessarily play a role in disease pathogenesis but rather reflect the activation of specific signal-transduction pathways that are associated with enhanced migration and invasion capability. In our own work, we have identified several genes (e.g. thymosin beta-4, elF4A1), including a novel non-coding RNA (MALAT-1) to be expressed at significantly higher levels in stage-I and stage-II NSCLC primary tumours that subsequently metastasised. As a consequence, patients with high-level expression of these genes were shown to have significantly worse survival compared to patients with low-level expression of these genes. These data support the hypothesis that gene-expression patterns in primary tumours determine the tumours' likelihood to metastasise. In the near future, this information will be used for tailored therapy approaches for patients with early-stage NSCLC.

[PMID: 24163781]
Although metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript (MALAT)-1 is known to be consistently upregulated in several epithelial malignancies, little is known about its function or regulation. We therefore examined the relationship between MALAT-1 expression and candidate modulators such as DNA tumor virus oncoproteins human papillomavirus (HPV)-16 E6 and E7, BK virus T antigen (BKVTAg), mouse polyoma virus middle T antigen (MPVmTAg) and tumor suppressor genes p53 and pRb. Using suppressive subtractive hybridization (SSH) and real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays, MALAT-1 was shown to be increased in viral oncongene-expressing salivary gland biopsies from humans and mice. The results also indicated that MALAT-1 transcripts and promoter activity were increased in vitro when viral oncongene-expressing plasmids were introduced into different cell types. These same viral oncogenes in addition to increasing MALAT-1 transcription have also been shown to inhibit p53 and/or pRb function. In p53 mutant or inactive cell lines MALAT-1 was also shown to be highly upregulated. We hypothesize that there is a correlation between MALAT-1 over-expression and p53 deregulation. In conclusion, we show that disruption of p53, by both polyoma and papilloma oncoproteins appear to play an important role in the up-regulation of MALAT-1. MALAT-1 might therefore represent a biomarker for p53 deregulation within malignancies.

[PMID: 18006640]
Recent studies with tiling arrays have revealed more genomic transcription than previously anticipated. Whole new groups of non-coding transcripts (NCTs) have been detected. Some of these NCTs, including miRNAs, can regulate gene expression. To date, most known NCTs studied have been relatively short, but several important regulatory NCTs, including XIST, MALAT-1, BC1 and BC200, are considerably larger in length and represent a novel class of long, non-coding RNA species. Whole-genome tiling arrays were utilized to identify novel long NCTs across the entire human genome. Our results have identified a new group of long (>400 nt), abundantly expressed NCTs and have found that a subset of these are also highly evolutionarily conserved. In this report, we have begun to characterize 15 long, conserved NCTs. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was used to analyze their expression in different normal human tissue and also in breast and ovarian cancers. We found altered expression of many of these NCTs in both cancer types. In addition, several of these NCTs have consistent mutations when sequences of normal samples were compared with a panel of cancer-derived cell lines. One NCT was found to be consistently mutated in a panel of endometrial cancers compared with matched normal blood. These NCTs were among the most abundantly expressed transcripts detected. There are probably many long, conserved NCTs, albeit with lower levels of expression. Although the function of these NCTs is currently unknown, our study indicates that they may play an important function in both normal cells and in cancer development.

[PMID: 23726266]
Examining plasma RNA is an emerging non-invasive diagnosis technique. However, whether tumour-derived long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in plasma can be used as a novel approach to detect human prostate cancer (PCa) has not yet been established. The study was divided into three parts: (1) the characteristics of PCa-related lncRNA fragments were systematically studied in the plasma or serum of 25 patients; (2) the source of the circulating lncRNA fragments was explored in vitro and in vivo; and (3) the diagnostic performance of metastasis associated in lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT-1) derived (MD) miniRNA was validated in an independent cohort of 192 patients. The expression levels of lncRNAs were measured by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The MD-miniRNA copies were calculated using a standard curve in an area under the ROC curve (AUC)-receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. Genome-wide profiling revealed that MALAT-1 and prostate cancer gene 3 (PCA3) are overexpressed in PCa tissues. Plasma lncRNAs probably exist in the form of fragments in a stable form. MD-miniRNA enters cell culture medium at measurable levels, and MD-miniRNA derived from human PCa xenografts actually enters the circulation in vivo and can be measured to distinguish xenografted mice from controls. In addition, plasma MD-miniRNA levels are significantly elevated in PCa patients compared to non-PCa patients (p<0.001). At a cut-off of 867.8 MD-miniRNA copies per microlitre of plasma, the sensitivity is 58.6%, 58.6% and 43.5% and the specificity is 84.8%, 84.8% and 81.6% for discriminating PCa from non-PCa, positive biopsy from negative biopsy and positive biopsy from negative biopsy, respectively. We conclude that MD-miniRNA can be used as a novel plasma-based biomarker for PCa detection and can improve diagnostic accuracy by predicting prostate biopsy outcomes. Further large-scale studies are needed to confirm our findings.

[PMID: 16878148]
Tumor markers can facilitate understanding molecular cell biology of neoplasia and provide potential targets for the diagnosis and insight for intervention. We here identify a novel murine gene, hepcarcin (hcn), encoding a 7-kb mRNA-like transcript. The gene appears to be the murine ortholog of the human alpha gene, that is, MALAT-1. The gene and homologs lack credible open reading frames, consistent with a highly conserved large noncoding RNA (ncRNA). In all nodules of procarcinogen-induced murine hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and human HCCs, expression was markedly elevated compared to the uninvolved liver. Quantitative analyses indicated a 6-7-fold increased RNA level in HCCs versus uninvolved liver, advancing this as a molecule of interest. This ncRNA was overexpressed in all five non-hepatic human carcinomas analysed, consistent with a potential marker for neoplastic cells and potential participant in the molecular cell biology of neoplasia.

[PMID: 12970751]
Early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) can be cured by surgical resection, but a substantial fraction of patients ultimately dies due to distant metastasis. In this study, we used subtractive hybridization to identify gene expression differences in stage I NSCLC tumors that either did or did not metastasize in the course of disease. Individual clones (n=225) were sequenced and quantitative RT-PCR verified overexpression in metastasizing samples. Several of the identified genes (eIF4A1, thymosin beta4 and a novel transcript named MALAT-1) were demonstrated to be significantly associated with metastasis in NSCLC patients (n=70). The genes' association with metastasis was stage- and histology specific. The Kaplan-Meier analyses identified MALAT-1 and thymosin beta4 as prognostic parameters for patient survival in stage I NSCLC. The novel MALAT-1 transcript is a noncoding RNA of more than 8000 nt expressed from chromosome 11q13. It is highly expressed in lung, pancreas and other healthy organs as well as in NSCLC. MALAT-1 expressed sequences are conserved across several species indicating its potentially important function. Taken together, these data contribute to the identification of early-stage NSCLC patients that are at high risk to develop metastasis. The identification of MALAT-1 emphasizes the potential role of noncoding RNAs in human cancer.

[PMID: 23845456]
To understand the role of MALAT-1 in prostate cancer we evaluated its expression in prostate cancer tissues and cell lines. We also studied the therapeutic effects of MALAT-1 silencing on castration resistant prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was used to detect MALAT-1 expression in prostate cancer tissues and cell lines. siRNA against MALAT-1 was designed and the silencing effect was examined by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The biological effects of MALAT-1 siRNA on cells were investigated by examining cell proliferation using a cell counting kit and cell colony assays as well as cell migration by in vitro scratch assay, cell invasion by Transwell® invasion assay and cell cycle by flow cytometry. We further investigated the effect of therapeutic siRNA targeting MALAT-1 on castration resistant prostate cancer in vivo. MALAT-1 was up-regulated in human prostate cancer tissues and cell lines. Higher MALAT-1 expression correlated with high Gleason score, prostate specific antigen, tumor stage and castration resistant prostate cancer. MALAT-1 down-regulation by siRNA inhibited prostate cancer cell growth, invasion and migration, and induced castration resistant prostate cancer cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phases. Importantly, intratumor delivery of therapeutic siRNA targeting MALAT-1 elicited delayed tumor growth and reduced metastasis of prostate cancer xenografts in castrated male nude mice, followed by the concomitant prolongation of survival of tumor bearing mice. MALAT-1 may be needed to maintain prostate tumorigenicity and it is involved in prostate cancer progression. Thus, MALAT-1 may serve as a potential therapeutic target for castration resistant prostate cancer.

[PMID: 22858678]
The metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1, MALAT1, is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that has been discovered as a marker for lung cancer metastasis. It is highly abundant, its expression is strongly regulated in many tumor entities including lung adenocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma as well as physiological processes, and it is associated with many RNA binding proteins and highly conserved throughout evolution. The nuclear transcript MALAT-1 has been functionally associated with gene regulation and alternative splicing and its regulation has been shown to impact proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion.   Here, we have developed a human and a mouse knockout system to study the loss-of-function phenotypes of this important ncRNA. In human tumor cells, MALAT1 expression was abrogated using Zinc Finger Nucleases. Unexpectedly, the quantitative loss of MALAT1 did neither affect proliferation nor cell cycle progression nor nuclear architecture in human lung or liver cancer cells. Moreover, genetic loss of Malat1 in a knockout mouse model did not give rise to any obvious phenotype or histological abnormalities in Malat1-null compared with wild-type animals. Thus, loss of the abundant nuclear long ncRNA MALAT1 is compatible with cell viability and normal development.

[PMID: 21678027]
Metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1(MALAT1), a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), is up-regulated in many solid tumors and associated with cancer metastasis and recurrence. However, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains poorly understood. In the present study, we evaluated the expression of MALAT1 by quantitative real-time PCR in 9 liver cancer cell lines and 112 HCC cases including 60 cases who received liver transplantation (LT) with complete follow-up data. Moreover, small interfering RNA (siRNA) was used to inhibit MALAT1 expression to investigate its biological role in tumor progression. We found that MALAT1 was up-regulated in both cell lines and clinical tissue samples. Patients with high expression level of MALAT1 had a significantly increased risk of tumor recurrence after LT, particularly in patients who exceeded the Milan criteria. On multivariate analysis, MALAT1 was an independent prognostic factor for predicting HCC recurrence (hazard ratio, 3.280, P = 0.003).In addition, inhibition of MALAT1 in HepG2 cells could effectively reduce cell viability, motility, invasiveness, and increase the sensitivity to apoptosis. Our data suggest that lncRNA MALAT1 play an important role in tumor progression and could be a novel biomarker for predicting tumor recurrence after LT and serve as a promising therapeutic target.

[PMID: 22088988]
The functions of large noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) have remained elusive in many cases. Metastasis-Associated-in-Lung-Adenocarcinoma-Transcript-1 (MALAT-1) is an ncRNA that is highly expressed in several tumor types. Overexpression and RNA interference (RNAi) approaches were used for the analysis of the biological functions of MALAT-1 RNA. Tumor growth was studied in nude mice. For prognostic analysis, MALAT-1 RNA was detected on paraffin-embedded non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissue probes (n = 352) using in situ hybridization. MALAT-1 was highly expressed in several human NSCLC cell lines. MALAT-1 expression was regulated by an endogenous negative feedback loop. In A549 NSCLCs, RNAi-mediated suppression of MALAT-1 RNA suppressed migration and clonogenic growth. Forced expression of MALAT-1 in NIH 3T3 cells significantly increased migration. Upon injection into nude mice, NSCLC xenografts with decreased MALAT-1 expression were impaired in tumor formation and growth. In situ hybridization on paraffin-embedded lung cancer tissue probes revealed that high MALAT-1 RNA expression in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung was associated with a poor prognosis. On genetic level, MALAT-1 displays the strongest association with genes involved in cancer like cellular growth, movement, proliferation, signaling, and immune regulation. These data indicate that MALAT-1 expression levels are associated with patient survival and identify tumor-promoting functions of MALAT-1.