[PMID: 28144959]
The Notch signaling pathway controls cell fate decision, proliferation, and other biological functions in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Precise regulation of the canonical Notch pathway ensures robustness of the signal throughout development and adult tissue homeostasis. Aberrant Notch signaling results in profound developmental defects and is linked to many human diseases. In this study, we identified the Atrophin family protein RERE (also called Atro2) as a positive regulator of Notch target Hes genes in the developing vertebrate spinal cord. Prior studies have shown that during early embryogenesis in mouse and zebrafish, deficit of RERE causes various patterning defects in multiple organs including the neural tube. Here, we detected the expression of RERE in the developing chick spinal cord, and found that normal RERE activity is needed for proper neural progenitor proliferation and neuronal differentiation possibly by affecting Notch-mediated Hes expression. In mammalian cells, RERE co-immunoprecipitates with CBF1 and Notch intracellular domain (NICD), and is recruited to nuclear foci formed by over-expressed NICD1. RERE is also necessary for NICD to activate the expression of Notch target genes. Our findings suggest that RERE stimulates Notch target gene expression by preventing degradation of NICD protein, thereby facilitating the assembly of a transcriptional activating complex containing NICD, CBF1/RBPjκ in vertebrate, Su(H) in Drosophila melanogaster, Lag1 in C. elegans, and other coactivators.

[PMID: 9152013]
The Hes gene family members are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes. hairy and Enhancer of split function in both segmentation and in the Notch neurogenic pathway during Drosophila embryo development. Previous expression data suggested a conserved role for the Hes genes in the Notch signalling pathway, but not in segmentation. Here, Hes3 expression during mouse embryogenesis is described. During early development of the central nervous system, Hes3 is expressed specifically in the region of the midbrain/hindbrain boundary, and in rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 7. This pattern suggests that Hes3 may have a conserved role as a segmentation gene. Later in development, Hes3 is co-expressed with other neurogenic gene homologues in the developing central nervous system and epithelial cells undergoing mesenchyme induction.

[PMID: 17028039]
HESR1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors regulated by the Notch signaling pathway in vertebrate and Drosophila embryos, and is related to the HES/Hairy/E (sp1) family. HESR1 is a downstream target of Notch in endothelial cells and could be an effector of Notch signaling in these cells. HESR1 is necessary for the induction of a tubular network and for continued maintenance of mature and quiescent blood vessels. To examine the role of HESR1 in retinal neovascularization, we transfected retinal vascular endothelial cells (HRCECs) with the HESR1 gene and studied its effects on the expression of angiogenic factors, on the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells, and on the formation of tube-like structures (TLSs). Overexpression of HESR1 downregulated VEGFR-2 expression, upregulated occludin expression, inhibited the migration and proliferation of HRCECs, and inhibited the formation of TLSs. Thus, HESR1 plays a key role in the finely tuned network of molecules involved in the regulation of retinal vascular homeostasis. HESR1 seems to inhibit the vessel-promoting effects of VEGF, shift endothelial cells from a proliferative state to a quiescent state, and restore normal vessel structures. Expression of the HESR1 gene in retinal vascular endothelial cells may protect retinal blood vessels and may be useful in the treatment of diseases involving damage to the retinal vasculature, including diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and retinal vein occlusion.

[PMID: 17586813]
Hes and Hey genes are the mammalian counterparts of the Hairy and Enhancer-of-split type of genes in Drosophila and they represent the primary targets of the Delta-Notch signaling pathway. Hairy-related factors control multiple steps of embryonic development and misregulation is associated with various defects. Hes and Hey genes (also called Hesr, Chf, Hrt, Herp or gridlock) encode transcriptional regulators of the basic helix-loop-helix class that mainly act as repressors. The molecular details of how Hes and Hey proteins control transcription are still poorly understood, however. Proposed modes of action include direct binding to N- or E-box DNA sequences of target promoters as well as indirect binding through other sequence-specific transcription factors or sequestration of transcriptional activators. Repression may rely on recruitment of corepressors and induction of histone modifications, or even interference with the general transcriptional machinery. All of these models require extensive protein-protein interactions. Here we review data published on protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions of Hairy-related factors and discuss their implications for transcriptional regulation. In addition, we summarize recent progress on the identification of potential target genes and the analysis of mouse models.

[PMID: 19050759]
Establishment and maintenance of a functional central nervous system (CNS) requires a highly orchestrated process of neural progenitor cell proliferation, cell cycle exit, and differentiation. An evolutionary conserved program consisting of Notch signalling mediated by basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factor activity is necessary for both the maintenance of neural progenitor cell character and the progression of neurogenesis; however, additional players in mammalian CNS neural specification remain largely unknown. In Drosophila we recently characterized Hamlet, a transcription factor that mediates Notch signalling and neural cell fate. Hamlet is a member of the Prdm (PRDI-BF1 and RIZ homology domain containing) proto-oncogene transcription factor family, and in this study we report that multiple genes in the Prdm family (Prdm6, 8, 12, 13 and 16) are expressed in the developing mouse CNS in a spatially and temporally restricted manner. In developing spinal cord Prdm8, 12 and 13 are expressed in precise neuronal progenitor zones suggesting that they may specify discrete neuronal subtypes. In developing telencephalon Prdm12 and 16 are expressed in the ventricular zone in a lateral to medial graded manner, and Prdm8 is expressed in a complementary domain in postmitotic neurons. In postnatal brain Prdm8 additionally shows restricted expression in cortical layers 2/3 and 4, the hippocampus, and the amygdala. To further elucidate roles of Prdm8 and 16 in the developing telencephalon we analyzed the relationship between these factors and the bHLH Hes (Hairy and enhancer of split homolog) effectors of Notch signalling. In Hes null telencephalon neural differentiation is enhanced, Prdm8 expression is upregulated, and Prdm16 expression is downregulated; conversely in utero electroporation of Hes1 into the developing telencephalon upregulates Prdm16 expression. Our data demonstrate that Prdm genes are regulated by the Notch-Hes pathway and represent strong candidates to control neural class specification and the sequential progression of mammalian CNS neurogenesis.

[PMID: 25248479]
Hes genes, encoding basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional repressors, are mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes, both of which are required for normal neurogenesis in Drosophila. There are seven members in the human Hes family, Hes1-7, which are expressed in many tissues and play various roles mainly in development. All Hes proteins have three conserved domains: basic HLH (bHLH), Orange, and WRPW domains. The basic region binds to target DNA sequences, while the HLH region forms homo- and heterodimers with other bHLH proteins, the Orange domain is responsible for the selection of partners during heterodimer formation, and the WRPW domain recruits corepressors. Hes1, Hes5, and Hes7 are known as downstream effectors of canonical Notch signaling, which regulates cell differentiation via cell-cell interaction. Hes factors regulate many events in development by repressing the expression of target genes, many of which encode transcriptional activators that promote cell differentiation. For example, Hes1, Hes3, and Hes5 are highly expressed by neural stem cells, and inactivation of these genes results in insufficient maintenance of stem cell proliferation and prematurely promotes neuronal differentiation. Recently, it was shown that the expression dynamics of Hes1 plays crucial roles in proper developmental timings and fate-determination steps of embryonic stem cells and neural progenitor cells. Here, we discuss some key features of Hes factors in development and diseases.

[PMID: 9570950]
Hes2 encodes a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor homologous to the products of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split. Here, we isolated and characterized the mouse Hes2 gene. This gene consists of four exons, and all the introns are located within the protein-coding region at positions homologous to those of other Hes genes. On the inter-specific backcross analyses, mouse Hes2 is mapped to the distal region of Chromosome 4 near the Hes3 and Hes5 loci, which are different from the Hes1 locus on Chromosome 16. Upstream of the transcription initiation site, there are GC-rich regions, but a typical TATA box is not present. Transient transfection analyses demonstrated that, while Hes1 and Hes5 promoter activities are significantly upregulated by the active form of Notch, a key regulator of cellular differentiation, Hes2 and Hes3 promoter activities are not. These results suggest that Hes genes are functionally classified into two groups: those that are regulated by Notch and those that are not.

[PMID: 23300480]
Dynamic activity of signaling pathways, such as Notch, is vital to achieve correct development and homeostasis. However, most studies assess output many hours or days after initiation of signaling, once the outcome has been consolidated. Here we analyze genome-wide changes in transcript levels, binding of the Notch pathway transcription factor, CSL [Suppressor of Hairless, Su(H), in Drosophila], and RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) immediately following a short pulse of Notch stimulation. A total of 154 genes showed significant differential expression (DE) over time, and their expression profiles stratified into 14 clusters based on the timing, magnitude, and direction of DE. E(spl) genes were the most rapidly upregulated, with Su(H), Pol II, and transcript levels increasing within 5-10 minutes. Other genes had a more delayed response, the timing of which was largely unaffected by more prolonged Notch activation. Neither Su(H) binding nor poised Pol II could fully explain the differences between profiles. Instead, our data indicate that regulatory interactions, driven by the early-responding E(spl)bHLH genes, are required. Proposed cross-regulatory relationships were validated in vivo and in cell culture, supporting the view that feed-forward repression by E(spl)bHLH/Hes shapes the response of late-responding genes. Based on these data, we propose a model in which Hes genes are responsible for co-ordinating the Notch response of a wide spectrum of other targets, explaining the critical functions these key regulators play in many developmental and disease contexts.

[PMID: 9291577]
Mash-2 expression begins during preimplantation development, but is restricted to trophoblasts after the blastocyst stage. Within the trophoblast lineage, Mash-2 transcripts are first expressed in the ectoplacental cone and chorion, but not in terminally differentiated trophoblast giant cells. After day 8.5 of gestation, Mash-2 expression becomes further restricted to focal sites within the spongiotrophoblast and labyrinth. Downregulation is probably important for normal development since overexpression of Mash-2 reduces giant cell formation. We have investigated the role that the Notch signaling pathway may play in trophoblast development. Mash-2 is a homologue of Drosophila achaete/scute complex genes. In Drosophila, activation of the Notch receptor induces transcriptional repressors encoded by the hairy/Enhancer of split (HES) genes, which interact with the Groucho protein to shut off achaete-scute transcription. In the developing mouse placenta, we found that all elements of the Notch pathway were expressed. In particular, the Notch-2, HES-2, and HES-3 genes were coexpressed in trophoblast giant cells and in foci within the spongiotrophoblast at day 10.5 when Mash-2 transcription becomes restricted. Two members of the mammalian Groucho family were expressed in trophoblasts; TLE3 was expressed broadly in the giant cell, spongiotrophoblast, and labyrinthine regions, whereas TLE2 was limited to giant cells and focal regions of the spongiotrophoblast. These data suggest that Notch signaling through activation of HES transcriptional repressors may play a role in murine placental development.

[PMID: 15893982]
HES transcriptional repressors are important components of the Notch pathway that regulates neurogenesis from Drosophila to vertebrates. These proteins are normally induced by Notch activity and inhibit neural commitment by antagonizing the activity of proneural genes. We describe here four chick hes genes that are expressed during neurogenesis: three hes5-like genes (hes5-1, hes5-2 and hes5-3) and one hes6-like (hes6-2). We show that hes6-2 represses transcription of the hes5 genes, thus functioning as a negative regulator of Notch signaling. Conversely, hes6-2 may be repressed by hes5 activity. In cells committing to differentiation, we find that hes6-2 is up-regulated by proneural genes and contributes to the proneural program of neuronal commitment by preventing Notch activity in these cells. In neural progenitors, Notch signaling produces an initial burst of hes5 activity, which represses hes6-2. However, as hes5 transcription declines due to negative auto-regulation, hes6-2 may become active and inhibit the remaining hes5 activity to end Notch signaling. These cells can then enter a new cycle of fate decisions and will be kept as progenitors if a new pulse of Notch activity occurs. Maintenance of progenitors during vertebrate neurogenesis therefore requires that these cells go through successive cycles of Notch activity. We propose that the hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative cross-regulations is a conserved feature of the Notch pathway that underlies these cycles in neural progenitors.

[PMID: 23274689]
The Notch pathway plays an important role in ovary development in invertebrates like Drosophila. However its role for the mammalian ovary is unclear. Mammalian Hes genes encode transcriptional factors that mediate many of the activities of the Notch pathway. Here, we have studied the function of Hes1 during embryonic development of the mouse ovary. We find that Hes1 protein is present in somatic cells and oocyte cytoplasm and decreases between E15.5 and P0. Conventional Hes1 knock-out (KO), Hes1 conditional KO in the ovarian somatic, and chemical inhibition of Notch signaling decrease the total number, size and maturation of oocytes and increase the number of pregranulosa cells at P0. These defects correlate with abnormal proliferation and enhanced apoptosis. Expression of the proapoptotic gene Inhbb is increased, while the levels of the antiapoptotic and oocyte maturation marker Kit are decreased in the Hes1 KO ovaries. Conversely, overactivation of the Notch pathway in ovarian somatic cells increases the number of mature oocytes and decreases the number of pregranulosa cells. Fertility is also reduced by either Hes1 deletion or Notch pathway overactivation. In conclusion, our data suggest that the Notch-Hes1 pathway regulates ovarian somatic cell development, which is necessary for oocyte survival and maturation.

[PMID: 33229432]
Neural stem cells divide during embryogenesis and juvenile life to generate the entire complement of neurons and glia in the nervous system of vertebrates and invertebrates. Studies of the mechanisms controlling the fine balance between neural stem cells and more differentiated progenitors have shown that, in every asymmetric cell division, progenitors send a Delta-Notch signal to their sibling stem cells. Here, we show that excessive activation of Notch or overexpression of its direct targets of the Hes family causes stem-cell hyperplasias in the <i>Drosophila</i> larval central nervous system, which can progress to malignant tumours after allografting to adult hosts. We combined transcriptomic data from these hyperplasias with chromatin occupancy data for Dpn, a Hes transcription factor, to identify genes regulated by Hes factors in this process. We show that the Notch/Hes axis represses a cohort of transcription factor genes. These are excluded from the stem cells and promote early differentiation steps, most likely by preventing the reversion of immature progenitors to a stem-cell fate. We describe the impact of two of these 'anti-stemness' factors, Zfh1 and Gcm, on Notch/Hes-triggered tumorigenesis.

[PMID: 14648848]
Hairy-related transcription factor (HRT/Hey) genes encode a novel subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors related to the Drosophila hairy and Enhancer-of-split (E(spl)) and the mammalian HES proteins that function as downstream mediators of Notch signaling. Using the yeast two-hybrid approach, a previously uncharacterized protein was identified in Xenopus that interacts with XHRT1 (originally referred to as bc8), one member of the HRT/Hey subclass. This protein is evolutionarily conserved in chordates. It binds to sequences adjacent to the bHLH domain of XHRT1 known as the Orange domain and has been named bc8 Orange interacting protein (BOIP). BOIP shows a rather uniform subcellular localization and is recruited to the nucleus upon binding to XHRT1. In Xenopus, XBOIP mRNA is detected by RNase protection analysis throughout embryogenesis. In the adult, the strongest expression is detected in testis. In the mouse, high levels of BOIP mRNA are also found in adult testis. No expression is detected in the embryo and in any of the other adult organs tested. In situ hybridization revealed that BOIP transcripts were detected almost exclusively in round spermatids and that this expression overlaps with that of Hey1 (HRT1), which is expressed throughout spermatogenesis. In view of the importance of the Orange domain for HRT/Hey function, the newly identified BOIP proteins may serve as regulators specifically of HRT1/Hey1 activity.

[PMID: 9819428]
The Notch receptor is involved in many cell fate determination events in vertebrates and invertebrates. It has been shown in Drosophila melanogaster that Delta-dependent Notch signaling activates the transcription factor Suppressor of Hairless, leading to an increased expression of the Enhancer of Split genes. Genetic evidence has also implicated the kuzbanian gene, which encodes a disintegrin metalloprotease, in the Notch signaling pathway. By using a two-cell coculture assay, we show here that vertebrate Dl-1 activates the Notch-1 cascade. Consistent with previous data obtained with active forms of Notch-1 a HES-1-derived promoter construct is transactivated in cells expressing Notch-1 in response to Dl-1 stimulation. Impairing the proteolytic maturation of the full-length receptor leads to a decrease in HES-1 transactivation, further supporting the hypothesis that only mature processed Notch is expressed at the cell surface and activated by its ligand. Furthermore, we observed that Dl-1-induced HES-1 transactivation was dependent both on Kuzbanian and RBP-J activities, consistent with the involvement of these two proteins in Notch signaling in Drosophila. We also observed that exposure of Notch-1-expressing cells to Dl-1 results in an increased level of endogenous HES-1 mRNA. Finally, coculture of Dl-1-expressing cells with myogenic C2 cells suppresses differentiation of C2 cells into myotubes, as previously demonstrated for Jagged-1 and Jagged-2, and also leads to an increased level of endogenous HES-1 mRNA. Thus, Dl-1 behaves as a functional ligand for Notch-1 and has the same ability to suppress cell differentiation as the Jagged proteins do.