[PMID: 22675341]
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs), approved as glucose-lowering drugs for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, have also been shown to reduce body weight. An extensive Medline, Cochrane database, and Embase search for "exenatide," "liraglutide," "albiglutide," "semaglutide," and "lixisenatide" was performed, collecting all randomized clinical trials on humans up to December 15, 2011, with a duration of at least 24 weeks, comparing GLP-1 receptor agonists with either placebo or active drugs. Twenty two (7,859 patients) and 7 (2,416 patients) trials with available results on body weight at 6 and 12 months, respectively, were included. When compared with placebo, GLP-1RAs determine a reduction of BMI at 6 months of -1.0 [-1.3; -0.6] kg/m(2). Considering the average BMI at baseline (32.4 kg/m(2)) these data means a weight reduction of about 3% at 6 months. This result could seem modest from a clinical standpoint; however, it could be affected by many factors contributing to an underestimation of the effect of GLP-1RA on body weight, such as non adequate doses, inclusion criteria, efficacy of GLP-1RA on reducing glycosuria, and association to non-pharmacological interventions not specifically aimed to weight reduction.

[PMID: 26308095]
Liraglutide is an acylated glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogue that binds to serum albumin in vivo and is approved for once-daily treatment of diabetes as well as obesity. The aim of the present studies was to design a once weekly GLP-1 analogue by increasing albumin affinity and secure full stability against metabolic degradation. The fatty acid moiety and the linking chemistry to GLP-1 were the key features to secure high albumin affinity and GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) potency and in obtaining a prolonged exposure and action of the GLP-1 analogue. Semaglutide was selected as the optimal once weekly candidate. Semaglutide has two amino acid substitutions compared to human GLP-1 (Aib(8), Arg(34)) and is derivatized at lysine 26. The GLP-1R affinity of semaglutide (0.38 ± 0.06 nM) was three-fold decreased compared to liraglutide, whereas the albumin affinity was increased. The plasma half-life was 46.1 h in mini-pigs following i.v. administration, and semaglutide has an MRT of 63.6 h after s.c. dosing to mini-pigs. Semaglutide is currently in phase 3 clinical testing.

[PMID: 27432074]
The global epidemic of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) continues largely unabated due to an increasingly sedentary lifestyle and obesogenic environment. A cost-effective patient-centred approach, incorporating glucose-lowering therapy and modification of cardiovascular risk factors, could help prevent the inevitable development and progression of macrovascular and microvascular complications. Glycaemic optimization requires patient structured education, self-management and empowerment, and psychological support along with early and proactive use of glucose lowering therapies, which should be delivered in a system of care as shown by the Chronic Care Model. From diagnosis, intensive glycaemic control and individualised care is aimed at reducing complications. In older people, the goal is maintaining quality of life and minimizing morbidity, especially as overtreatment increases hypoglycaemia risk. Maintaining durable glycaemic control is challenging and complex to achieve without hypoglycaemia, weight gain and other significant adverse effects. Overcoming patient and physician barriers can help ensure adequate treatment initiation and intensification. Cardiovascular safety studies with newer glucose-lowering agents are now mandatory, with a sodium glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitor (empagliflozin), and two glucagon like peptide-1 receptor agonists (liraglutide and semaglutide) being the first to demonstrate superior CV outcomes compared with placebo.

[PMID: 26694823]
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) are increasingly being used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, but consideration of benefits and potential adverse events is required. This review examines the state of glycemic control, weight loss, blood pressure, and tolerability, as well as the current debate about the safety of GLP-1 RAs, including risk of pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and thyroid cancer. A MEDLINE search (2010-2015) identified publications that discussed longer-acting GLP-1 RAs. Search terms included GLP-1 receptor agonists, liraglutide, exenatide, lixisenatide, semaglutide, dulaglutide, albiglutide, efficacy, safety, pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and thyroid cancer. Abstracts from the American Diabetes Association, European Association for the Study of Diabetes, and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists from 2010 to 2015 were also searched. Efficacy and safety studies, pooled analyses, and meta-analyses were prioritized. Research has confirmed that GLP-1 RAs provide robust glycemic control, weight loss, and blood pressure re-duction. Current studies do not prove increased risk of pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, or thyroid cancer but more trials are needed since publications that indicate safety or suggest increased risk have methodological flaws that prevent firm conclusions to be drawn about these rare, long-term events. GLP-1 RA therapy in the context of individualized, patient-centered care continues to be supported by current literature. GLP-1 RA therapy provides robust glycemic control, blood pressure reduction, and weight loss, but studies are still needed to address concerns about tolerability and safety, including pancreatitis and cancer.

[PMID: 27183953]
This article introduces the concept of "weekend therapy", which has now become reality in diabetes. It briefly describes injectable and oral drugs which are currently available, or are in advanced stages of development, for use in once weekly administration. These include dulaglutide, exenatide QW, semaglutide, omarigliptin and trelagliptin.

[PMID: 27817160]
The purpose is to review evidence on cardiovascular risks and benefits of new treatments for type 2 diabetes mellitus. In response to guidance issued by the Food and Drug Administration, thousands of patients have been enrolled in large randomized trials evaluating the cardiovascular effects of the three newest diabetes drug classes: glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors. Two studies of GLP-1 receptor agonists-one of liraglutide and one of semaglutide-have shown cardiovascular benefit relative to placebo, and one study of the SGLT-2 inhibitor empagliflozin has shown benefit. The other published cardiovascular outcome studies of the newest drug classes have generally supported safety, apart from an as-yet unresolved safety concern about increased rates of heart failure with DPP-4 inhibitors. Recent research suggests the thiazolidinedione pioglitazone may have beneficial effects on some cardiovascular outcomes as well, but these are counterbalanced by a known increase of the risk of heart failure with this drug. In general, more prospective randomized trial data is now available regarding the cardiovascular effects of the newer diabetes drugs than on the older drug classes. New evidence suggests that the newest diabetes drugs are safe from a cardiovascular perspective. Evidence on benefit from at least some members of the GLP-1 receptor agonist and SGLT-2 inhibitor classes is encouraging but not yet decisive.

[PMID: 27921428]
New antidiabetic drugs are being developed today that expand the range of pharmacological intervention, in particular for patients with type 2 diabetes (imeglimin, semaglutide, dulaglutide, FGF 21 analogue). At the same time innovations take place that "better" the well-proven molecules, they offer new application forms we have no experience of diabetology (osmotic pump for exenatide, faster acting insulin aspart). New properties are brought by just the change of concentration (insulin glargine in a concentration of 300 U/ml), unexpected positive results are also brought by new fixed-ratio combinations of antidiabetics (fixed-ratio combination of insulin degludec and liraglutide, fixed-ratio combination of insulin glargine and lixisenatide). Also results of clinical studies appear that concern molecules already in use which facilitate the formulation of new recommendations regarding treatment type 2 diabetes.Key words: type 2 diabetes mellitus - dulaglutide - FGF 21 - imeglimin - insulin aspart - insulin degludek - insulin glargine - ITCA 650 - liraglutide - national information diabetes system - semaglutide.

[PMID: 27863704]
The purpose of this study was to review the results of clinical trials assessing the cardiovascular effects of drugs for type 2 diabetes and the cardiovascular effects of newer available drugs. We performed a detailed search of PubMed-listed publications, reports from international meetings, and ongoing studies from clinical trials.gov. Currently available drugs have neutral or, in some cases, negative effects on cardiovascular outcomes. Modern sulfonylureas appear to be safe, although the biguanide metformin has a slightly better cardiovascular safety profile than the sulfonylureas and is the first choice for monotherapy. The cardiovascular tolerability of thiazolidinediones (glitazones) remains controversial, with particularly adverse effects in patients with cardiac failure. The cardiovascular effects of insulin in type 2 diabetes appear neutral. Newer incretin-based therapies have been closely examined in a large number of clinical trials, some of which are still ongoing. The dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor (gliptins) trials to date have all found a neutral effect. Of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists, lixisenatide had a neutral effect, whereas liraglutide and semaglutide had a benefit on outcomes. The results of the sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitor empaglifozin attracted interest when it was the first to report a strong benefit on cardiovascular mortality. Liraglutide and semaglutide had a neutral effect on cardiac failure admissions, whereas empaglifozin had a benefit. In each of the trials, there was not a clear effect on myocardial infarction and stroke. The mechanism of the cardiovascular benefit is debated, and further studies with other GLP-1 agonists and SGLT-2 inhibitors are awaited. After 2 decades of disappointment in attempting to control cardiovascular progression in type 2 diabetes with careful glycemic control, there is distinct hope that newer drugs, particularly the GLP-1 agonists and the SGLT-2 inhibitors, will have cardiovascular benefits independent of glycemic control.

[PMID: 27835045]
Cardiovascular (CV) disease remains the leading cause of death in people with diabetes, highlighting the importance of using treatment options that do not increase CV risk or possibly decrease CV outcomes. Since 2008, the Food and Drug Administration has required demonstration of CV safety for all new medications developed for the glycemic management of diabetes. Seven trials have been published that have established CV safety for three DPP-4 inhibitors (alogliptin, saxagliptin, and sitagliptin), three GLP-1 receptor agonists (liraglutide, lixisenatide, and semaglutide), and one sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor (empagliflozin). Three of those studies also established superiority with liraglutide, empagliflozin, and semaglutide at reducing the composite primary endpoint of major CV events (CV death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, and nonfatal stroke). In addition, one trial found an increase in heart failure hospitalizations with saxagliptin. The findings of these trials must be compared and contrasted cautiously given the differences in patient populations and trial designs, but together they provide important information that can be used to shape our treatment guideline recommendations and patient-specific treatment decisions.

[PMID: 25475122]
The effect of semaglutide, a once-weekly human glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analog in development for type 2 diabetes (T2D), on the bioavailability of a combined oral contraceptive was investigated. Postmenopausal women with T2D (n = 43) on diet/exercise ± metformin received ethinylestradiol (0.03 mg)/levonorgestrel (0.15 mg) once daily for 8 days before (semaglutide-free) and during (steady-state 1.0 mg) semaglutide treatment (subcutaneous once weekly; dose escalation: 0.25 mg 4 weeks; 0.5 mg 4 weeks; 1.0 mg 5 weeks). Bioequivalence of oral contraceptives was established if 90%CI for the ratio of pharmacokinetic parameters during semaglutide steady-state and semaglutide-free periods was within prespecified limits (0.80-1.25). The bioequivalence criterion was met for ethinylestradiol area under the curve (AUC0-24 h ) for semaglutide steady-state/semaglutide-free; 1.11 (1.06-1.15). AUC0-24 h was 20% higher for levonorgestrel at semaglutide steady-state vs. semaglutide-free (1.20 [1.15-1.26]). Cmax was within bioequivalence criterion for both contraceptives. Reductions (mean ± SD) in HbA1c (-1.1 ± 0.6%) and weight (-4.3 ± 3.1 kg) were observed. Semaglutide pharmacokinetics were compatible with once-weekly dosing; the semaglutide dose and dose-escalation regimen were well tolerated. Adverse events, mainly gastrointestinal, were mild to moderate in severity. Asymptomatic increases in mean amylase and lipase were observed. Three subjects had elevated alanine aminotransferase levels ≥3x the upper limit of normal during semaglutide/oral contraceptive coadministration, which were reported as adverse events, but resolved during follow-up. Semaglutide did not reduce the bioavailability of ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel.

[PMID: 26642233]
Once-weekly glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs) are new drugs for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. To summarize evidence for the cardiometabolic efficacy and adverse effects of once-weekly GLP-1RAs in adults with type 2 diabetes. Electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, European Medicines Agency, ClinicalTrials.gov) and congress abstracts from inception through 26 September 2015. Randomized, controlled trials (≥ 24 weeks of follow-up) studying albiglutide, dulaglutide, once-weekly exenatide, semaglutide, and taspoglutide and reporting a cardiometabolic (primary outcome, hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c]) or safety outcome. Extraction was done in duplicate, and risk of bias was assessed. No language restriction was applied. 34 trials (21,126 participants) were included. Compared with placebo, all once-weekly GLP-1RAs reduced HbA1c and fasting plasma glucose; taspoglutide, 20 mg, once-weekly exenatide, and dulaglutide, 1.5 mg, reduced body weight. Among once-weekly GLP-1RAs, the greatest differences were found between dulaglutide, 1.5 mg, and taspoglutide, 10 mg, for HbA1c (-0.4% [95% CI, -0.7% to -0.2%]), once-weekly exenatide and albiglutide for fasting plasma glucose (-0.7 mmol/L [CI, -1.1 to -0.2 mmol/L]; -12.6 mg/dL [CI, -19.8 to -3.6 mg/dL]), and taspoglutide, 20 mg, and dulaglutide, 0.75 mg, for body weight (-1.5 kg [CI, -2.2 to -0.8]). Clinically marginal or no differences were found for blood pressure, blood lipid levels, and C-reactive protein levels. Once-weekly exenatide increased heart rate compared with albiglutide and dulaglutide (1.4 to 3.2 beats/min). Among once-weekly GLP-1RAs, the risk for hypoglycemia was similar, whereas taspoglutide, 20 mg, had the greatest risk for nausea (odds ratios, 1.9 to 5.9). Data were unavailable for semaglutide, definitions of outcomes were heterogeneous, the last-observation-carried-forward imputation method was used in 73% of trials, and publication bias is possible. Compared with other once-weekly GLP-1RAs, dulaglutide, 1.5 mg; once-weekly exenatide; and taspoglutide, 20 mg, showed a greater reduction of HbA1c, fasting plasma glucose, and body weight. Taspoglutide, 20 mg, had the highest risk for nausea; risk for hypoglycemia among once-weekly GLP-1RAs was similar. Sanofi Aventis (grant to the University of Leicester).

[PMID: 27042424]
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)-based therapy improves glycaemic control through multiple mechanisms, with a low risk of hypoglycaemia and the additional benefit of clinically relevant weight loss. Since Starling and Bayliss first proposed the existence of intestinal secretions that stimulate the pancreas, tremendous progress has been made in the area of incretins. As a number of GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) continue to become available, physicians will soon face the challenge of selecting the right option customized to their patient's needs. The following discussion, derived from an extensive literature search using the PubMed database, applying the terms incretin, GLP-1, exenatide, liraglutide, albiglutide, dulaglutide, lixisenatide, semaglutide, and taspoglutide, provides a comprehensive review of existing and upcoming molecules in the GLP-1 RA class in terms of their structure, pharmacological profiles, efficacy, safety, and convenience. Search Methodology: A literature search was conducted using the PubMed database, applying the terms incretin, GLP-1, exenatide, liraglutide, albiglutide, dulaglutide, lixisenatide, semaglutide, and taspoglutide. Relevant articles were those that discussed structural, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic differences, classification, long-acting and short-acting GLP-1 RAs, phase 3 trials, and expert opinions. Additional targeted searches were conducted on diabetes treatment guidelines and reviews on safety, as well as the American Diabetes Association/European Society for Study of Diabetes (ADA/EASD) statement on pancreatic safety.

[PMID: 26358288]
To investigate the dose-response relationship of semaglutide versus placebo and open-label liraglutide in terms of glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. This was a 12-week, randomized, double-blind phase 2 trial. Patients (n = 415) were randomized to receive a subcutaneous injection of semaglutide once weekly without dose escalation (0.1-0.8 mg) or with dose escalation (E) (0.4 mg steps to 0.8 or 1.6 mg E over 1-2 weeks), open-label liraglutide once daily (1.2 or 1.8 mg), or placebo. The primary end point was change in HbA1c level from baseline. Secondary end points included change in body weight, safety, and tolerability. Semaglutide dose-dependently reduced the level of HbA1c from baseline (8.1 ± 0.8%) to week 12 by up to -1.7%, and body weight by up to -4.8 kg (1.6 mg E, P < 0.001 vs. placebo). Up to 81% of patients achieved an HbA1c level of <7%. HbA1c level and weight reductions with semaglutide 1.6 mg E were greater than those with liraglutide 1.2 and 1.8 mg (based on unadjusted CIs), but adverse events (AEs) and withdrawals occurred more frequently. The incidence of nausea, vomiting, and withdrawal due to gastrointestinal AEs increased with the semaglutide dose; most events were mild to moderate, transient, and ameliorated by dose escalation. There were no major episodes of hypoglycemia and few cases of injection site reactions. After 12 weeks, semaglutide dose-dependently reduced HbA1c level and weight in patients with type 2 diabetes. No unexpected safety or tolerability concerns were identified; gastrointestinal AEs typical of glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists were mitigated by dose escalation. On this basis, weekly semaglutide doses of 0.5 and 1.0 mg with a 4-week dose escalation were selected for phase 3.

[PMID: 27633186]
Regulatory guidance specifies the need to establish cardiovascular safety of new diabetes therapies in patients with type 2 diabetes in order to rule out excess cardiovascular risk. The cardiovascular effects of semaglutide, a glucagon-like peptide 1 analogue with an extended half-life of approximately 1 week, in type 2 diabetes are unknown. We randomly assigned 3297 patients with type 2 diabetes who were on a standard-care regimen to receive once-weekly semaglutide (0.5 mg or 1.0 mg) or placebo for 104 weeks. The primary composite outcome was the first occurrence of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. We hypothesized that semaglutide would be noninferior to placebo for the primary outcome. The noninferiority margin was 1.8 for the upper boundary of the 95% confidence interval of the hazard ratio. At baseline, 2735 of the patients (83.0%) had established cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, or both. The primary outcome occurred in 108 of 1648 patients (6.6%) in the semaglutide group and in 146 of 1649 patients (8.9%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.74; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.58 to 0.95; P<0.001 for noninferiority). Nonfatal myocardial infarction occurred in 2.9% of the patients receiving semaglutide and in 3.9% of those receiving placebo (hazard ratio, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.51 to 1.08; P=0.12); nonfatal stroke occurred in 1.6% and 2.7%, respectively (hazard ratio, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.38 to 0.99; P=0.04). Rates of death from cardiovascular causes were similar in the two groups. Rates of new or worsening nephropathy were lower in the semaglutide group, but rates of retinopathy complications (vitreous hemorrhage, blindness, or conditions requiring treatment with an intravitreal agent or photocoagulation) were significantly higher (hazard ratio, 1.76; 95% CI, 1.11 to 2.78; P=0.02). Fewer serious adverse events occurred in the semaglutide group, although more patients discontinued treatment because of adverse events, mainly gastrointestinal. In patients with type 2 diabetes who were at high cardiovascular risk, the rate of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke was significantly lower among patients receiving semaglutide than among those receiving placebo, an outcome that confirmed the noninferiority of semaglutide. (Funded by Novo Nordisk; SUSTAIN-6 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01720446 .).