[PMID: 28769756]
Autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a very rare neurological disorder featured with late onset, slowly progressive central nervous system demyelination. Duplication or over expression of the lamin B1 (LMNB1) gene causes ADLD. In this study, we undertook a comprehensive clinical evaluation and genetic detection for a Chinese family with ADLD. The proband is a 52-year old man manifested with autonomic abnormalities, pyramidal tract dysfunction. MRI brain scan identified bilateral symmetric white matter (WM) hyper-intensities in periventricular and semi-oval WM, cerebral peduncles and middle cerebellar peduncles. The proband has a positive autosomal dominant family history with similar clinical manifestations with a trend of genetic anticipation. In order to understand the genetic cause of the disease in this family, target exome capture based next generation sequencing has been done, but no causative variants or possibly pathogenic variants has been identified. However, Multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) showed whole duplication of <i>LMNB1</i> gene which is co-segregated with the disease phenotype in this family. This is the first genetically confirmed <i>LMNB1</i> associated ADLD pedigree from China.

[PMID: 26311780]
Lamin B1 is a component of the nuclear lamina and plays a critical role in maintaining nuclear architecture, regulating gene expression and modulating chromatin positioning. We have previously shown that LMNB1 gene duplications cause autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD), a fatal adult onset demyelinating disease. The mechanisms by which increased LMNB1 levels cause ADLD are unclear. To address this, we used a transgenic mouse model where Lamin B1 overexpression is targeted to oligodendrocytes. These mice showed severe vacuolar degeneration of the spinal cord white matter together with marked astrogliosis, microglial infiltration, and secondary axonal damage. Oligodendrocytes in the transgenic mice revealed alterations in histone modifications favoring a transcriptionally repressed state. Chromatin changes were accompanied by reduced expression of genes involved in lipid synthesis pathways, many of which are known to play important roles in myelin regulation and are preferentially expressed in oligodendrocytes. Decreased lipogenic gene expression resulted in a significant reduction in multiple classes of lipids involved in myelin formation. Many of these gene expression changes and lipid alterations were observed even before the onset of the phenotype, suggesting a causal role. Our findings establish, for the first time, a link between LMNB1 and lipid synthesis in oligodendrocytes, and provide a mechanistic framework to explain the age dependence and white matter involvement of the disease phenotype. These results have implications for disease pathogenesis and may also shed light on the regulation of lipid synthesis pathways in myelin maintenance and turnover. Autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is fatal neurological disorder caused by increased levels of the nuclear protein, Lamin B1. The disease is characterized by an age-dependent loss of myelin, the fatty sheath that covers nerve fibers. We have studied a mouse model where Lamin B1 level are increased in oligodendrocytes, the cell type that produces myelin in the CNS. We demonstrate that destruction of myelin in the spinal cord is responsible for the degenerative phenotype in our mouse model. We show that this degeneration is mediated by reduced expression of lipid synthesis genes and the subsequent reduction in myelin enriched lipids. These findings provide a mechanistic framework to explain the age dependence and tissue specificity of the ADLD disease phenotype.

[PMID: 27854160]
Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy (ADLD), a fatal adult onset demyelinating disorder, is the only human disease that has been linked to mutations of the nuclear lamina protein, lamin B1, and is primarily caused by duplications of the LMNB1 gene. Why CNS myelin is specifically targeted and the mechanisms underlying ADLD are unclear. Recent work from our group has demonstrated that over expression of lamin B1 in oligodendrocytes, the myelin producing cells in the CNS, resulted in age dependent epigenetic modifications, transcriptional down-regulation of lipogenic gene expression and significant reductions of myelin-enriched lipids. Given the high lipid content of meylin, we hypothesize that lipid loss is one of the primary drivers of the demyelination phenotype. These results can, at least partially, explain the age dependence and cell type specificity in ADLD and are discussed in the context of the existing literature, in an attempt to delineate potential pathways underlying the disease phenotype.

[PMID: 19961535]
Duplications of lamin B1 (LMNB1) at 5q23 are implicated in adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) having been described in six families with diverse ethnic background but with a homogeneous phenotype. In a large Italian family, we recently identified a variant form of ADLD characterized clinically by absence of the autonomic dysfunction at onset described in ADLD and, on MRI, by milder cerebellar involvement with sparing of hemispheric white matter. Aim of this study was to investigate the genetic basis of this variant form of ADLD. We carried out a genome-wide linkage analysis using microsatellite markers, and the genes in the candidate region were screened for point mutations. LMNB1 was also screened for deletions/duplications by real-time PCR, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and Southern blot. We mapped the variant ADLD locus to 5q23.2-q23.3, a genomic region containing 11 genes including LMNB1. Neither gene copy-number defects nor point mutations in the LMNB1 gene were found. We also excluded point mutations in the coding exons of the other ten genes in the candidate region. However, expression of lamin B1 evaluated in lymphoblastoid cells was higher in patients than in healthy controls, and was similar to the lamin B1 expression levels found in a patient with LMNB1 duplication. This observation suggests that a mutation in an LMNB1 regulatory sequence underlies the variant ADLD phenotype. Thus, adult forms of ADLD linked to 5q23 appear to be more heterogeneous clinically and genetically than previously thought.

[PMID: 23676464]
Adult-onset autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a progressive and fatal neurological disorder characterized by early autonomic dysfunction, cognitive impairment, pyramidal tract and cerebellar dysfunction, and white matter loss in the central nervous system. ADLD is caused by duplication of the LMNB1 gene, which results in increased lamin B1 transcripts and protein expression. How duplication of LMNB1 leads to myelin defects is unknown. To address this question, we developed a mouse model of ADLD that overexpresses lamin B1. These mice exhibited cognitive impairment and epilepsy, followed by age-dependent motor deficits. Selective overexpression of lamin B1 in oligodendrocytes also resulted in marked motor deficits and myelin defects, suggesting these deficits are cell autonomous. Proteomic and genome-wide transcriptome studies indicated that lamin B1 overexpression is associated with downregulation of proteolipid protein, a highly abundant myelin sheath component that was previously linked to another myelin-related disorder, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Furthermore, we found that lamin B1 overexpression leads to reduced occupancy of Yin Yang 1 transcription factor at the promoter region of proteolipid protein. These studies identify a mechanism by which lamin B1 overexpression mediates oligodendrocyte cell-autonomous neuropathology in ADLD and implicate lamin B1 as an important regulator of myelin formation and maintenance during aging.

[PMID: 21225301]
Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) with autonomic symptoms features micturition urgency, constipation, erectile dysfunction, and orthostatic hypotension, usually followed by pyramidal signs and ataxia. Peripheral nerve conduction is normal. The disease is often mistaken for multiple sclerosis in the initial phase. There is a characteristic pattern of white matter changes in the brain and spinal cord on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), mild atrophy of the brain, and a more marked atrophy of the spinal cord. ADLD is associated with duplications of the lamin B1 (LMNB1) gene but the mechanism by which the rearrangement conveys the phenotype is not fully defined. We analyzed four unrelated families segregating ADLD with autonomic symptoms for duplications of the LMNB1 gene. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis revealed novel duplications spanning the entire LMNB1 gene in probands from each of the four families. We then analyzed the expression of lamin B1 in peripheral leukocytes by Western blot analysis in five patients from two available families. The protein levels of lamin B1 were found significantly increased. These results indicate that the ADLD phenotype associated with LMNB1 duplications is mediated by increased levels of the lamin B1 protein. Furthermore, we show that a molecular diagnosis for ADLD with autonomic symptoms can be obtained by a direct analysis of lamin B1 in peripheral leukocytes.

[PMID: 23261988]
Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a slowly progressive neurological disorder characterised by pyramidal, cerebellar, and autonomic disturbances. Duplication of the LMNB1 gene is the genetic cause of ADLD, yet the pathogenetic mechanism is not defined. In this study, we analysed cells and muscle tissue from three patients affected by ADLD, carrying an extra copy of the LMNB1 gene. Lamin B1 levels were dramatically increased in ADLD nuclei, both in skin fibroblasts and skeletal muscle fibres. Since lamin B1 is known to bind Oct-1, a transcription factor involved in the oxidative stress pathway, we investigated Oct-1 fate in ADLD. Oct-1 recruitment to the nuclear periphery was increased in ADLD cells, while nucleoplasmic localisation of the transcription factor under oxidative stress conditions was reduced. Importantly, lamin B1 degradation occurring in some, but not all ADLD cell lines, slowed down lamin B1 and Oct-1 accumulation. In skeletal muscle, focal disorganisation of sarcomeres was observed, while IIB-myosin heavy chain, an Oct-1 target gene, was under-expressed and rod-containing fibres were formed. These data show that a high degree of regulation of lamin B1 expression is implicated in the different clinical phenotypes observed in ADLD and show that altered Oct-1 nuclear localisation contributes to the disease phenotype.

[PMID: 26189928]
adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a rare inherited disorder due to a duplication of lamin-B1 (LMNB1) gene. The aim of this study was to investigate brain metabolic and microstructural alterations by using advanced MR techniques. we performed brain MR scans including single-voxel proton-MR Spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) of the lateral ventricles and parietal white matter and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in 4 subjects with LMNB1 gene duplication, 6 non-mutated relatives and 7 unrelated healthy controls. Cervical and thoracic spinal cord MR was performed in three symptomatic subjects with LMNB1 mutation. All participants underwent clinical and neuropsychological evaluation. all subjects with LMNB1 gene duplication presented pathological accumulation of lactate in lateral ventricles CSF and no alterations of brain white matter absolute metabolites concentrations or metabolites/Cr ratios. We found increased white matter intra- and extracellular water transverse relaxation times. Tract-based spatial statistics analysis detected a significantly reduced fractional anisotropy in the genu of the corpus callosum in mutated cases compared to unrelated healthy controls and non-mutated relatives. Moreover, we detected different degrees of the typical white matter signal intensity alterations and brain and spinal atrophy at conventional MRI in symptomatic subjects with LMNB1 mutation. A mild impairment of executive functions was found in subjects with LMNB1 gene mutation. in subjects with LMNB1 gene duplication, we found a pathological increase in CSF lactate, likely due to active demyelination along with glial activation, and microstructural changes in the genu of the corpus callosum possibly underpinning the mild neuropsychological deficits.

[PMID: 23649844]
Autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is an adult onset demyelinating disorder that is caused by duplications of the lamin B1 (LMNB1) gene. However, as only a few cases have been analyzed in detail, the mechanisms underlying LMNB1 duplications are unclear. We report the detailed molecular analysis of the largest collection of ADLD families studied, to date. We have identified the minimal duplicated region necessary for the disease, defined all the duplication junctions at the nucleotide level and identified the first inverted LMNB1 duplication. We have demonstrated that the duplications are not recurrent; patients with identical duplications share the same haplotype, likely inherited from a common founder and that the duplications originated from intrachromosomal events. The duplication junction sequences indicated that nonhomologous end joining or replication-based mechanisms such fork stalling and template switching or microhomology-mediated break induced repair are likely to be involved. LMNB1 expression was increased in patients' fibroblasts both at mRNA and protein levels and the three LMNB1 alleles in ADLD patients show equal expression, suggesting that regulatory regions are maintained within the rearranged segment. These results have allowed us to elucidate duplication mechanisms and provide insights into allele-specific LMNB1 expression levels.

[PMID: 30697589]
To characterize the genetic and clinical features of patients with autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD) carrying duplication and deletion upstream of lamin B1 (<i>LMNB1</i>). Ninety-three patients with adult-onset leukoencephalopathy of unknown etiology were genetically analyzed for copy numbers of <i>LMNB1</i> and its upstream genes. We examined <i>LMNB1</i> expression by reverse transcription-qPCR using total RNA extracted from peripheral leukocytes. Clinical and MRI features of the patients with ADLD were retrospectively analyzed. We identified 4 patients from 3 families with <i>LMNB1</i> duplication. The duplicated genomic regions were different from those previously reported. The mRNA expression level of <i>LMNB1</i> in patients with duplication was significantly increased. The clinical features of our patients with <i>LMNB1</i> duplication were similar to those reported previously, except for the high frequency of cognitive impairment in our patients. We found 2 patients from 1 family carrying a 249-kb genomic deletion upstream of <i>LMNB1</i>. Patients with the deletion exhibited relatively earlier onset, more prominent cognitive impairment, and fewer autonomic symptoms than patients with duplication. The presence of cerebellar symptoms and lesions may be characteristic in our patients with the deletion compared with the previously reported family with the deletion. Magnetic resonance images of patients with the deletion exhibited a widespread distribution of white matter lesions including the anterior temporal region. We identified 4 Japanese families with ADLD carrying duplication or deletion upstream of <i>LMNB1</i>. There are differences in clinical and MRI features between the patients with the duplication and those with the deletion upstream of <i>LMNB1</i>.

[PMID: 31143934]
Allele-specific silencing by RNA interference (ASP-siRNA) holds promise as a therapeutic strategy for downregulating a single mutant allele with minimal suppression of the corresponding wild-type allele. This approach has been effectively used to target autosomal dominant mutations and single nucleotide polymorphisms linked with aberrantly expanded trinucleotide repeats. Here, we propose ASP-siRNA as a preferable choice to target duplicated disease genes, avoiding potentially harmful excessive downregulation. As a proof-of-concept, we studied autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD) due to lamin B1 (LMNB1) duplication, a hereditary, progressive and fatal disorder affecting myelin in the CNS. Using a reporter system, we screened the most efficient ASP-siRNAs preferentially targeting one of the alleles at rs1051644 (average minor allele frequency: 0.45) located in the 3' untranslated region of the gene. We identified four siRNAs with a high efficacy and allele-specificity, which were tested in ADLD patient-derived fibroblasts. Three of the small interfering RNAs were highly selective for the target allele and restored both LMNB1 mRNA and protein levels close to control levels. Furthermore, small interfering RNA treatment abrogates the ADLD-specific phenotypes in fibroblasts and in two disease-relevant cellular models: murine oligodendrocytes overexpressing human LMNB1, and neurons directly reprogrammed from patients' fibroblasts. In conclusion, we demonstrated that ASP-silencing by RNA interference is a suitable and promising therapeutic option for ADLD. Moreover, our results have a broad translational value extending to several pathological conditions linked to gene-gain in copy number variations.

[PMID: 25701871]
Chromosomal rearrangements with duplication of the lamin B1 (LMNB1) gene underlie autosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophy (ADLD), a rare neurological disorder in which overexpression of LMNB1 causes progressive central nervous system demyelination. However, we previously reported an ADLD family (ADLD-1-TO) without evidence of duplication or other mutation in LMNB1 despite linkage to the LMNB1 locus and lamin B1 overexpression. By custom array-CGH, we further investigated this family and report here that patients carry a large (∼660 kb) heterozygous deletion that begins 66 kb upstream of the LMNB1 promoter. Lamin B1 overexpression was confirmed in further ADLD-1-TO tissues and in a postmortem brain sample, where lamin B1 was increased in the frontal lobe. Through parallel studies, we investigated both loss of genetic material and chromosomal rearrangement as possible causes of LMNB1 overexpression, and found that ADLD-1-TO plausibly results from an enhancer adoption mechanism. The deletion eliminates a genome topological domain boundary, allowing normally forbidden interactions between at least three forebrain-directed enhancers and the LMNB1 promoter, in line with the observed mainly cerebral localization of lamin B1 overexpression and myelin degeneration. This second route to LMNB1 overexpression and ADLD is a new example of the relevance of regulatory landscape modifications in determining Mendelian phenotypes.

[PMID: 16951681]
Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a slowly progressive neurological disorder characterized by symmetrical widespread myelin loss in the central nervous system, with a phenotype similar to chronic progressive multiple sclerosis. In this study, we identify a genomic duplication that causes ADLD. Affected individuals carry an extra copy of the gene for the nuclear laminar protein lamin B1, resulting in increased gene dosage in brain tissue from individuals with ADLD. Increased expression of lamin B1 in Drosophila melanogaster resulted in a degenerative phenotype. In addition, an abnormal nuclear morphology was apparent when cultured cells overexpressed this protein. This is the first human disease attributable to mutations in the gene encoding lamin B1. Antibodies to lamin B are found in individuals with autoimmune diseases, and it is also an antigen recognized by a monoclonal antibody raised against plaques from brains of individuals with multiple sclerosis. This raises the possibility that lamin B may be a link to the autoimmune attack that occurs in multiple sclerosis.

[PMID: 30949481]
The nuclear lamina is a fibrous meshwork of proteins found adjacent to the inner nuclear membrane that plays a critical role in the maintenance of nuclear architecture. Made up of A and B type lamins, the nuclear lamina has recently been shown to contribute to numerous cellular functions such as chromatin organization, DNA replication, cellular proliferation, senescence, and aging. While at least a dozen disorders are associated with <i>LMNA</i>, the focus of this review is Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy (ADLD), the only disease associated with the lamin B1 gene (<i>LMNB1</i>). ADLD is a fatal, adult onset CNS demyelinating disorder that is caused by either genomic duplications involving <i>LMNB1</i> or deletions upstream of the gene. Both mutation types result in increased <i>LMNB1</i> gene expression. How the increased levels of this widely expressed nuclear structural component results a phenotype as specific as demyelination is a great mystery. This review summarizes what is currently known about the disease and describes recent work using animal and cell culture models that have provided critical insights into ADLD pathological mechanisms. The delineation of these pathways provides a fascinating glimpse into entirely novel roles for the nuclear lamina and will be critical for the identification of therapies for this fatal disease.