[PMID: 19788051]
To evaluate the role of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of brain lesions in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a hereditary microangiopathy leading to cognitive decline and dementia, caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene. Detection of apoptotic nuclei in temporal lobe, brain stem, medulla oblongata, hippocampus and basal ganglia from one young CADASIL patient was performed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL). Our results showed a great involvement of glial cells in apoptotic cell death in the majority of the brain regions examined; neuronal apoptosis was significantly present only in the brain stem region. We hypothesized that in the early stages of the disease neuronal involvement of apoptosis is limited to the cells of the brain stem, sparing the cortical area which is involved in neuronal apoptosis and cognitive decline later.

[PMID: 22664156]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), the most common form of familial vascular dementia, is caused by mutations of the NOTCH3 gene. Approximately two hundred pathogenic mutations have been reported within five exons (exons 3, 4, 6, 11 and 19) which accounted for 78% of known mutations in worldwide series. We reported twenty-one NOTCH3 pathogenic mutations (including five novel ones) identified in 53 index Italian patients. Exons 4 (28%), 7 (21%) and 19 (24%) were the most frequently involved. To dissect genetic heterogeneity, we analyzed five haplotyped tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs1044009, rs4809030, rs10426042, rs10423702 and rs3815188) in 95 patients, 39 unaffected pedigree members and 50 healthy controls. SNPs were analyzed using the Illumina VeraCode Universal Capture Beads technology by Allele Specific Primer Extension (ASPE). We identified ten different haplotypes named H1-H10; H1 was the most common haplotype in patients and controls and it was associated with at least twelve out of the twenty-one mutations. Detected mutations were not associated to specific haplotypes while genotyping was compatible with a possible founder effect for the novel p.S396C mutation which clustered in a restricted geographical area of northeast Italy. The results added on to the genetic heterogeneity of CADASIL and emphasized difficulties in designing algorithms for molecular diagnosis.

[PMID: 17854869]
Proteins of the Notch family are cell surface receptors that transduce signals between neighbouring cells. The Notch signalling pathway is highly evolutionarily conserved and critical for cell fate determination during embryonic development, including many aspects of vascular development. The interaction of Notch receptors with ligands leads to cleavage of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) which then translocates to the nucleus and activates the transcription factor CBF1/JBP-Jkappa, regulating downstream gene expression. To date four Notch receptors have been found in mammals. Of these, Notch3 is predominantly expressed in adult arterial smooth muscle cells in human. NOTCH3 gene mutations cause the autosomal dominant condition, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoecephelopathy (CADASIL), an inherited early stroke syndrome leading to dementia due to systemic vascular degeneration. This suggests that Notch3 plays a critical role in maintaining the phenotypic stability of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Recent publications indicate that Notch3 is involved in vascular injury and is a determinant of VSMC survival, but its exact function is unknown. The molecular mechanisms underlying CADASIL pathology are therefore intriguing. Investigation of CADASIL mutant Notch3 shows that the majority of mutations do not change CBF1/JBP-Jkappa mediated classic Notch activation, so the pathological consequences of NOTCH3 mutations in CADASIL patients can not be simply explained by loss- or gain-of-function in the classic Notch signalling pathway. This suggests that a novel Notch3-mediated signalling pathway may be present in VSMCs, or cross-regulation of Notch3 to other signalling pathway(s) may play a critical role on VSMCs survival. Alternatively, the mutant Notch3 may gain a novel or toxic function in VSMCs. This review will focus on recent findings of Notch3 in vascular development and in regulating the VSMC behaviour and phenotype, and will use findings on investigating the molecular pathology of the single gene disorder CADASIL to understand the function of Notch3 in VSMCs.

[PMID: 21038489]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene and is clinically characterized by recurrent stroke, cognitive decline, psychiatric disturbances and migraine. The prevalence of migraine in CADASIL is slightly higher than in the general population, and the proportion of migraine with aura is much higher. The pathophysiological mechanism that leads to increased aura prevalence in CADASIL is unknown. Possible mechanisms of the excess of migraine with aura are an increased susceptibility to cortical spreading depression (CSD) or a different expression of CSD. It is also possible that the brainstem migraine area is involved in CADASIL. Last, it is possible that the NOTCH3 mutation acts as a migraine aura susceptibility gene by itself. In this narrative review we summarize the literature about migraine in CADASIL, with a special focus on what CADASIL might teach us about the pathophysiology of migraine.

[PMID: 19539236]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leucoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most common heritable cause of stroke and vascular dementia in adults. Clinical and neuroimaging features resemble those of sporadic small-artery disease, although patients with CADASIL have an earlier age at onset of stroke events, an increased frequency of migraine with aura, and a slightly variable pattern of ischaemic white-matter lesions on brain MRI. NOTCH3 (Notch homolog 3), the gene involved in CADASIL, encodes a transmembrane receptor primarily expressed in systemic arterial smooth-muscle cells. Pathogenetic mutations alter the number of cysteine residues in the extracellular domain of NOTCH3, which accumulates in small arteries of affected individuals. Functional and imaging studies in cultured cells, genetically engineered mice, and patients with CADASIL have all provided insights into the molecular and vascular mechanisms underlying this disease. A recent multicentre trial in patients with cognitive impairment emphasises the feasibility of randomised trials in patients with CADASIL. In this Review, we summarise the current understanding of CADASIL, a devastating disorder that also serves as a model for the more common forms of subcortical ischaemic strokes and pure vascular dementia.

[PMID: 19018300]
To investigate the migraine locus around the C19p13 region through analysis of the NOTCH3 gene (C19p13.2-p13.1), previously shown to be a gene involved in CADASIL and the TNFSF7 gene (C19p13), homologous to the ligands of TNF-alpha and TNF-beta, genes that have previously been associated with migraine. The NOTCH3 gene was analysed by sequencing all exons with known CADASIL mutations in a typical (non-familial hemiplegic) migraine family (MF1) that has previously been shown to be linked to C19p13. The TNFSF7 gene was investigated through SNP association analysis using a matched case-control migraine population. NOTCH3 gene sequencing results for affected members of MF1 proved to be negative for all known sequence variants giving rise to mutations for CADASIL. TNFSF7 gene chi-square results showed non-significant P values across all populations tested against controls, except for the MO subgroup which displayed a possible association with the TNFSF7 SNP (genotype, allele analysis P = 0.036, P = 0.017 respectively). Our results suggest that common migraine is not caused by any known CADASIL mutations in the NOTCH3 gene of interest. However, the TNFSF7 gene displayed signs of involvement in a MO affected population and indicates that further independent studies of this marker are warranted.

[PMID: 20224942]
We reviewed the characteristics of headache in patients with cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), to verify the appropriateness of the International Classification of Headache Disorders, second edition (ICHD-II) criteria. Available data were found through Medline/PubMed using the keyword "cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)". The search was restricted to studies published in English in the years between 1993 and 2008. We excluded studies that did not report original data on CADASIL and information regarding the presence of headache. We found 34 studies reporting data on 749 patients overall; 387 (51.7%) patients had headache. According to the authors' definition, 356 (92%) patients were reported as having migraine and 31 (8%) as having headache. Of the 356 patients who were defined as migraineurs, 125 (35.1%) had migraine with aura, 7 (2%) migraine without aura, 156 (43.8%) unspecified migraine and 68 (19.1%) had more than one type of migraine. Among the 31 patients reported as suffering from headache, the headache was not further detailed in 18 (58.1%) patients; it was defined as chronic in 6 (19.3%), as resembling migraine with aura in 4 (12.9%), as resembling migraine without aura in 2 (6.5%) and as tension type in 1 (3.2%) patient. In patients with CADASIL, the headache was usually referred to as migraine and mostly as migraine with aura. However, this referral is formally incorrect since the diagnostic criteria for any type of migraine in the ICHD-II require that the disturbance is not attributed to another disorder. For this reason, we suggest updating the ICHD-II in relation to CADASIL. Our suggestion is to insert a new category referred to as Headache attributed to genetic disorder including Headache attributed to CADASIL.

[PMID: 17726918]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an inherited small-artery disease of mid-adulthood caused by mutations of the NOTCH3 gene. The disease is responsible for widespread white-matter lesions associated with lacunar infarctions in various subcortical areas. The disease is responsible for migraine with aura and ischemic strokes, and is associated with various degrees of cognitive impairment and with mood disturbances. CADASIL is considered as a unique model to investigate what is known as "subcortical ischemic vascular dementia." Recent data suggest that the number of lacunar infarctions and severity of cerebral atrophy are the main magnetic resonance imaging markers associated with cognitive and motor disabilities in this disorder. Mood disturbances are reported in 10% to 20% of patients, most often in association with cognitive alterations. Their exact origin remains unknown; the presence of ischemic lesions within the basal ganglia or the frontal white matter may promote the occurrence of these symptoms. Further studies are needed to better understand the relationships between cerebral lesions and both cognitive and psychiatric symptoms in this small-vessel disease of the brain.

[PMID: 18313300]
Ubiquitin is a highly conserved protein involved in many important cellular processes, such as cell surface receptor signaling, endocytosis and protein degradation. Since ubiquitin plays a key role in the pathomechanisms of many neurodegenerative diseases, we immunohistochemically analyzed its expression in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). CADASIL is a heritable vascular dementia characterized by degeneration of the vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) caused by mutations in the notch 3 gene. In CADASIL, there is abnormal accumulation of the Notch 3 extracellular domain on blood vessels, but the molecular pathways linking notch 3 mutations to degeneration of the VSMC are, as yet, poorly understood. We studied human brain and skin biopsy specimens, and observed increased ubiquitin expression on structures primarily affected by the pathological process in CADASIL: the VSMC and vascular lamina media, and also large ballooned macrophages. Ultrastructurally, we noted that pathognomonic CADASIL deposits of granular osmiophilic material were often located inside indentations in the VSMC membrane that resembled endocytic vesicles. We suggest that in CADASIL, damage to the VSMC may be associated with aberrant ubiquitin-dependent endocytosis of the Notch 3 ligand, and increased accumulation of ubiquitin on the vessel wall may be a manifestation of this aberration.

[PMID: 17622327]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a vascular dementing disease caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene, most which are missense mutations leading to an uneven number of cysteine residues in epidermal growth factor-like repeats in the extracellular domain of Notch3 receptor (N3ECD). CADASIL is characterized by degeneration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) and accumulation of N3ECD on the VSMCs of small and middle-sized arteries. Recent studies have demonstrated that impairment of Notch3 signaling is not the primary cause of the disease. In the present study we used proteomic analysis to characterize the protein expression pattern of a unique material of genetically genuine cultured human CADASIL VSMCs. We identified 11 differentially expressed proteins, which are involved in protein degradation and folding, contraction of VSMCs, and cellular stress. Our findings indicate that misfolding of Notch3 may cause endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of unfolded protein response, leading to increased reactive oxygen species and inhibition of cell proliferation. In addition, upregulation of contractile proteins suggests an alteration in the signaling system of VSMC contraction. The accumulation of N3ECD on the cell surface possibly upregulates the angiotensin II regulatory feedback loop and thereby enhances the readiness of the cells to respond to angiotensin II stimulation.

[PMID: 21702048]
Notch3 is a single pass transmembrane protein belonging to the Notch receptor family. Notch proteins are involved in a very conserved signaling system (Notch signaling) with a broad spectrum of functions, from cell proliferation and differentiation to apoptosis. Mutations in Notch3 gene are linked to cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a disorder characterized by stroke and dementia in young adults. Studies evaluating Notch3 expression in human differentiated cells and adult tissues have shown high Notch3 levels only in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). However, it has been hypothesized that Notch3 is ubiquitously expressed in adult human tissues. Our aim was to evaluate Notch3 expression in human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and fibroblasts from normal healthy subjects. In both cell types, we examined the expression of Notch3 by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Moreover, we assessed Notch3 protein expression by Western blot analysis. RT-PCR and qRT-PCR analysis showed the presence of Notch3 mRNA in both cell types. Western blot analysis confirmed Notch3 protein expression in PBLs and fibroblasts though showing different profiles. Our data support the expression of Notch3 in adult human cell types, and suggests that PBLs and fibroblasts could provide readily available cells for the study of the role of Notch3 expression in the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to different human disease.

[PMID: 17996090]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is increasingly recognized as an inherited arterial disease leading to a step-wise decline and eventually to dementia. CADASIL is caused by mutations in NOTCH3 epidermal growth factor-like repeat that maps to chromosome 19. CADASIL cases have been identified in most countries of Western and Central Europe, the Americas, Japan, Australia, the Caribbean, South America, Tanzania, Turkey, South Africa and Southeast Asia, but not in Arabs. We studied three families from Saudi Arabia (Family A), Kuwait (Family B) and Yemen (Family C) with 19 individuals affected by CADASIL. The mean age of onset was 31 +/- 6 and the clinical presentation included stroke in 68%, subcortical dementia in 17% and asymptomatic leukoariosis detected by MRI in 15%. Migraine and depression were frequently associated, 38% and 68% respectively. The mean age of death was 56 +/- 11. All NOTCH3 exons were screened for mutations, which revealed the presence of previously reported mutations c.406C>T (p.Arg110>Cys) in two families (family A&B) and c.475C>T (p.Arg133>Cys) mutation in family C. CADASIL occurs in Arabs, with clinical phenotype and genotype similar to that in other ethnic groups.

[PMID: 19255248]
Cell-cell signaling mediated by the Notch receptor is iteratively involved in numerous developmental contexts, and its dysregulation has been associated with inherited genetic disorders and cancers. The core components of the signaling pathway have been identified for some time, but the study of the modulation of the pathway in different cellular contexts has revealed many layers of regulation. These include complex sugar modifications in the extracellular domain as well as transit of Notch through defined cellular compartments, including specific endosomes.

[PMID: 22878905]
Cerebrolysin (Cere) is a peptidergic nootropic drug with neurotrophic properties which has been used to treat dementia and sequelae of stroke. Use of Cere prevents nuclear structural changes typical of apoptosis and significantly reduces the number of apoptotic cells after several apoptotic stimuli. Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a hereditary disease caused by mutations of the Notch3 gene encoding the Notch3 protein. Notch3 is involved in the regulation of apoptosis, modulating Fas-Ligand (Fas-L)- induced apoptosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the in vitro protective effects of Cere against oxidative stress-induced apoptosis in cells from CADASIL patients. We used peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) from 15 CADASIL patients (age range 34-70 years); 2-deoxy-D-ribose (dRib), a highly reducing sugar, was used as paradigm pro-apoptotic stimulus. Apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy. Administration of Cere to PBLs from CADASIL patients cultured under standard conditions had no effect on the percentage of apoptotic cells. Administration of Cere to PBLs cultured with dRib caused a significant decrease in apoptosis after 48 h of culture in only 5 patients, whereas in the other 10 patients, Cere treatment was not associated with any significant difference in the percentage of apoptosis. This result showed a protective effect of Cere against oxidative stress-induced apoptosis only in 30 % of the CADASIL patients, suggesting that the Notch3 gene probably does not influence the anti-apoptotic properties of Cere in vitro.

[PMID: 23308019]
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a small vessel disease of the brain caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene. CADASIL progresses, in some cases, to subcortical dementia with a particular cognitive impairment. Different diseases in the dementia spectrum share a central cholinergic and sensorimotor plasticity alteration. We aimed to study different intracortical circuits and sensorimotor plasticity in CADASIL patients using transcranial magnetic stimulation protocols, and to determine whether these characteristics correlated with the results of clinical neuropsychological evaluation. Ten CADASIL patients and 10 healthy subjects were included in the study. All subjects underwent a transcranial magnetic stimulation study examining different intracortical circuits. Sensorimotor plasticity was also assessed using a paired associative stimulation and extensive neuropsychological tests. CADASIL patients showed a lack of intracortical facilitation, short latency afferent inhibition and sensorimotor plasticity when compared with control subjects. CADASIL patients also showed an altered neuropsychological profile. Correlation between sensorimotor plasticity and neuropsychological alterations was observed in CADASIL patients. These results suggest that acetylcholine and glutamate could be involved in the dementia process in CADASIL and that abnormal sensorimotor plasticity correlates with the neuropsychological profile in CADASIL patients.