[PMID: 21527990]
Embryonic neuroepithelia and adult subventricular zone (SVZ) stem and progenitor cells express nestin. We characterized a transgenic line that expresses enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) specified to neural tissue by the second intronic enhancer of the nestin promoter that had several novel features. During embryogenesis, the dorsal telencephalon contained many and the ventral telencephalon few eGFP+ cells. eGFP+ cells were found in postnatal and adult neurogenic regions. eGFP+ cells in the SVZ expressed multiple phenotype markers, glial fibrillary acidic protein, Dlx, and neuroblast-specific molecules suggesting the transgene is expressed through the lineage. eGFP+ cell numbers increased in the SVZ after cortical injury, suggesting this line will be useful in probing postinjury neurogenesis. In non-neurogenic regions, eGFP was strongly expressed in oligodendrocyte progenitors, but not in astrocytes, even when they were reactive. This eGFP+ mouse will facilitate studies of proliferative neuroepithelia and adult neurogenesis, as well as of parenchymal oligodendrocytes.

[PMID: 23131160]
Nestin is an intermediate filament protein expressed in neuroepithelial stem cells during development and it is later replaced by cell specific neuronal or glial filaments. Nevertheless, nestin⁺ cells remain within adult tissues and they can be regarded as potential neural stem cell (NSC). Nestin⁺ cells have been detected in Schwann cells related with sensory corpuscles of rodent and they have been demonstrated to be NSC. We have investigated the existence of nestin⁺ in human cutaneous cells Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles through the use of immunohistochemistry techniques and in situ hybridization. S100 protein (also regarded as a marker for NSC) and vimentin (the intermediate filament of mature Schwann cells in sensory corpuscles) were also investigated. The results show that the adult human cutaneous sensory Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles contains a small population of Schwann-related cells (vimentin⁺) which on the basis of their basic immunohistochemical characteristics (S100 protein⁺, nestin⁺) can be potential NSCs. Cells sharing identical immunohistochemical profile were also found in the close vicinity of Meissner corpuscles. Because their localization they are easily accessible and may represent a peripheral niche of NSC to be used for therapeutic goals.

[PMID: 20552272]
Neural stem/progenitor cell (NSP) biology and neurogenesis in adult central nervous system (CNS) are important both towards potential future therapeutic applications for CNS repair, and for the fundamental function of the CNS. In the present study, we report the characterization of NSP population from subventricular zone (SVZ) of neonatal piglet brain using in vivo and in vitro systems. We show that the nestin and vimentin-positive neural progenitor cells are present in the SVZ of the lateral ventricles of neonatal piglet brain. In vitro, piglet NSPs proliferated as neurospheres, expressed the typical protein of neural progenitors, nestin and a range of well-established neurodevelopmental markers. Upon dissociation and subculture, piglet NSPs differentiated into neurons and glial cells. Clonal analysis demonstrates that piglet NSPs are multipotent and retain the capacity to generate both glia and neurons. These cells expressed VEGF, VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and Neuropilin-1 and -2 mRNAs. Real time PCR revealed that SVZ NSPs from newborn piglet expressed total VEGF and all VEGF splice variants. These findings show that piglet NSPs may be helpful to more effectively design growth factor based strategies to enhance endogenous precursor cells for cell transplantation studies potentially leading to the application of this strategy in the nervous system disease and injury.

[PMID: 15458607]
The origin of brain tumors has attracted much controversy. Recent advances in neural stem cell biology coupled with the new concepts of central nervous system development have raised interesting possibilities regarding the oncogenic properties of neural stem/progenitor cells. To elucidate these putative properties further, the clinical materials from an infant brain tumor were analyzed, focusing on the relation with the neural stem/progenitor cells. The expression of neural stem/progenitor cell markers in the tumor cells and the cellular components of the infant brain tumor were examined using immunohistochemistry. The tumor cell biology was analyzed both in culture and in the grafted brain environment. Three main bodies of evidence were demonstrated indicating that the tumor was of possible subventricular zone postnatal or adult normal neural stem cell origin. First, in the tumor specimen we demonstrated the strong positive expression of the neural stem/progenitor cell markers, nestin and Musashi-1. Second, immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of neuronal, astrocytic, and immature precursor cells in the tumor tissue, similar to the cellular components of the subventricular zone, thereby pointing to the subventricular zone as the possible origin of the tumor. The subventricular zone also is one of the strong candidates for the location of postnatal/adult neural stem cells. This cellular evidence was strengthened further by the clinicoradiological findings that demonstrated the involvement of the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle by the tumor. Third, in the in vitro and in vivo experiments, a dynamic shift in expression patterns between neural stem cells (nestin, Musashi-1) and differentiated cells (glial fibrillary acidic protein, neuron-specific Class III beta-tubulin) markers was seen, similar to the proposed behavior of postnatal/adult neural stem cells in situ. These findings suggest that this brain tumor originated from neural stem cells located in the subventricular zone, and the further possibility of the general oncogenic potential of neural stem cells.

[PMID: 16567040]
Precursor cells have been shown to be affected by oxidative stress, in vivo and vitro, but little is known about the expression of antioxidant mechanisms in neuronal/glial differentiation. We have characterized the expression of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (Cu/Zn SOD), one of the main antioxidant proteins involved in the breakdown of superoxide, in the immature rat dorsolateral subventricular zone (SVZ), rostral migratory stream (RMS) and hippocampal subgranular zone (SGZ). Progenitor cells were identified immunohistochemically on cryostat sections by 5'Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and expressing cells were further characterized using double labeling for progenitor markers. In the SVZ, only a subpopulation of BrdU+ cells, mostly found in the medial SVZ, expressed Cu/Zn SOD. These cells were mostly nestin+ and some were also vimentin+. In contrast, in the lateral SVZ few Cu/Zn SOD+/BrdU+ cells were found. These were primarily nestin+, vimentin-, showed some PSA-NCAM expression, but only a few were NG2+. In the RMS and SGZ virtually all BrdU+ progenitors were Cu/Zn SOD+ and expressed nestin and vimentin. Some RMS cells were also PSA-NCAM+. These findings show a heterogeneous expression of Cu/Zn SOD in restricted cell types in the germinative zones and suggest a role for antioxidant Cu/Zn SOD in progenitor cells of the immature rat brain.

[PMID: 16647786]
Because the neural differentiation capacity of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) is still a matter of controversial debate, we performed a thorough investigation into the differentiation capacity of human BMSCs and examined their therapeutic potency. BMSCs were isolated from the femur and kept in cell cultures with various cultivation protocols being applied. In standard culture conditions using a fetal calf serum-enriched medium, while not exhibiting a neural phenotype, the majority of cells expressed a variety of neuronal marker proteins as well as the astrocyte marker GFAP. Only a minority of stem cells expressed nestin, a marker for neural precursor cells. Cultivation in serum-free medium supplemented with specific growth factors resulted in a markedly higher percentage of nestin-positive cells. To establish the therapeutic potency of bone marrow-derived cells, the synthesis of neurotrophic factors such as NGF, BDNF and GDNF was analyzed under non-stimulating standard culture conditions as well as after a neural selection procedure. The therapeutic potency of BMSCs was further examined with regard to their migratory potential in vitro and after transplantation in vivo. After stereotactic engraftment into the lateral ventricle of adult rats, mesenchymal stem cells were seen to adhere to the ependymocytes and cells of the choroids plexus. Afterwards grafted cells passed through the ependymal barrier, locating in the subventricular space. Their BMSCs took up a close host graft interaction without any degenerative influence on the host cells. Furthermore, there was morphological as well as immunohistochemical evidence for a transdifferentiation within the host tissue. In addition, BMSCs could be efficiently transduced using a third-generation adenoviral vector, indicating their potential feasibility for a gene-therapeutic option.

[PMID: 17717696]
Since reports that precursor cells in the adult subventricular zone (SVZ) contribute to regenerative neuro- and gliogenesis in CA1, we wondered whether a similar route of migration might also exist under physiological conditions. Permanent labeling of SVZ precursor cells with a lentiviral vector for green fluorescent protein did not reveal any migration from the SVZ into CA1 in the intact murine brain. However, in a nestin-GFP reporter mouse we found proliferating cells within the corpus callosum/alveus region expressing nestin and glial fibrillary acidic protein similar to precursor cells in the neighboring neurogenic region of the adult dentate gyrus. Within 3 weeks of BrdU administration, BrdU-positive nestin-GFP-expressing protoplasmic astrocytes emerged in CA1. Similar to precursor cells isolated from the dentate gyrus and the SVZ, nestin-GFP-expressing cells from corpus callosum/alveus were self-renewing and multipotent in vitro, whereas cells isolated from CA1 were not. Nestin-GFP-expressing cells in CA1 differentiated into postmitotic astrocytes characterized by S100beta expression. No new neurons were found in CA1. The number of nestin-GFP-expressing astrocytes in CA1 was increased by environmental enrichment. We conclude that astrogenesis in CA1 is influenced by environmental conditions. However, SVZ precursor cells do not contribute to physiological cellular plasticity in CA1.

[PMID: 11294470]
We transplanted adult whole bone marrow prelabeled with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into the ischemic boundary zone of the adult rat brain at 1 day after 2 h of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo). Approximately 3.3% of 10(6) transplanted bone marrow cells were BrdU reactive at 14 days after MCAo. BrdU-reactive cells expressed neuronal and astrocytic proteins, neuronal nuclei protein (NeuN, 1%), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, 5%) immunoreactivities, respectively. In addition, bone marrow transplantation promoted proliferation of ependymal and subependymal cells, identified by nestin (a neuroepithelial stem cell marker), within the ventricular zone and subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ). These data suggest that intracerebral transplantation of bone marrow could potentially be used to induce plasticity in ischemic brain.

[PMID: 22027098]
Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs) reside in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus in adult mammals. The ubiquitin ligase HRD1 is associated with degradation of amyloid precursor protein and believed to be specifically expressed in neurons and not in astrocytes. We investigated expression of HRD1 using immunohistochemistry and found colocalization of HRD1 with the NSC marker protein nestin and glial fibrillary acidic protein in the NSCs of the SVZ (the SVZ astrocytes) but not in the hippocampus. In the hippocampal dentate gyrus, HRD1 is localized in the nucleus of nestin-positive cells.

[PMID: 10802345]
The subventricular zone (SVZ) is an embryonic remnant that persists and remains mitotically active throughout adulthood. The rodent SVZ harbors neuronal precursors, principally in its anterior part, and generates neuroblasts that migrate tangentially into the olfactory bulb, thus forming the so-called rostral migratory stream. This study aimed at characterizing the SVZ in the human brain. Antibodies raised against the widely used SVZ molecular markers nestin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, beta-tubulin-III and polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule, have allowed us to characterize in detail a zone similar to the rodent SVZ in humans. Virtually all portions of the lateral ventricle, as well as the ventral (hypothalamic) sector of the third ventricle, displayed immunoreactivity for most of the molecular markers. The midline region of the septum (septal recess) and the ventral portion of the SVZ displayed a particularly intense immunostaining for all SVZ markers. These two regions may represent zones of adult neurogenesis that are unique to primates. Furthermore, the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 was found to be actively synthesized and co-expressed with all the other markers throughout the entire SVZ. This study reveals that a well-developed SVZ exists in the adult human brain and suggests that Bcl-2 might play an important role in the functional organization of such a system.

[PMID: 15056462]
Nestin is a unique intermediate filament protein. While it is robustly expressed in developing brain, postnatal expression is limited to the brain's subventricular zone (SVZ) and endothelial cells. Reexpression occurs, however, under several pathological conditions, including injury and neoplasia. We hypothesized that nestin would be a sensitive marker of early neoplasia after transplacental exposure of rats to ethylnitrosourea (ENU). Rats of various ages were administered bromodeoxyuridine (BudR) before sacrifice, and brain sections were examined for proliferative cells and several immunohistochemical markers, including nestin. Additional rats were examined after a stab wound injury to assess the expression of two of these markers, GFAP and nestin, in reactive astrocytes. All ENU-induced brain tumors (n = 9) were classified as gliomas (astrocytomas or oligoastrocytomas) based on their histology and immunophenotype. Nestin expression was noted in all tumors examined and was present in tumor cells as well as endothelial cells. During tumor development, we consistently noted nestin-expressing cells bearing multiple processes distributed throughout brain parenchyma. Both single cells and multiple cell clusters were observed as early as postnatal day 30 in all ENU-exposed brains examined (n = 11). Such distinctive nestin-expressing cells were not seen in nestin-stained control brains or ENU-exposed brains stained for GFAP or vimentin, nor was such a cell seen in a stab wound model used to assess reactive astrocytosis. While the number of these clusters was highly variable among rats, their size increased between 30 and 90 days. The data suggest that these nestin-expressing cells represent an early stage of the neoplastic process. It remains to be determined whether these cells become apparent at 30 days of age due to "dedifferentiation" of a local resident astrocyte or astrocyte precursor cell or migration of a relatively undifferentiated precursor/stem cell from the SVZ.

[PMID: 11078926]
The mature central nervous system contains precursor cells in the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle. In this study we examined the possibility to affect fate of precursor cells through exogenous manipulations. The results indicate that administration of thyroid hormone and retinoic acid increases the expression of Ki67, a nuclear antigen associated with cell proliferation, and of nestin, a marker protein for precursor cells in the subventricular zone of adult male rats. Moreover, retinoic acid increases polysialated-neural cell adhesion molecules (PSA-NCAM)-immunoreactivity. These data suggest that nuclear receptor ligands are potential candidates for fate determination of precursor cells in the subventricular zone also in the adult brain.

[PMID: 23407958]
Prominin-1 (CD133) is commonly used to isolate stem and progenitor cells from the developing and adult nervous system and to identify cancer stem cells in brain tumors. However, despite extensive characterization of Prominin-1(+) precursor cells from the adult subventricular zone, no information about the expression of Prominin-1 by precursor cells in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the adult hippocampus has been available. We show here that Prominin-1 is expressed by a significant number of cells in the SGZ of adult mice in vivo and ex vivo, including postmitotic astrocytes. A small subset of Prominin-1(+) cells coexpressed the nonspecific precursor cell marker Nestin as well as GFAP and Sox2. Upon fluorescence-activated cell sorting, only Prominin-1/Nestin double-positive cells fulfilled the defining stem cell criteria of proliferation, self-renewal, and multipotentiality as assessed by a neurosphere assay. In addition, isolated primary Prominin-1(+) cells preferentially migrated to the neurogenic niche in the SGZ upon transplantation in vivo. Finally, despite its expression by various stem and progenitor cells, Prominin-1 turned out to be dispensable for precursor cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Nevertheless, a net decrease in hippocampal neurogenesis, by ∼30% was found in Prominin-1 knock-out mice, suggesting other roles in controlling adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Remarkably, an upregulation of Prominin-2 was detected in Prominin-1-deficient mice highlighting a potential compensatory mechanism, which might explain the lack of severe symptoms in individuals carrying mutations in the Prom1 gene.

[PMID: 14715941]
The subventricular zone of the rodent brain retains the capacity of generating new neurons in adulthood. The newly formed neuroblasts migrate rostrally toward the olfactory bulb, where they differentiate as granular and periglomerular interneurons. The reported presence of differentiated neurons expressing the neuronal isoform of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) in the periphery of the neurogenic region and the organization of their varicose axons as a network in which the precursors are immersed raised the hypothesis that endogenous nitric oxide (NO) may participate in the control of neurogenesis in the subventricular zone. Systemic administration of the NOS inhibitors N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester or 7-nitroindazole to adult mice produced a dose- and time-dependent increase in the number of mitotic cells in the subventricular zone, rostral migratory stream, and olfactory bulb, but not in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, without affecting apoptosis. In the subventricular zone, this effect was exerted selectively on a precursor subpopulation expressing nestin but not neuronal or glial cell-specific proteins. In addition, in the olfactory bulb, analysis of maturation markers in the newly generated neurons indicated that chronic NOS inhibition caused a delay in neuronal differentiation. Postmitotic cell survival and migration were not affected when NO production was impaired. Our results suggest that NO, produced by nitrergic neurons in the adult mouse subventricular zone and olfactory bulb, exerts a negative control on the size of the undifferentiated precursor pool and promotes neuronal differentiation.

[PMID: 12812760]
To investigate the effect of global cerebral ischemia on brain cell proliferation in young adult macaques, we infused 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU), a DNA replication indicator, into monkeys subjected to ischemia or sham-operated. Subsequent quantification by BrdU immunohistochemistry revealed a significant postischemic increase in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the hippocampal dentate gyrus, subventricular zone of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle, and temporal neocortex. In all animals, 20-40% of the newly generated cells in the dentate gyrus and subventricular zone expressed the neural progenitor cell markers Musashi1 or Nestin. A few BrdU-positive cells in postischemic monkeys were double-stained for markers of neuronal progenitors (class III beta-tubulin, TUC4, doublecortin, or Hu), neurons (NeuN), or glia (S100beta or GFAP). Our results suggest that ischemia activates endogenous neuronal and glial precursors residing in diverse locations of the adult primate central nervous system.