[PMID: 12361237]
Recent studies on the mode of action have revealed exciting features of multiple activities of nisin and related lantibiotics making these peptides interesting model systems for the design of new antibiotics (Molec. Microbiol. 30 (1998) 317; Science 286 (1999) 2361; J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 1772.). In contrast to other groups of antibiotic peptides, the lantibiotics display a substantial degree of specificity for particular components of bacterial membranes. Mersacidin and actagardine were shown to bind with high affinity to the lipid coupled peptidoglycan precursor, the so-called lipid II, which prevents the polymerisation of the cell wall monomers into a functional murein sacculus. The lantibiotics nisin and epidermin also bind tightly to this cell wall precursor; however, for these lantibiotics the binding of lipid II has two consequences. Like with mersacidin blocking of lipid II inhibits peptidoglycan biosynthesis; in addition, lipid II is used as a specific docking molecule for the formation of pores. This combination of lethal effects explains the potency of these peptides, which are active in nanomolar concentration. Other type-A lantibiotics are believed to also use docking molecules for pore formation, although identification of such membrane components has not yet been achieved.

[PMID: 19009315]
Lantibiotics, a group of lanthionine-containing peptides, display their antibiotic activity by combining different killing mechanisms within one molecule. The prototype lantibiotic nisin was shown to possess both inhibition of peptidoglycan synthesis and pore formation in bacterial membranes by interacting with lipid II. Gallidermin, which shares the lipid II binding motif with nisin but has a shorter molecular length, differed from nisin in pore formation in several strains of bacteria. To simulate the mode of action, we applied cyclic voltammetry and quartz crystal microbalance to correlate pore formation with lipid II binding kinetics of gallidermin in model membranes. The inability of gallidermin to form pores in DOPC (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) (C18/1) and DPoPC (1,2-dipalmitoleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) (C16/1) membranes was related to the membrane thickness. For a better simulation of bacterial membrane characteristics, two different phospholipids with branched fatty acids were incorporated into the DPoPC matrix. Phospholipids with methyl branches in the middle of the fatty acid chains favored a lipid II-independent DPoPC permeabilization by gallidermin, while long-branched phospholipids in which the branch is placed near the hydrophilic region induced an identical lipid II-dependent pore formation of gallidermin and nisin. Obviously, the branched lipids altered lipid packing and reduced the membrane thickness. Therefore, the duality of gallidermin activity (pore formation and inhibition of the cell wall synthesis) seems to be balanced by the bacterial membrane composition.

[PMID: 1482192]
Nisin produced by Lactococcus lactis 6F3 is used as a food preservative and is the most important member of a group of peptide-antibiotics containing lanthionine bridges (lantibiotics) (N. Schnell, K.-D. Entian, U. Schneider, F. Götz, H. Zähner, R. Kellner, and G. Jung, Nature [London] 333:276-278, 1988). Nisin is ribosomally synthesized, and its structural gene, nisA, encodes a prepeptide that is posttranslationally modified, revealing the active lantibiotic (C. Kaletta and K.-D. Entian, J. Bacteriol. 171:1597-1601, 1989). Adjacent to nisA, the additional genes nisB, nisT, and nisC were identified. Over their entire sequences, these genes were homologous to genes recently identified as important for the biosynthesis of lantibiotics, that is, subtilin from Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 and epidermin from Staphylococcus epidermidis Tü 3298. Genes nisB, nisT, and nisC corresponded to open reading frames of 993, 600, and 418 amino acid residues, respectively. The nisT open reading frame is homologous to proteins of the HlyB (hemolysin B protein of Escherichia coli) subfamily. Proteins of this subfamily are responsible for the secretion of a variety of compounds, including large polypeptides, polysaccharides, and anti-drug tumors, indicating that NisT may be involved in nisin transport. Northern (RNA) blot analysis revealed a 0.3-kb transcript for the nisA structural gene, and the transcriptional start point of the nisA gene was determined by primer extension. Additionally, a mRNA of at least 3 kb was identified by using a hybridization probe specific to nisB. Antibodies were raised against the NisB protein, and Western blot (immunoblot) analysis revealed a molecular weight of about 115 kDa, which is in accordance with the theoretical protein size of 117.5 kDa as calculated from the nisB open reading frame. Several amphipathic transmembrane alpha-helices indicated that NisB is associated with the membrane. This was confirmed by preparing L. lactis vesicles. The NisB protein was tightly associated with the vesicle fraction and was released by sodium dodecyl sulfate treatment only. These results suggest that NisB is membrane associated and that nisin biosynthesis occurs at the cell membrane.

[PMID: 21905643]
Lantibiotics are peptide antibiotics, realizing their unique secondary structure by posttranslational modifications, the most important one being the formation of the characteristic amino acid lanthionine. Like other ribosomal peptide antibiotics, they are synthesized with an N-terminal leader peptide important for posttranslational processing by modifying enzymes; after peptide maturation, the leader peptide is proteolytically cleaved off. Numerous studies of the leader peptides of class I and II lantibiotics already showed their crucial role in recognition, self-immunity, and extracellular transport. The recently described labyrinthopeptins, members of the family of class III lantibiotics, exhibit the characteristic novel amino acid labionin, which was revealed by elucidation of the structure of labyrinthopeptin A2. The assembly of the labionin motif in the linear peptide chain is mediated by the lyase-kinase-cyclase-type enzyme LabKC through a serine side chain phosphorylation with GTP, elimination of the phosphate group, and a subsequent 2-fold Michael-type addition cyclization. In this work, we systematically investigated for the first time the importance of the leader peptide in the processing of class III lantibiotics using the example of the labyrinthopeptin A2 precursor peptide. In vitro studies with synthetic leader peptide analogues revealed that a conserved N-terminal hydrophobic patch on a putative helical structure is required for the proper peptide processing by the modifying enzyme LabKC. On the other hand, studies showed that the C-terminal part of the leader peptide serves as a spacer between the binding site and active sites for phosphorylation and elimination, thus restricting the number of hydroxy amino acid side chains that could undergo dehydration. Finally, a model for the peptide recognition and processing by the LabKC has been postulated.

[PMID: 11945173]
Lantibiotics are antibiotic peptides distinguished by the presence of the rare thioether amino acids lanthionine and/or methyllanthionine. They are produced by Gram-positive bacteria as gene-encoded precursor peptides and undergo post-translational modification to generate the mature peptide. The structural gene for the prepeptide and the genes involved in biosynthesis, processing, export as well as regulation and producer strain self-protection are organized in clusters. Based on their structural and functional features lantibiotics are currently divided into two major groups. The flexible amphiphilic type-A lantibiotics act primarily by pore formation in the bacterial membrane, a mechanism which was recently shown, e.g. for nisin and epidermin, to involve the interaction with specific docking molecules such as the membrane precursor lipid II. The rather rigid and globular type-B lantibiotics inhibit enzyme functions through interaction with the respective substrates: mersacidin and actagardine inhibit the cell wall biosynthesis by complexing lipid II, whereas the cinnamycin-like peptides inhibit phospholipases by binding phosphoethanolamine. Lantibiotics have attracted much attention in recent years and undergone extensive characterization. New insights into the mode of action and structure-function relationships as well as the biochemistry and the genetics will be outlined in this review.

[PMID: 24069959]
The emergence of bacterial drug resistance encourages the re-evaluation of the potential of existing antimicrobials. Lantibiotics are post-translationally modified, ribosomally synthesised antimicrobial peptides with a broad spectrum antimicrobial activity. Here, we focussed on expanding the potential of lacticin 3147, one of the most studied lantibiotics and one which possesses potent activity against a wide range of Gram positive species including many nosocomial pathogens. More specifically, our aim was to investigate if lacticin 3147 activity could be enhanced when combined with a range of different clinical antibiotics. Initial screening revealed that polymyxin B and polymyxin E (colistin) exhibited synergistic activity with lacticin 3147. Checkerboard assays were performed against a number of strains, including both Gram positive and Gram negative species. The resultant fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) index values established that, while partial synergy was detected against Gram positive targets, synergy was obvious against Gram negative species, including Cronobacter and E. coli. Combining lacticin 3147 with low levels of a polymyxin could provide a means of broadening target specificity of the lantibiotic, while also reducing polymyxin use due to the lower concentrations required as a result of synergy.

[PMID: 21470152]
Lantibiotics are ribosomally synthesized, post-translationally modified, peptide antibiotics containing unusual amino acids such as dehydrated amino acids and lanthionine. These unusual amino acids impose conformational constraints on the peptide and contribute to the biological activity and high physicochemical stability of lantibiotics. Recent researches on the modification enzymes responsible for dehydration and cyclization have considerably increased our understanding of their molecular characteristics and relaxed specificity. These insights enabled us to exploit these modification enzymes for developing new lantibiotic variants with improved therapeutic potential. Several methodologies have been explored to engineer novel lantibiotics. Here, we outline the current knowledge of modification enzymes. We also describe the methodologies and strategies used to engineer lantibiotics and provide some examples of successful generation of lantibiotics with enhanced activity.

[PMID: 23168402]
Lantibiotics are biologically active peptides produced by Gram-positive bacteria. Starting from fermentation broth extracts preselected from a high-throughput screening program for discovering cell-wall inhibitors, we successfully isolated a new lantibiotic produced by Actinoplanes sp., designated as NAI-802. MS and NMR analysis together with explorative chemistry established that NAI-802 consists of 21 amino acids, 19 of which are identical to those present in the class II lantibiotic actagardine. Interestingly, NAI-802 carries one extra alanine and one extra arginine at the N- and C-termini, respectively. As expected from the overall higher positive charge, NAI-802 was slightly more active than actagardine against staphylococci and streptococci. Further improvement of its antibacterial activity was achieved by adding one additional positive charge through conversion of the C-terminal carboxylate into the corresponding basic amide. NAI-802 thus represents a novel promising candidate for treating Gram-positive infections caused by multidrug-resistant pathogens.

[PMID: 8264800]
Lantibiotics are defined as peptide antibiotics containing the unusual amino acids mesolanthionine, 3-methyllanthionine, dehydroalanine, and dehydrobutyrine. They are synthesized by some gram-positive bacteria. Their inhibitory effect on certain other gram-positive bacteria is explained by detergent-like damage of cytoplasmic membranes. Prominent members of the lantibiotics are nisin of Lactococcus lactis, which can be used as a food preservative, subtilin of Bacillus subtilis, which is similar to nisin, and epidermin of Staphylococcus epidermidis, which is considered in the treatment of acne. Lantibiotics are ribosomally synthesized as prepeptides, which are posttranslationally modified. Genes probably encoding these biosynthetic enzymes and regulatory factors have been identified adjacent to the structural genes of the lantibiotics subtilin, nisin, and epidermin.

[PMID: 25787977]
The dramatic rise in the incidence of antibiotic resistance demands that new therapeutic options will have to be developed. One potentially interesting class of antimicrobials are the modified bacteriocins termed lantibiotics, which are bacterially produced, posttranslationally modified, lanthionine/methyllanthionine-containing peptides. It is interesting that low levels of resistance have been reported for lantibiotics compared with commercial antibiotics. Given that there are very few examples of naturally occurring lantibiotic resistance, attempts have been made to deliberately induce resistance phenotypes in order to investigate this phenomenon. Mechanisms that hinder the action of lantibiotics are often innate systems that react to the presence of any cationic peptides/proteins or ones which result from cell well damage, rather than being lantibiotic specific. Such resistance mechanisms often arise due to altered gene regulation following detection of antimicrobials/cell wall damage by sensory proteins at the membrane. This facilitates alterations to the cell wall or changes in the composition of the membrane. Other general forms of resistance include the formation of spores or biofilms, which are a common mechanistic response to many classes of antimicrobials. In rare cases, bacteria have been shown to possess specific antilantibiotic mechanisms. These are often species specific and include the nisin lytic protein nisinase and the phenomenon of immune mimicry.

[PMID: 23475977]
The increasing prevalence of antibiotic resistance in bacterial pathogens has renewed focus on natural products with antimicrobial properties. Lantibiotics are ribosomally synthesized peptide antibiotics that are posttranslationally modified to introduce (methyl)lanthionine bridges. Actinomycetes are renowned for their ability to produce a large variety of antibiotics, many with clinical applications, but are known to make only a few lantibiotics. One such compound is planosporicin produced by Planomonospora alba, which inhibits cell wall biosynthesis in Gram-positive pathogens. Planosporicin is a type AI lantibiotic structurally similar to those which bind lipid II, the immediate precursor for cell wall biosynthesis. The gene cluster responsible for planosporicin biosynthesis was identified by genome mining and subsequently isolated from a P. alba cosmid library. A minimal cluster of 15 genes sufficient for planosporicin production was defined by heterologous expression in Nonomuraea sp. strain ATCC 39727, while deletion of the gene encoding the precursor peptide from P. alba, which abolished planosporicin production, was also used to confirm the identity of the gene cluster. Deletion of genes encoding likely biosynthetic enzymes identified through bioinformatic analysis revealed that they, too, are essential for planosporicin production in the native host. Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis indicated that the planosporicin gene cluster is transcribed in three operons. Expression of one of these, pspEF, which encodes an ABC transporter, in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) conferred some degree of planosporicin resistance on the heterologous host. The inability to delete these genes from P. alba suggests that they play an essential role in immunity in the natural producer.

[PMID: 15044440]
Lantibiotics are lanthionine-containing peptide antibiotics. Nisin, encoded by nisA, is a pentacyclic lantibiotic produced by some Lactococcus lactis strains. Its thioether rings are posttranslationally introduced by a membrane-bound enzyme complex. This complex is composed of three enzymes: NisB, which dehydrates serines and threonines; NisC, which couples these dehydrated residues to cysteines, thus forming thioether rings; and the transporter NisT. We followed the activity of various combinations of the nisin enzymes by measuring export of secreted peptides using antibodies against the leader peptide and mass spectroscopy for detection. L. lactis expressing the nisABTC genes efficiently produced fully posttranslationally modified prenisin. Strikingly, L. lactis expressing the nisBT genes could produce dehydrated prenisin without thioether rings and a dehydrated form of a non-lantibiotic peptide. In the absence of the biosynthetic NisBC enzymes, the NisT transporter was capable of excreting unmodified prenisin and fusions of the leader peptide with non-lantibiotic peptides. Our data show that NisT specifies a broad spectrum (poly)peptide transporter that can function either in conjunction with or independently from the biosynthetic genes. NisT secretes both unmodified and partially or fully posttranslationally modified forms of prenisin and non-lantibiotic peptides. These results open the way for efficient production of a wide range of peptides with increased stability or novel bioactivities.

[PMID: 24621781]
Frequent use of antibiotics has led to the emergence of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. Lantibiotic compounds are ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides against which bacteria are not able to produce resistance, hence making them a good alternative to antibiotics. Nisin is the oldest and the most widely used lantibiotic, in food preservation, without having developed any significant resistance against it. Having their antimicrobial potential and a limited number, there is a need to identify novel lantibiotics. Identification of novel lantibiotic biosynthetic clusters from an ever increasing database of bacterial genomes, can provide a major lead in this direction. In order to achieve this, a strategy was adopted to identify novel lantibiotic biosynthetic clusters by screening the sequenced genomes for LanT homolog, which is a conserved lantibiotic transporter specific to type IB clusters. This strategy resulted in identification of 54 bacterial strains containing the LanT homologs, which are not the known lantibiotic producers. Of these, 24 strains were subjected to a detailed bioinformatic analysis to identify genes encoding for precursor peptides, modification enzyme, immunity and quorum sensing proteins. Eight clusters having two LanM determinants, similar to haloduracin and lichenicidin were identified, along with 13 clusters having a single LanM determinant as in mersacidin biosynthetic cluster. Besides these, orphan LanT homologs were also identified which might be associated with novel bacteriocins, encoded somewhere else in the genome. Three identified gene clusters had a C39 domain containing LanT transporter, associated with the LanBC proteins and double glycine type precursor peptides, the only known example of such a cluster is that of salivaricin. This study led to the identification of 8 novel putative two-component lantibiotic clusters along with 13 having a single LanM and 3 with LanBC genes. Putative lantibiotic clusters identified here hold the potential for the discovery of novel lantibiotic(s).

[PMID: 24210177]
The immense potential of bacteria for production of antimicrobials represents an inexhaustible source of new antibiotics. An emerging class of natural products is constituted by ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides (RiPPs). "Lantibiotics" (lanthionine and/or methyl-lanthionine containing antibiotics) belong to the earliest members of this class. The characteristic thioether amino acids are introduced into the precursor peptides by enzyme-mediated posttranslational modifications. The encouraging antimicrobial activity of lantibiotics against multiresistant clinical pathogens, their stability against proteases, heat and oxidation make lantibiotics interesting candidates for novel antimicrobial applications in many areas of the healthcare sector and associated industries. In addition to applications as alternatives to classical antibiotics, lantibiotics can be used as probiotics, prophylactics or additives. Furthermore, the in vitro activity of the lantibiotic modification machinery opens the possibility to generate either improved synthetic lantibiotic peptides or to introduce thioether cross-links into existing therapeutics.

[PMID: 19393544]
Lantibiotics are one of the most promising alternative candidates for future antibiotics that maintain their antibacterial efficacy through many mechanisms. Of these mechanisms, some modes of activity have recently been reported, providing opportunities to show these peptides as potential candidates for forthcoming applications. Many findings providing new insight into the detailed molecular activities of numerous lantibiotics are constantly being uncovered. The combination of antibiotic mechanisms in one lantibiotic molecule shows its diverse antimicrobial usefulness as a future generation of antibiotic. Since lantibiotics do not have any known candidate resistance mechanisms, the discovered distinct modes of activity may revolutionize the design of anti-infective drugs through the knowledge provided by these super molecules. In this review, we discuss the rising assortment of lantibiotics, with special emphasis on their structure-function relationships, addressing the unique activities involved in their individual modes of action.