[PMID: 29937317]
Resistin is an immunometabolic mediator that is elevated in several inflammatory disorders. A ligand for Toll-like receptor 4, resistin modulates the recruitment and activation of myeloid cells, notably neutrophils. Neutrophils are major drivers of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease, in part due to the release of human neutrophil elastase- and myeloperoxidase-rich primary granules, leading to tissue damage. Here we assessed the relationship of resistin to CF lung disease. Resistin levels were measured in plasma and sputum from three retrospective CF cohorts spanning a wide range of disease. We also assessed the ability of neutrophils to secrete resistin upon activation in vitro. Finally, we constructed a multivariate model assessing the relationship between resistin levels and lung function. Plasma resistin levels were only marginally higher in CF than in healthy control subjects. By contrast, sputum resistin levels were very high in CF, reaching 50-100 fold higher levels than in plasma. Among CF patients, higher plasma resistin levels were associated with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and higher sputum resistin levels were associated with CF-related diabetes. Mechanistically, in vitro release of neutrophil primary granules was concomitant with resistin secretion. Overall, sputum resistin levels were negatively correlated with CF lung function, independently of other variables (age, sex, and genotype). Our data establish relationships between resistin levels in the plasma and sputum of CF patients that correlate with disease status, and identify resistin as a novel mechanistic link between neutrophilic inflammation and lung disease in CF.

[PMID: 24780007]
Resistin is an adipocytokine that has been related to inflammation and insulin resistance. Following knee injury, elevated levels of resistin have been found in synovial fluid (SF) while very little is known about the role of resistin in osteoarthritis (OA). The aim of the present study was to investigate resistin levels in OA joints and to determine if it is associated with inflammatory and catabolic factors in the joints. SF, plasma, and cartilage samples were collected from 88 OA patients undergoing knee replacement surgery. Resistin levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in SF, plasma, and cartilage culture media. Significant levels of resistin [0.75 (0.67) ng/mL; median (IQR)] were found in SF from OA patients. Resistin correlated positively with interleukin (IL)-6 (r = 0.39, p < 0.001) and with matrix metalloproteinases MMP-1 (r = 0.31, p = 0.004) and MMP-3 (r = 0.24, p = 0.024) in SF. Resistin was also released from cultured OA cartilage and it correlated with resistin levels in SF (r = 0.39, p < 0.001). In addition, resistin levels in plasma correlated positively with those in SF (r = 0.44, p < 0.001). There were no differences in SF or plasma resistin concentrations between females and males or between non-diabetic and diabetic patients, and resistin did not correlate with body mass index (BMI). Resistin is present in OA joints and is released from OA cartilage. Levels of resistin in SF are associated with inflammatory and catabolic factors, suggesting that resistin has a role to play in the pathogenesis of, and as a possible drug target in, OA.

[PMID: 18417718]
Resistin is known as an adipocyte-specific secretory hormone that can cause insulin resistance and decrease adipocyte differentiation. It can be regulated by sexual hormones. Whether environmental estrogens regulate the production of resistin is still not clear. Using 3T3-L1 adipocytes, we found that octylphenol upregulated resistin mRNA expression in dose- and time-dependent manners. The concentration of octylphenol that increased resistin mRNA levels by 50% was approximately 100 nM within 6 h of treatment. The basal half-life of resistin mRNA induced by actinomycin D was lengthened by octylphenol treatment, suggesting that octylphenol decreases the rate of resistin mRNA degradation. In addition, octylphenol stimulated resistin protein expression and release. The basal half-life of resistin protein induced by cycloheximide was lengthened by octylphenol treatment, suggesting that octylphenol decreases the rate of resistin protein degradation. While octylphenol was shown to increase activities of the estrogen receptor (ER) and MEK1, signaling was demonstrated to be blocked by pretreatment with either ICI-182780 (an ERalpha antagonist) or U-0126 (a MEK1 inhibitor), in which both inhibitors prevented octylphenol-stimulated phosphorylation of ERK. These results imply that ERalpha and ERK are necessary for the octylphenol stimulation of resistin mRNA expression. Moreover, U-0126 antagonized the octylphenol-increased resistin protein expression and release. These data suggest that the way octylphenol signaling increases resistin protein levels is similar to that by which it increases resistin mRNA levels; it is likely mediated through an ERK-dependent pathway. In vivo, octylphenol increased adipose resistin mRNA expression and serum resistin and glucose levels, supporting its in vitro effect.

[PMID: 26729407]
Resistin, an adipocyte-secreted factor, is known to be elevated in breast cancer patients. However, the molecular mechanism by which resistin acts is not fully understood. The aim of this study was to investigate whether resistin could stimulate invasion and migration of breast cancer cells. Here, we report that resistin stimulated invasion and migration of breast cancer cells as well as phosphorylation of c-Src. Inhibition of c-Src blocked resistin-induced breast cancer cell invasion. Resistin increased intracellular calcium concentration, and chelation of intracellular calcium blocked resistin-mediated activation of Src. Resistin also induced phosphorylation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Inhibition of c-Src blocked resistin-mediated PP2A phosphorylation. In addition, resistin increased phosphorylation of PKCα. Inhibition of PP2A enhanced resistin-induced PKCα phosphorylation, demonstrating that PP2A activity is critical for PKCα phosphorylation. Resistin also increased phosphorylation of ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERM). Additionally, ezrin interacted with PKCα, and resistin promoted co-localization of ezrin and PKCα. Either inhibition of c-Src and PKCα or knock-down of ezrin blocked resistin-induced breast cancer cells invasion. Moreover, resistin increased expression of vimentin, a key molecule for cancer cell invasion. Knock-down of ezrin abrogated resistin-induced vimentin expression. These results suggest that resistin play as a critical regulator of breast cancer metastasis.

[PMID: 23981771]
Resistin is a circulating mediator of insulin resistance mainly expressed in human monocytes and responsive to inflammatory stimuli. Recent clinical studies have connected elevated resistin levels with the development and severity of heart failure. To further our understanding of the role of human resistin in heart failure, we studied a humanized mouse model lacking murine resistin but transgenic for the human Retn gene (Hum-Retn mice), which exhibits basal and inflammation-stimulated resistin levels similar to humans. Specifically, we explored whether resistin underlies acute anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity. Remarkably, doxorubicin (25mg/kg ip) led to a 4-fold induction of serum resistin levels in Hum-Retn mice. Moreover, doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity was greater in the Hum-Retn mice than in littermate controls not expressing human resistin (Retn(-/-)). Hum-Retn mice showed increased cardiac mRNA levels of inflammatory and cell adhesion genes compared with Retn(-/-) mice. Macrophages, but not cardiomyocytes, from Hum-Retn mice treated with doxorubicin in vitro showed dramatic induction of hRetn (human resistin) mRNA and protein expression. We also examined resistin levels in anthracycline-treated breast cancer patients with and without cardiotoxicity. Intriguingly, serum resistin levels in women undergoing anthracycline-containing chemotherapy increased significantly at 3 months and remained elevated at 6 months in those with subsequent cardiotoxicity. Further, elevation in resistin correlated with decline in ejection fraction in these women. These results suggest that elevated resistin is a biomarker of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and may contribute in the development of heart failure via its direct effects on macrophages. These results further implicate resistin as a link between inflammation, metabolism, and heart disease.

[PMID: 15103228]
Resistin is a new adipocytokine which is expressed in rat, mouse and possibly human adipose tissue. Its putative role as a mediator of insulin resistance is controversial. We hypothesized that resistin, like leptin, would have multiple roles in non-adipose tissues and we reported that resistin is expressed in mouse brain and pituitary. Moreover, resistin expression in female mouse pituitary is developmentally regulated and maximal expression occurs peripubertally. Although the role of endogenous resistin in mouse brain and pituitary has not been determined, our data suggest that resistin could be important in the postnatal maturation of the hypothalamic-pituitary system. In the present study we compared the ontogeny of resistin gene expression in the pituitary of male and female mice using semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis. We show that resistin expression is developmentally regulated in the pituitary of male and female CD1 mice. However, significant gender differences were evident (male > female at postnatal day 28 and 42) and this was not modified by neonatal treatment of female pups with testosterone. Since resistin expression in adipose tissue is also influenced by obesity, we evaluated resistin expression in fat, brain and pituitary of the obese ob/ob mouse. Resistin mRNA was significantly increased in both visceral and subcutaneous adipose depots in postnatal day 28 ob/ob mice compared to controls, but pituitary resistin expression was significantly reduced. In contrast to the prepubertal levels, and in agreement with other reports, adipose resistin expression was reduced in adult ob/ob mice. In a third set of experiments we examined the influence of food deprivation on pituitary and fat resistin mRNA. Resistin gene expression was severely down-regulated by a 24-hour fast in adipose and pituitary tissue but not in hypothalamus. In conclusion, pituitary resistin expression is age- and gender-dependent. In ob/ob mice, and in fasted mice, resistin is regulated in a tissue-specific manner. Thus in visceral fat obesity increases but starvation decreases resistin mRNA. In contrast, pituitary levels are decreased in the presence of both high (ob/ob) and low (fasting) adipose stores. Further studies are required to define the unexpected hormonal regulation of resistin gene expression in the pituitary.

[PMID: 30353146]
The adipokine resistin has been proposed to link obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes. We have previously reported that diabetic hearts express high levels of resistin while overexpression of resistin in adult rat hearts gives rise to a phenotype resembling diabetic cardiomyopathy. The transcriptional regulation of resistin in diabetic cardiac tissue is currently unknown. This study investigated the mechanism of resistin upregulation and the role of Serca2a in its transcriptional suppression. We demonstrate that restoration of Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis in diabetic hearts, through normalization of Serca2a function genetically and pharmacologically, suppressed resistin expression via inhibition of NFATc. H9c2 myocytes stimulated with high-glucose concentration or Ca<sup>2+</sup> time-dependently increased NFATc and resistin expression while addition of the Ca<sup>2+</sup> chelator BAPTA-AM attenuated this effect. NFATc expression was enhanced in hearts from ob/ob diabetic and from cardiac-specific Serca2a<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Similarly, NFATc increased resistin expression in myocytes cultured in low glucose while the NFATc inhibitor VIVIT blocked glucose-induced resistin expression, suggesting that hyperglycemia/diabetes induces resistin expression possibly through NFATc activation. Interestingly, overexpression of Serca2a or VIVIT mitigated glucose-stimulated resistin and NFATc expression and enhanced AMPK activity, a downstream target of resistin signaling. NFATc direct activation of resistin was verified by resistin promoter luciferase activity and chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis. Interestingly, activation of Serca2a by a novel agonist, CDN1163, mirrored the effects of AAV9-Serca2a gene transfer on resistin expression and its promoter activity and AMPK signaling in diabetic mice. These findings parse a role for Ca<sup>2+</sup> in resistin transactivation and provide support that manipulation of Serca2a-NFATc-Resistin axis might be useful in hyper-resistinemic conditions.

[PMID: 19024936]
The body mass index, and especially the lean/fat tissue ratio, are determinants of female fertility. In 1996, it was claimed that leptin might be the "missing link" between fat and reproduction. Leptin belongs to the adipokine family, which also contains adiponectin and resistin. Leptin and resistin impair insulin sensitivity, whereas adiponectin enhances it. Leptin is a potent stimulator of central GnRH and gonadotropin secretion, and, paradoxically, a potent inhibitor of ovarian steroidogenesis. The central roles of adiponectin and resistin are less clear. In the ovary, adiponectin stimulates steroidogenesis by granulosa cells. Recent data point to the existence of a distinct lipid metabolism in the ovary. Its role in female reproduction will provide an exciting field of research in coming years.

[PMID: 12660880]
Resistin is a recently discovered hormone that is exclusively expressed in adipose tissue. Its expression in rodents was reported to be elevated or suppressed in genetic and diet-induced obesity, respectively. Resistin treatment impaired glucose tolerance and insulin action. Immunoneutralization of resistin improved insulin sensitivity, while thiazolidinedione treatment reduced resistin expression. Therefore, resistin could play a critical role in the development of obesity and type 2 diabetes. In this study were determined resistin plasma levels in humans suffering from type 1 and type 2 diabetes and in healthy controls. Plasma levels of resistin in healthy controls were 38.78 ng/ml. They were not statistically different in individuals with a broad BMI range. Resistin plasma levels in type 2 diabetes were 38.7 ng/ml, and 39.4 ng/ml in type 1 diabetes. Thiazolidinedione treatment did not influence resistin plasma levels. We conclude from our data: 1. resistin can be detected in human plasma, 2. plasma resistin levels are not different in type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

[PMID: 18191042]
Resistin is an adipokine that induces insulin resistance in mice; serum concentrations are decreased by fasting and increased by feeding. Adiponectin, another adipokine, improves insulin sensitivity. The aims of this study were to determine the effects of glucose and meal loading on serum resistin and total and high-molecular weight (HMW) adiponectin in humans and to explore potential determinants of fasting serum resistin and of changes in resistin. Serum resistin and total and HMW adiponectin were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in young, lean, nondiabetic subjects during 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and meal tolerance test (MTT). Resistin single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) -420 was typed. Serum resistin was decreased at 60 and 120 minutes during OGTT compared with baseline (n = 36, 1-way repeated-measures analysis of variance, P < .0001; Scheffe, P = .0457 and P < .0001, respectively). Serum resistin was also reduced at 240 minutes during MTT (n = 33, 1-way repeated measures analysis of variance, P < .0001; Scheffe, P = .0002). Multiple regression analysis adjusted for age, sex, and body mass index revealed that the reductions in serum resistin were dependent on baseline resistin levels. Subjects with greater baseline concentrations of resistin experienced more pronounced declines in resistin (OGTT, unstandardized regression coefficient (beta) = -0.19, P = .0005; MTT, beta = -0.63, P < .0001). Serum total and HMW adiponectin was unchanged. Fasting serum resistin was positively correlated with the G allele number of SNP -420 (beta = 7.70, P = .01) and white blood cell count (beta = 0.007, P = .0001) adjusted for age, sex, and body mass index. Therefore, in young, lean, nondiabetic humans, serum resistin was reduced by glucose and meal loading; the reduction in resistin was greater in subjects with higher fasting resistin. Fasting resistin was correlated with SNP -420 and white blood cell count.

[PMID: 29278852]
Adipose tissue is now described as an endocrine organ secreting a number of adipokines contributing to the development of inflammation and metabolic imbalance, but also endothelial dysfunction, vascular remodeling, atherosclerosis, and ischemic stroke. Leptin, adiponectin, and resistin are the most studied adipokines which play important roles in the regulation of cardiovascular homeostasis. Leptin and adiponectin mediate both proatherogenic and antiatherogenic responses. Leptin and adiponectin have been linked to the development of coronary heart disease and may be involved in the underlying biological mechanism of ischemic stroke. Resistin, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, is predictive of atherosclerosis and poor clinical outcomes in patients with coronary artery disease and ischemic stroke. The changes in serum levels of novel adipokines apelin, visfatin are also associated with acute ischemic stroke. These adipokines have been proposed as potential prognostic biomarkers of cardiovascular mortality/morbidity and therapeutic targets in patients with cardiometabolic diseases. In this article, we summarize the biologic role of the adipokines and discuss the link between dysfunctional adipose tissue and metabolic/inflammation imbalance, consequently endothelial damage, progression of atherosclerotic disease, and the occurrence of ischemic stroke.

[PMID: 14962997]
Resistin is an adipose-derived hormone that has been proposed as a link among obesity, insulin resistance, and diabetes. In agreement with a role of resistin in insulin resistance, the administration of recombinant resistin led to glucose intolerance in mice and impaired insulin action in rat liver. However, the regulation of resistin expression by physiological conditions, hormones, or agents known to modulate insulin sensitivity does not always support the association between resistin and obesity-induced insulin resistance. In the present study we investigated the effects of leptin administration on adipose resistin expression in insulin-resistant and obese ob/ob mice. We show that the expression of resistin mRNA and protein in adipose tissue is lower in ob/ob than in wild-type control mice, in agreement with the reduced adipocyte resistin mRNA level reported in several models of obesity. Leptin administration in ob/ob mice resulted in improvement of insulin sensitivity concomitant with a decrease in resistin gene expression. The lack of effect of leptin on resistin in db/db mice indicated that the leptin inhibitory action on resistin expression requires the long leptin receptor isoform. In addition, we demonstrated that the effect of leptin on resistin expression was centrally mediated. High-fat feeding in C57BL/6J wild-type mice, which is known to induce the development of obesity and insulin resistance, produced an increase in resistin expression. Interestingly, in both ob/ob and high fat-fed mice we obtained a striking positive correlation between glycemia and resistin gene expression. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that leptin decreases resistin expression and suggest that resistin may influence glucose homeostasis.

[PMID: 19095472]
Resistin is a secreted factor that is elevated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and believed to drive joint inflammation in vivo. This study was undertaken to determine if resistin is present in the joint following joint injury and to elucidate the role of resistin in cartilage degradation. The level of resistin was measured in paired synovial fluid (SF) and serum samples from patients following joint injury (anterior cruciate ligament, ACL or meniscus tear). Localization of resistin was visualized by immunohistochemistry of synovial tissue and cartilage from healthy and OA donors. Mouse and human cartilage cultures were used to assess the effect of resistin on cartilage metabolism. In trauma patients, resistin levels declined with increasing time post injury. The resistin levels were highest in samples collected up to 1 week following traumatic injury (SF: 2980 pg/ml, serum: 7901 pg/ml) and lowest in samples collected 6-26 years post injury (SF: 686 pg/ml, serum: 5682 pg/ml). Resistin was shown to be expressed in macrophage-like cells in both healthy and OA synovial tissue. Treatment of mouse cartilage cultures with recombinant resistin led to a dose dependent loss of proteoglycan and induction of inflammatory cytokine and PGE(2) production. Recombinant resistin inhibited proteoglycan synthesis in human cartilage explants. Resistin is elevated both systemically and locally in the weeks immediately following joint injury and has a direct effect on cartilage matrix turnover and cytokine production. Resistin may play a role in the early stages of trauma-induced OA and may represent a new therapeutic target to slow joint destruction in OA.

[PMID: 14644422]
Resistin is a secreted adipose tissue hormone that belongs to the resistin-like molecule family. We report here a new alternatively spliced isoform of the rat resistin gene, named S-resistin (short resistin), detected in adipose tissue by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). A comparison of this cDNA variant and genomic sequences indicates the lack of the second exon containing the secretory consensus signal. Both cDNAs, resistin and S-resistin, were carboxy-tagged with FLAG epitope and transiently expressed in cultured cell lines. While the resistin-FLAG construct gives the expected pattern for a secretion protein, the S-resistin-FLAG construct yielded a predominant nuclear staining. These results indicate that this splicing event regulates the fate and probably the function of the mature protein.

[PMID: 27079485]
Adipokines, such as resistin and adiponectin, modify inflammation and may contribute to increased asthma risk and severity in obese people. To examine plasma resistin and resistin:adiponectin ratio (i) in asthmatics compared to healthy controls, (ii) according to asthma severity, obesity and gender (iii) following weight loss in obese asthmatics. In a cross-sectional observational study of asthmatic adults (n = 96) and healthy controls (n = 46), plasma resistin and adiponectin were measured. In a separate intervention study, obese asthmatic adults (n = 27) completed a 10-week weight loss intervention and plasma resistin and adiponectin concentrations were analysed. Plasma resistin and resistin:adiponectin ratio were higher in asthma compared to controls and were higher again in subjects with a severe vs. mild-to-moderate asthma pattern. Amongst asthmatic subjects, resistin was not modified by gender or obesity, while adiponectin was lower in males and obese subjects. As a result, resistin:adiponectin ratio was higher in obese males, non-obese males and obese females, compared to non-obese females. In a logistic regression model, plasma resistin concentration was a predictor of asthma risk. In a multiple linear regression model, plasma resistin:adiponectin ratio was a negative predictor of FEV1 in asthma. Following weight loss, neither resistin, adiponectin nor resistin:adiponectin ratio was changed. However, the change (∆) in %body fat was associated with ∆ resistin:adiponectin ratio. Post-intervention ∆ resistin was negatively correlated with both ∆FRC and ∆RV. This study demonstrates that resistin and resistin:adiponectin ratio are higher in asthma and are higher again in subjects who have more severe disease. Resistin:adiponectin ratio is highest in obese male asthmatics. As resistin is a predictor of asthma risk and resistin:adiponectin is a predictor of FEV1 in asthma, these adipokines may be contributing to the obese asthma phenotype, thus providing a potential therapeutic target for obese asthma.