[PMID: 15940703]
We report clinical findings in 17 adults with Costello syndrome ranging in age from 16 to 40 years. Two patients in this series have had bladder carcinoma, the only malignancy reported to affect adults with Costello syndrome. Benign tumors included multiple ductal papillomata in two women, and a fourth ventricle mass in one man, thought to be a choroid plexus papilloma. Endocrine problems in this series were osteoporosis, central hypogonadism, and delayed puberty. Other health problems were symptomatic Chiari malformations in three patients. Four patients had adult-onset gastro-esophageal reflux, three of whom had Chiari malformations. Fourteen adults had mild to moderate intellectual disability with three individuals having severe intellectual disability; 15 individuals attained some reading and writing skills and 14 showed ongoing acquisition of new skills into adulthood. On the basis of this data, we recommend that neuro-imaging be considered in adults with Costello syndrome if they develop symptoms suggestive of a Chiari malformation. In the event of pubertal delay, endocrine investigations are indicated and hormone treatment may be required. Bone density assessments should be performed in adults with Costello syndrome, particularly in those with pubertal abnormalities. Screening for microscopic hematuria as a marker for bladder carcinoma may be indicated, although this requires further evaluation.

[PMID: 18483625]
Germline activation of H-RAS oncogenes is the primary cause of Costello syndrome (CS), a neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous developmental syndrome. Here we describe the generation of a mouse model of CS by introduction of an oncogenic Gly12Val mutation in the mouse H-Ras locus using homologous recombination in ES cells. Germline expression of the endogenous H-RasG12V oncogene, even in homozygosis, resulted in hyperplasia of the mammary gland. However, development of tumors in these mice was rare. H-RasG12V mutant mice closely phenocopied some of the abnormalities observed in patients with CS, including facial dysmorphia and cardiomyopathies. These mice also displayed alterations in the homeostasis of the cardiovascular system, including development of systemic hypertension, extensive vascular remodeling, and fibrosis in both the heart and the kidneys. This phenotype was age dependent and was a consequence of the abnormal upregulation of the renin-Ang II system. Treatment with captopril, an inhibitor of Ang II biosynthesis, prevented development of the hypertension condition, vascular remodeling, and heart and kidney fibrosis. In addition, it partially alleviated the observed cardiomyopathies. These mice should help in elucidating the etiology of CS symptoms, identifying additional defects, and evaluating potential therapeutic strategies.

[PMID: 17551924]
Because Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome has significant phenotypic overlap with Costello syndrome, it may be difficult to establish the diagnosis on a clinical basis. The recent discoveries of germline HRAS mutations in patients with Costello syndrome and mutations in BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 in CFC syndrome uncovered the biologic mechanism for the shared phenotypic findings based on the close interaction of the affected gene products within the MAP kinase pathway. We evaluated a series of patients who were either clinically diagnosed with Costello syndrome, or in whom the diagnoses of both Costello and CFC syndromes were considered. After excluding mutations in HRAS, we identified eight changes in BRAF and five in MEK1. Five mutations are novel, and all changes occurred de novo among those triads tested. A review of the clinical abnormalities showed important differences between patients with either a BRAF or MEK1 mutation, and those previously reported with an HRAS mutation. Statistical significance was achieved, despite the relatively small number of patients with BRAF and MEK1 mutations reported here, for polyhydramnios, growth hormone deficiency and the presence of more than one papilloma, which were less common in CFC compared to HRAS mutation positive patients. Although both CFC and Costello syndrome are characterized by cardiac abnormalities in about three-fourths of patients, the pattern of congenital heart defects (CHD), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and tachycardia differs somewhat. CHD, especially pulmonic stenosis associated with a secundum-type atrial septal defect, are more common in CFC than Costello syndrome (P = 0.02). Atrial tachycardia is less frequent in CFC patients with BRAF or MEK1 mutations, compared to Costello syndrome patients with HRAS mutation (P = 0.04). Chaotic atrial rhythm or multifocal atrial tachycardia was observed only in Costello syndrome. Malignant tumors have been viewed as characteristic for Costello syndrome due to HRAS mutations, however, we report here on a MEK1 mutation in a patient with a malignant tumor, a hepatoblastoma. Although this indicates that the presence of a tumor is not specific for Costello syndrome with HRAS mutation, it is noteworthy that the tumor histology differs from those commonly seen in Costello syndrome. Based on these clinical differences we suggest that patients with BRAF and MEK mutations should be diagnosed with CFC syndrome, and the diagnosis of Costello syndrome be reserved for patients with HRAS mutations.

[PMID: 22752028]
The involvement of the Ras superfamily of GTPases in the pathogenesis of rhabdomysarcoma (RMS) is not well understood. While mutant H-Ras leads to embryonal RMS (ERMS) formation in experimental animals and in Costello syndrome patients, no data exists on the potential role of Ras GTPases in the pathogenesis of alveolar RMS (ARMS). To address this issue better, we focused on the role of the GTP exchange factor RasGRF1 in this process. We observed that, in comparison to normal skeletal muscle cells, RasGRF1 mRNA is upregulated in the majority of human ARMS cell lines and subsequently confirmed its high expression in patient samples. By employing confocal microscopy analysis, we observed RasGRF1 accumulation in cell filopodia, which suggests its involvement in ARMS cell migration. Furthermore, we observed that RasGRF1 becomes phosphorylated in ARMS after stimulation by several pro-metastatic factors, such as SDF-1 and HGF/SF, as well as after exposure to growth-promoting Igf-2 and insulin. More importantly, activation of RasGRF1 expression correlated with activation of p42/44 MAPK and AKT. When the expression of RasGRF1 was down-regulated in ARMS cells by an shRNA strategy, these RasGRF1-kd RMS cells did not respond to stimulation by SDF-1, HGF/SF, Igf-2 or insulin by phosphorylation of p42/44 MAPK and AKT and lost their chemotactic responsiveness; however, their adhesion was not affected. We also observed that RasGRF1-kd ARMS cells proliferated at a very low rate in vitro, and, more importantly, after inoculation into immunodeficient SCID/beige inbred mice they formed significantly smaller tumors. We conclude that RasGRF1 plays an important role in ARMS pathogenesis and is a new potential therapeutic target to inhibit ARMS growth.

[PMID: 22887473]
Costello syndrome is a rare condition due to heterozygous germline mutations in the proto-oncogene HRAS. It affects multiple organ systems and includes severe failure-to-thrive, short stature, and macrocephaly. The goal of this study was to develop Costello syndrome-specific growth curves. We collected height, weight, and head circumference (OFC) measurements from 94 individuals (45 males and 49 females). Their HRAS mutation spectrum reflects previously published cohorts, with p.G12S in 77.7%. Participants received medical care, therefore our data does not reflect natural history per se, but rather growth with nutritional support. Due to limited cohort size, we analyzed data from males and females together. Weight-for-age data included 417 separate measurements from 80 individuals age 0-36 months, and 585 measurements from 82 individuals for age 0-10 years. Height-for-age data were derived from 391 measurements from 77 individuals age 0-36 months, and 591 measurements from 90 individuals age 0-10 years. Measurements obtained after growth hormone exposure in 15 individuals were excluded in this analysis. The OFC curve was derived from 221 measurements from 55 individuals age 0-36 months. Centiles (5th, 50th, and 95th) were estimated across the age continuum for each growth parameter, and compared to gender-specific curves for average stature individuals. The resulting curves demonstrate very slow weight gain in the first 2 years. Short stature is seen in many, but after age 4 years the 95th centile for height falls within the low normal range for average stature children. Head circumference curves largely overlap those for average stature, reflecting relative macrocephaly.

[PMID: 16278907]
Costello syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, loose skin, coarse facies, skeletal abnormalities, cardiovascular abnormalities (congenital heart defects, cardiomyopathy, rhythm disturbances), and predisposition to neoplasia. Endocrine abnormalities including growth hormone deficiency, adrenal insufficiency, glucose intolerance, parathyroid adenoma with hyperprolactinemia and hypoglycemia have been described. Hypoglycemia has been documented due to growth hormone and cortisol deficiency. We report on two patients with Costello syndrome and persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and review the endocrine manifestations of Costello syndrome. Both patients required diazoxide therapy to stop the unregulated insulin secretion and maintain normoglycemia. The mechanism of persistent hyperinsulinism in patients with Costello syndrome is unclear.

[PMID: 20307337]
We describe a 6-year-old boy with newly diagnosed Costello syndrome after the diagnosis of severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. His neonatal asymmetric septal cardiomyopathy resolved by 9 months of age but reappeared at 6 years of age. This report highlights two important concepts: the association of genetic syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and the possibility of worsening severity of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy linked to growth hormone therapy.

[PMID: 22821884]
Costello syndrome is caused by HRAS germline mutations affecting Gly(12) or Gly(13) in >90% of cases and these are associated with a relatively homogeneous phenotype. Rarer mutations in other HRAS codons were reported in patients with an attenuated or mild phenotype. Disease-associated HRAS missense mutations result in constitutive HRAS activation and increased RAF-MEK-ERK and PI3K-AKT signal flow. Here we report on a novel heterozygous HRAS germline alteration, c.266C>G (p.S89C), in a girl presenting with severe fetal hydrops and pleural effusion, followed by a more benign postnatal course. A sibling with the same mutation and fetal polyhydramnios showed a Dandy-Walker malformation; his postnatal course was complicated by severe feeding difficulties. Their apparently asymptomatic father is heterozygous for the c.266C>G change. By functional analyses we identified reduced levels of active HRAS(S89C) and diminished MEK, ERK and AKT phosphorylation in cells overexpressing HRAS(S89C) , which represent novel consequences of disease-associated HRAS mutations. Given our patients' difficult neonatal course and presence of this change in their asymptomatic father, we hypothesize that its harmful consequences may be time limited, with the late fetal stage being most sensitive. Alternatively, the phenotype may develop only in the presence of an additional as-yet-unknown genetic modifier. While the pathogenicity of the HRAS c.266C>G change remains unproven, our data may illustrate wide functional and phenotypic variability of germline HRAS mutations.

[PMID: 14564166]
We present the case of a boy with Costello syndrome who developed osteofibrous dysplasia during a phase of growth hormone therapy. The lesion and the accompanying pain disappeared after discontinuation of the therapy. Growth hormone is a known mitogen for some neoplasms and osteofibrous dysplasia has been reported to become aggressive. Thus, although osteofibrous dysplasia in Costello syndrome has not been reported before, growth hormone therapy should be used under close supervision in children with this syndrome.

[PMID: 19035362]
Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by failure to thrive, craniofacial dysmorphisms, cardiac and skin abnormalities, mental retardation, and predisposition to malignancies. CS is caused by heterozygous gain-of-function mutations in HRAS that also occur as somatic alterations in human tumors. HRAS is one of the three classical RAS proteins and cycles between an active, GTP- and an inactive, GDP-bound conformation. We used primary human skin fibroblasts from patients with CS as a model system to study the functional consequences of HRAS mutations on endogenous signaling pathways. The GTP-bound form of HRAS was significantly enriched in CS compared with normal fibroblasts. Active HRAS is known to stimulate both the RAF-MEK-ERK and the PI3K-AKT signaling cascade. Phosphorylation of MEK and ERK was normal in CS fibroblasts under basal conditions and slightly prolonged after epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation. Interestingly, basal phosphorylation of AKT was increased yet more in CS fibroblasts. Moreover, AKT phosphorylation was diminished in the early and enhanced in the late phase of EGF stimulation. Taken together, these results document that CS-associated HRAS mutations result in prolonged signal flux in a ligand-dependent manner. Our data suggest that altered cellular response to growth factors rather than constitutive activation of HRAS downstream signaling molecules may contribute to some of the clinical features in patients with CS.

[PMID: 15316968]
We report on three patients with Costello syndrome and isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency treated with biosynthetic GH. To our knowledge, these are the only patients with Costello syndrome who have been successfully treated for GH deficiency. We review the pathophysiology of Costello syndrome and highlight the recent recommendations of tumor screening and cardiac surveillance in this population, of particular relevance to those receiving GH therapy.

[PMID: 21438134]
Costello syndrome is characterized by severe failure-to-thrive, short stature, cardiac abnormalities (heart defects, tachyarrhythmia, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)), distinctive facial features, a predisposition to papillomata and malignant tumors, postnatal cerebellar overgrowth resulting in Chiari 1 malformation, and cognitive disabilities. De novo germline mutations in the proto-oncogene HRAS cause Costello syndrome. Most mutations affect the glycine residues in position 12 or 13, and more than 80% of patients share p.G12S. To test the hypothesis that subtle genotype-phenotype differences exist, we report the first cohort comparison between 12 Costello syndrome individuals with p.G13C and individuals with p.G12S. The individuals with p.G13C had many typical findings including polyhydramnios, failure-to-thrive, HCM, macrocephaly with posterior fossa crowding, and developmental delay. Subjectively, their facial features were less coarse. Statistically significant differences included the absence of multifocal atrial tachycardia (P-value = 0.033), ulnar deviation of the wrist (P < 0.001) and papillomata (P = 0.003), and fewer neurosurgical procedures (P = 0.024). Fewer individuals with p.G13C had short stature (height below -2 SD) without use of growth hormone (P < 0.001). The noteworthy absence of malignant tumors did not reach statistical significance. Novel ectodermal findings were noted in individuals with p.G13C, including loose anagen hair resulting in easily pluckable hair with a matted appearance, different from the tight curls typical for most Costello syndrome individuals. Unusually long eye lashes requiring trimming are a novel finding we termed dolichocilia. These distinctive ectodermal findings suggest a cell type specific effect of this particular mutation. Additional patients are needed to validate these findings.

[PMID: 15316966]
We describe an 18-month-old boy with Costello syndrome (CS) with proven partial growth hormone (GH) deficiency and hypoglycemic episodes. The hypoglycemia is deemed to be due to cortisol deficiency. This report represents the second published case of cortisol deficiency in the CS. A brief review of the endocrine disturbances in the syndrome is provided. We highlight the need for careful endocrinological evaluation of individuals with CS.

[PMID: 8168845]
The Costello syndrome is characterized by dwarfism, unique cutaneous lesions, distinct facial gestalt, and mental retardation. We present a Japanese patient with the Costello syndrome. She showed high serum IgM level during the early infantile period. Nissen's fundplication was carried out to treat severe gastroesophageal reflux. Endocrinological investigations revealed a partial deficiency of growth hormone.

[PMID: 19258709]
Noonan syndrome (NS) is one of the most common syndromes transmitted by a mendelian mode. In recent years, germline mutations that affect components of the RAS-MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway were shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of NS and four rare syndromes with clinical features overlapping with NS: Leopard syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, Costello syndrome and neurofibromatosis type 1. Several hormones act through receptors that stimulate the RAS-MAPK pathway, and therefore, NS and related disorders represent a remarkable opportunity to study the implication of the RAS-MAPK pathway in different endocrine systems. Additionally, children with NS frequently are referred to the endocrinologist because of short stature, delayed puberty and/or undescended testes in males. In this paper, we review the diagnostic, clinical and molecular aspects of NS and NS-related disorders.