[PMID: 34037224]
MET exon 14 skipping is an oncogenic driver occurring in 3-4% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The MET inhibitor tepotinib has demonstrated clinical efficacy in patients with MET exon 14 skipping NSCLC. Here, we present data from Japanese patients in the Phase II VISION study, evaluating the efficacy and safety of tepotinib. In the open-label, single-arm, Phase II VISION study, patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC with MET exon 14 skipping received oral tepotinib 500 mg once daily. The primary endpoint was objective response by independent review. Subgroup analyses of Japanese patients were preplanned. As of 1 January 2020, 19 Japanese patients received tepotinib and were evaluated for safety, 15 of whom had ≥9 months' follow-up and were also analysed for efficacy. By independent review, objective response rate (ORR) was 60.0% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 32.3, 83.7), median duration of response was not reached (95% CI: 6.9, not estimable [ne]), and progression-free survival was 11.0 months (95% CI: 1.4, ne). ORR in patients with MET exon 14 skipping identified by liquid biopsy (n = 8) was 87.5% (95% CI: 47.3, 99.7), and by tissue biopsy (n = 12) was 50.0% (95% CI: 21.1, 78.9). Patients' quality of life was maintained with tepotinib treatment. Among patients evaluated for safety, the most common treatment-related adverse events (any grade) were blood creatinine increase and peripheral oedema (12 and nine patients, respectively). Tepotinib demonstrated robust and durable clinical efficacy in Japanese patients with advanced NSCLC harbouring MET exon 14 skipping, identified by either liquid or tissue biopsy. The main adverse events, blood creatinine increase and peripheral oedema, were manageable.

[PMID: 32469185]
A splice-site mutation that results in a loss of transcription of exon 14 in the oncogenic driver <i>MET</i> occurs in 3 to 4% of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We evaluated the efficacy and safety of tepotinib, a highly selective MET inhibitor, in this patient population. In this open-label, phase 2 study, we administered tepotinib (at a dose of 500 mg) once daily in patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC with a confirmed <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation. The primary end point was the objective response by independent review among patients who had undergone at least 9 months of follow-up. The response was also analyzed according to whether the presence of a <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation was detected on liquid biopsy or tissue biopsy. As of January 1, 2020, a total of 152 patients had received tepotinib, and 99 patients had been followed for at least 9 months. The response rate by independent review was 46% (95% confidence interval [CI], 36 to 57), with a median duration of response of 11.1 months (95% CI, 7.2 to could not be estimated) in the combined-biopsy group. The response rate was 48% (95% CI, 36 to 61) among 66 patients in the liquid-biopsy group and 50% (95% CI, 37 to 63) among 60 patients in the tissue-biopsy group; 27 patients had positive results according to both methods. The investigator-assessed response rate was 56% (95% CI, 45 to 66) and was similar regardless of the previous therapy received for advanced or metastatic disease. Adverse events of grade 3 or higher that were considered by investigators to be related to tepotinib therapy were reported in 28% of the patients, including peripheral edema in 7%. Adverse events led to permanent discontinuation of tepotinib in 11% of the patients. A molecular response, as measured in circulating free DNA, was observed in 67% of the patients with matched liquid-biopsy samples at baseline and during treatment. Among patients with advanced NSCLC with a confirmed <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation, the use of tepotinib was associated with a partial response in approximately half the patients. Peripheral edema was the main toxic effect of grade 3 or higher. (Funded by Merck [Darmstadt, Germany]; VISION ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02864992.).

[PMID: 33818908]
Tepotinib is a highly selective and potent MET inhibitor in development for the treatment of patients with solid tumors. Given the favorable tolerability and safety profiles up to the maximum tested dose in the first-in-human (FIH) trial, an efficacy-driven translational modeling approach was proposed to establish the recommended phase II dose (RP2D). To study the in vivo pharmacokinetics (PKs)/target inhibition/tumor growth inhibition relationship, a subcutaneous KP-4 pancreatic cell-line xenograft model in mice with sensitivity to MET pathway inhibition was selected as a surrogate tumor model. Further clinical PK and target inhibition data (derived from predose and postdose paired tumor biopsies) from a FIH study were integrated with the longitudinal PKs and target inhibition profiles from the mouse xenograft study to establish a translational PK/pharmacodynamic (PD) model. Preclinical data showed that tumor regression with tepotinib treatment in KP-4 xenograft tumors corresponded to 95% target inhibition. We therefore concluded that a PD criterion of sustained, near-to-complete (>95%) phospho-MET inhibition in tumors should be targeted for tepotinib to be effective. Simulations of dose-dependent target inhibition profiles in human tumors that exceeded the PD threshold in more than 90% of patients established an RP2D of tepotinib 500 mg once daily. This translational mathematical modeling approach supports an efficacy-driven rationale for tepotinib phase II dose selection of 500 mg once daily. Tepotinib at this dose has obtained regulatory approval for the treatment of patients with non-small cell lung cancer harboring MET exon 14 skipping.

[PMID: 32702795]
Mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (MET) gene is an important tumor driver gene of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Drugs targeting MET 14 exon skipping mutation bring new hope to patients. MET inhibitors that are currently on the market or are about to be marketed include: crizotinib, cabozantinib, savolitinib and tepotinib. The objective response rate of MET inhibitors is high, and the safety is good. However, resistance of MET-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) is inevitable, so it is necessary to pay attention to the study of drug resistance mechanism. In addition, the combined use of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/MET inhibitors and other drugs may play an important role in inhibiting and reversing drug resistance.

[PMID: 32716573]
Alterations in c-MET, a tyrosine kinase receptor encoded by the MET gene, have been reported in approximately 3% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases and carry important treatment implications. The best studied genetic alterations are exon 14 skipping and gene amplification; however, gene rearrangement has also been described, and multiple fusion partners have been reported. Recently, in METex14-mutated NSCLC, multitarget tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as crizotinib and cabozantinib, as well as MET-selective TKIs, such as tepotinib and capmatinib, have demonstrated durable responses. In this study, we present the case of a 41-year-old woman with advanced NSCLC harboring an HLA-DRB1-MET gene fusion. The patient was offered successively two different MET multikinase inhibitors, crizotinib and cabozantinib, and the selective inhibitor tepotinib. Each time, including under tepotinib, the patient experienced rapid and complete responses associated with a tremendous improvement in her physical function. KEY POINTS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of a patient with non-small cell lung cancer harboring an HLA-DRB1-MET gene fusion demonstrating a clinical response to multiple MET inhibitors, including tepotinib. This finding illustrates the efficacy and rationale to targeting MET regardless of fusion partner and gives insight to pooling of patients with different MET fusion products in trials assessing safety and efficacy of novel molecules.

[PMID: 28024693]
A number of small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have now been approved for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), including those targeted against epidermal growth factor receptor, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, and ROS1. Despite a wealth of agents developed to target the receptor tyrosine kinase, MET, clinical outcomes have as yet been disappointing, leading to pessimism about the role of MET in the pathogenesis of NSCLC. However, in recent years, there has been a renewed interest in MET exon 14 alterations as potential drivers of lung cancer. MET exon 14 alterations, which result in increased MET protein levels due to disrupted ubiquitin-mediated degradation, occur at a prevalence of around 3% in adenocarcinomas and around 2% in other lung neoplasms, making them attractive targets for the treatment of lung cancer. At least five MET-targeted TKIs, including crizotinib, cabozantinib, capmatinib, tepotinib, and glesatinib, are being investigated clinically for patients with MET exon 14 altered-NSCLC. A further two compounds have shown activity in preclinical models. In this article, we review the current clinical and preclinical data available for these TKIs, along with a number of other potential therapeutic options, including antibodies and immunotherapy. A number of questions remain unanswered regarding the future of MET TKIs, but unfortunately, the development of resistance to targeted therapies is inevitable. Resistance is expected to arise as a result of receptor tyrosine kinase mutation or from upregulation of MET ligand expression; potential strategies to overcome resistance are proposed.

[PMID: 33851690]
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most devastating cancers with high mortality worldwide. By inhibiting the activity of specific molecular targets in the cancer cells, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have become a standard treatment in combating NSCLC. Tepotinib hydrochloride is an orally bioavailable, mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) TKI developed mainly for selected NSCLC patients with METex14 skipping mutations. Tepotinib demonstrated durable clinical response in phase II clinical trials, which led to its approval for use in Japan and breakthrough therapy designation and accelerated approval in the U.S. These progresses highlighted tepotinib as a promising candidate for NSCLC patients. This review summarizes the pharmacological profile of tepotinib, preclinical studies and landmark clinical trials of tepotinib. In addition, we share our perspectives on the future direction of tepotinib as a novel anticancer drug.

[PMID: 33533182]
Mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) pathway activation is associated with the mechanisms that influence properties affecting cancer cell survival and invasiveness. The MET exon 14 skipping mutation (METex14del) is found in 2%-3% of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Previous studies reported that NSCLC patients harboring a METex14del responded well to MET-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including tepotinib. Tepotinib is a highly selective, once-daily oral MET inhibitor that has shown promising clinical activity in patients with NSCLC with METex14del. The Food and Drug Administration accepted a new drug application for tepotinib as a treatment for patients with metastatic NSCLC harboring METex14del in February 2021 [Correction added on 5 March 2021, after first online publication: the FDA approval date for tepotinib has been corrected from 'September 2019' to 'February 2021'.]. However, in the previous clinical trials involving MET-TKIs, only patients with stable central nervous system metastases were eligible, and those with untreated symptomatic brain metastases (BMs) were excluded. Therefore, the efficacy and safety of MET-TKIs in that population remains unknown. We herein report a case of dramatic intracranial response to tepotinib in a patient with symptomatic BMs from lung adenocarcinoma harboring METex14del. In the current report, the symptoms derived from multiple BMs (headache and loss of appetite) rapidly disappeared, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed that all the lesions were too small to measure only 23 days after the commencement of tepotinib. For NSCLC patients with multiple BMs, whole-brain irradiation is a standard-of-care therapy, but its adverse effects on neurocognition are concerning. Tepotinib might therefore be a therapeutic option for NSCLC patients with symptomatic multiple BMs harboring METex14del.

[PMID: 32306194]
The MET exon 14 skipping mutation is found in approximately 3% of lung adenocarcinomas and slightly more than 2% of lung squamous cell carcinomas. In recent years, more and more evidence has shown that MET inhibitors have achieved good anti-tumor effect in patients with MET exon 14 skipping mutation, suggesting that MET exon 14 skipping mutation may be a new target for NSCLC patients. Patients with positive MET exon 14 skipping mutation are recommended to be administered MET inhibitors, and crizotinib is recommended by the NCCN guideline. Due to the presence of gene amplification, second site mutation, bypass activation, and pathological type transformation, one of the inevitable problems of targeted therapy is drug resistance. If type I MET inhibitors (crizotinib, capmatinib, tepotinib, savolitinib) drug resistance is developed, type II MET inhibitors (cabozantinib, glesatinib, merestinib) can be considered.

[PMID: 34590003]
The spread of next-generation sequencing enables clinicians to identify rare oncogene alterations, including <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation, in clinical practice for NSCLC. Several tyrosine kinase inhibitors for <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation such as capmatinib and tepotinib have elucidated their effectiveness. Only a few reports have suggested their efficacy against central nervous system lesions, especially leptomeningeal metastases. We here report a case of a patient with NSCLC with <i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation and poor performance status salvaged by marked leptomeningeal metastases response to tepotinib. We further provide measures of plasma/cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of tepotinib and its cerebrospinal fluid penetration rate.

[PMID: 34295201]
<i>MET</i> exon 14 skipping mutation (<i>MET</i>∆ex14) is present about 3% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). NSCLC patients with <i>MET</i>∆ex14 are characterized by an average age of over 70 years at diagnosis, a smoking history and a higher frequency in pleomorphic carcinoma and adenosquamous cell carcinoma than in adenocarcinoma. It has also been reported that NSCLCs with <i>MET</i>∆ex14 often have codriver alterations such as <i>EGFR</i> amplification (6-28%), <i>FGFR1</i> alterations (5-17%), <i>KRAS</i> alterations (~8%), <i>BRAF</i> alterations (~21%), or <i>PIK3CA</i> mutation/amplification (~14%). In 2020, the approval of two MET-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), capmatinib and tepotinib, for NSCLCs carrying <i>MET</i>∆ex14 dawned a new era for MET-targeted therapy. These drugs yielded progression-free survival of 5.4-12.4 months in clinical trials; however, it has also been reported that one-third to half of patients show inherent resistance to MET-TKIs. In addition, the emergence of acquired resistance to MET-TKIs is inevitable. In this review, we summarize the clinical and molecular characteristics of NSCLCs with <i>MET</i>∆ex14, the efficacy and safety of capmatinib and tepotinib, the inherent and acquired resistance mechanisms to MET-TKIs, and new treatment strategies for NSCLCs with <i>MET</i>∆ex14 in the near future.

[PMID: 33335011]
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have transformed the standard of care in lung cancer. A number of TKIs have been discovered that specifically target oncogenes, including MET receptor tyrosine kinase. Second-generation MET TKIs are showing improved efficacy over first-generation TKIs. Herein, we report a case of a patient with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma harboring a <i>MET</i> exon 14 splice site mutation who has had prolonged disease control by a second-generation MET-TKI tepotinib. A 66-yr-old man was diagnosed with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma. He was started on carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab, but had severe toxicity. He was switched to pembrolizumab as his tumor was PD-L1 70%, and molecular testing was not yet performed because of insufficient tissue. A bronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasound was performed and a <i>MET</i> exon 14 splice site mutation was detected by next-generation sequencing. Upon progression, he was then enrolled in a clinical trial of tepotinib and continues with stable disease for more than 45 cycles and 31 mo. The MET receptor tyrosine kinase and the ligand hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) have been implicated as oncogenes and drivers of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Newer MET TKIs including capmatinib and tepotinib more recently showed not only improved localized control and response, but early data suggests intracranial activity as compared to first-generation MET TKIs, both in the front-line and the refractory setting. This is a case report demonstrating an effective duration of response in a patient with widely metastatic lung adenocarcinoma harboring a MET exon 14 mutation.

[PMID: 33305187]
Tepotinib is an oral MET inhibitor approved for metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring MET exon 14 (METex14) skipping mutations. Examining treatment-naive or tepotinib-resistant cells with MET amplification or METex14 skipping mutations identifies other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that co-exist in cells prior to tepotinib exposure and become more prominent upon tepotinib resistance. In a small cohort of patients with lung cancer with MET genetic alterations treated with tepotinib, gene copy number gains of other RTKs were found at baseline and affected treatment outcome. An Src homology 2 domain-containing phosphatase 2 (SHP2) inhibitor delayed the emergence of tepotinib resistance and synergized with tepotinib in treatment-naive and tepotinib-resistant cells as well as in xenograft models. Alternative signaling pathways potentially diminish the effect of tepotinib monotherapy, and the combination of tepotinib with an SHP2 inhibitor enables the control of tumor growth in cells with MET genetic alterations.

[PMID: 34295669]
Recently approved and highly specific small-molecule inhibitors of c-MET exon 14 skipping mutations (e.g., capmatinib, tepotinib) are a new and important therapeutic option for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harbouring c-MET alterations. Several experimental studies have provided compelling evidence that c-MET is involved in the regulation of the immune response by up-regulating inhibitory molecules (e.g., PD-L1) and down-regulating of immune stimulators (e.g., CD137, CD252, CD70, etc.). In addition, c-MET was found to be implicated in the regulation of the inflamed tumour microenvironment (TME) and thereby contributing to an increased immune escape of tumour cells from T cell killing. Moreover, it is a major resistance mechanism following treatment of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations (EGFRmut) with tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitors (TKIs). In line with these findings c-MET alterations have also been shown to be associated with a worse clinical outcome and a poorer prognosis in NSCLC patients. However, the underlying mechanisms for these experimental observations are neither fully evaluated nor conclusive, but clearly multifactorial and most likely tumour-specific. In this regard the clinical efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs) and TKIs against EGFRmut in NSCLC patients harbouring c-MET alterations is also not yet established, and further research will certainly provide some guidance as to optimally utilise CPIs and c-MET inhibitors in the future.

[PMID: 33387444]
Tepotinib is a key drug for cancer patients with mesenchymal-epithelial transition receptor tyrosine kinase proto-oncogene (MET) exon 14 skipping mutation. However, its bioavailability in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in humans has not been fully elucidated. Moreover, information about the efficacy of tepotinib in patients with leptomeningeal metastasis is limited. Here, we present the case of a 56-year-old man who was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma with MET exon 14 skipping mutation. He was urgently hospitalized due to leptomeningeal metastasis. We administered tepotinib 500 mg/day as the second-line therapy and observed improvement in leptomeningeal metastasis and performance status. The tepotinib concentrations reached 1,648 ng/mL in the plasma and 30.6 ng/mL in the CSF, with a penetration rate (CSF/plasma) of 1.83%. These demonstrate tepotinib could achieve a high rate of central nervous system transition and could be effective against leptomeningeal metastasis.