[PMID: 24213377]
The nuclear lamina guards the genome and in many ways contributes to regulating nuclear function. Increasing evidence indicates that the lamina dynamically interacts with chromatin mainly through large repressive domains, and recent data suggest that at least some of the lamin-genome contacts may be developmentally significant. In an attempt to provide an additional meaning to lamin-genome contacts, a recent study characterized the association of gene promoters with A-type lamins in progenitor and differentiated cells. Here, we discuss how A-type lamins interact with spatially defined promoter regions, and the relationship between these interactions, associated chromatin marks and gene expression outputs. We discuss the impact of A-type lamins on nucleus-wide and local chromatin organization. We also address how lamin-promoter interactions are redistributed during differentiation of adipocyte progenitors into adipocytes. Finally, we propose a model of lineage-specific "unlocking" of developmentally regulated loci and its significance in cellular differentiation.

[PMID: 21842415]
Lamins are type V intermediate filament proteins that support nuclear membranes. They are divided into A-type lamins, which include lamin A and C, and B-type lamins, which include lamin B1 and B2. In the rat brain, lamin A and C are expressed in relatively equal amounts, while the expressions of lamin B1 and B2 vary depending on the cell type. Lamins play important roles in normal morphogenesis and function. In the nervous system, their abnormal expression causes several neurodegenerative diseases such as peripheral neuropathy, leukodystrophy and lissencephaly. The retina belongs to the central nervous system (CNS) and has widely been used as a source of CNS neurons. We investigated the expression patterns of lamin subtypes in the adult rat retina by immunohistochemistry and found that the staining patterns differed when compared with the brain. All retinal neurons expressed lamin B1 and B2 in relatively equal amounts. In addition, horizontal cells and a subpopulation of retinal ganglion cells expressed lamin A and C, while photoreceptor cells expressed neither lamin A nor C, and all other retinal neurons expressed lamin C only. This differential expression pattern of lamins in retinal neurons suggests that they may be involved in cellular differentiation and expression of cell-specific genes in individual retinal neurons.

[PMID: 9363444]
In order to clarify the differentiation and proliferation status of the Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells we studied A and B-type lamin expression with specific monoclonal antibodies in nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease. Its normal counterpart, the reactive lymph node, was also examined for lamin subtype expression. The CD20 positive centrocytes and centroblasts of the follicle centre in the reactive lymph nodes expressed lamin B1, but were not or only very weakly positive for lamin B2 or A-type lamin antibodies. Mantle zone lymphocytes displayed lamins B1 and B2, but were negative for A-type lamins. Furthermore, CD3- and CD20-positive lymphocytes in the medulla and paracortex lacked A-type lamins, but were positive for both B-type lamins. Finally, the proliferation marker Ki67 was mainly detected in the centroblasts, but also in a fraction of the A-type lamin negative cells in the paracortex and medulla. In Hodgkin's disease, all cells expressed lamins B1 and B2, whereas A-type lamins were primarily observed in CD30-positive Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells. About 20% of the Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells expressed Ki67, with co-expression of lamin A in most of these cells. Ki67 and A-type lamin staining were in general mutually exclusive in lymph nodes, indicating that A-type lamin positive cells are not proliferative. This suggests also that the A-type lamin expression in Reed-Sternberg and Hodgkin cells is correlated with a relatively mature phenotype of these malignant cells. However, some of these differentiated malignant cells still have a capacity to proliferate as indicated by Ki67 positivity. Our observation that lamin B2 expression in the follicle centre cells of the reactive lymph node is low or absent indicates that this lamin subtype is not always expressed in nucleated cells, which is in clear contrast to the results obtained in previous studies in other diseases and in normal tissues. Absence of lamin B2 expression may be associated with the follicle centre stage of B-cells.

[PMID: 9274531]
Nuclear A- and B-type lamins are differentially expressed in tissues, depending on the degree of cellular differentiation and proliferative status. By studying lamin expression in testis parenchyma and testicular germ cell tumours, further insight may be gained into the degree of cellular differentiation in normal testis and into the whole spectrum of differentiation lineages found in testicular germ cell tumours. Frozen tissue sections of normal testis and the different types of testicular germ cell tumours were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies to distinct lamin subtypes. Lamin reactivity was evaluated in relation to the lineage and degree of cellular differentiation and the reactivity patterns were compared with each other and with those in normal testis. In normal testis, both A- and B-type lamins were expressed in Sertoli, Leydig, and peritubular cells, while in spermatogonia only B-type lamins were found and spermatocytes showed weak reactivity with the A-type lamin antibodies. Carcinoma in situ was most often positive for both of the B-type lamins and negative for the A-type lamins (lamins A and C). In testicular germ cell tumours, B-type lamins were always expressed, while A-type lamins were differentially expressed. Differentiated non-seminomas were positive for both of the A-type lamins, whereas embryonal carcinomas were positive for lamin C and negative for lamin A. Seminomas were negative for both of the A-type lamins, with the exception of seminomas containing a Ras mutation. Spermatogonia and seminoma cells, which follow a differentiation pathway along the spermatogenic lineage and show characteristics of germ cells, do not express A-type lamins. Non-seminomas, showing embryonal or extraembryonal differentiation, express A-type lamins to varying degrees, distinguishing embryonal carcinoma cells from other non-seminomatous components. This may aid in the evaluation of the percentage of embryonal carcinoma in non-seminomatous testicular germ cell tumours as a prognostic parameter.

[PMID: 20568006]
Cell type and tissue architecture correlate with genome organization in higher eukaryotes, and structural nuclear landmarks are faithfully transmitted from one cell generation to the next. However, how nuclear components find their place in the nucleus after mitosis is still a matter of debate. As the major structural proteins within nuclei, the nuclear lamins are good candidates to re-establish nuclear compartments following mitosis. Human cells with reduced expression of the major B-type lamin protein, lamin B1, were generated using RNA interference. Mitotic and nuclear assembly phenotypes were then visualized in both fixed and living cells. Mitotic defects in lamin B1-depleted cells correlated with a general deterioration in nuclear compartmentalization and chromatin structure, frequent failure of chromosome segregation, and profound disorganization of centromeres. Examination of cells with normal lamin B1 expression indicated that small lamin B1 foci remain associated with major nuclear compartments--chromatin, nucleoli, and nuclear speckles--during an unperturbed mitosis. Our experiments show that normal lamin B1 expression is required for successful cell division and provide preliminary evidence that lamin B1-containing remnants of the interphase nucleoskeleton persist throughout mitosis. We suggest that these residual structures provide landmarks that are targeted during nuclear reassembly to allow key features of nuclear organization to be inherited from one cell cycle to the next.

[PMID: 2404771]
The peripheral lamina of eukaryotic nuclei is composed of polypeptides called lamins that vary in number from one to four according to organism, cell type, and differentiated state of the cells. Early embryonic cells and stem cells of mammals generally possess only lamin B while lamins A and C appear later during differentiation. To study the role of the late appearance of lamins A and C in the differentiated phenotype, we have performed transfection of cDNAs coding for human lamins A or C into mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell lines F9 and P19 lacking these two lamins. Transient transfections have shown that lamins A or C could be expressed, translocated to the peripheral lamina, and distributed into daughter cell nuclei after mitosis. These results demonstrated that EC cells devoid of lamins A and C nevertheless possessed the appropriate mechanisms for the localization and mitotic redistribution of exogenous lamins A and C.

[PMID: 2415378]
The nuclear lamina consists of a proteinaceous layer or meshwork situated subjacent to the inner nuclear membrane. It is a karyoskeletal structure formed by a polymer containing one to three major polypeptides collectively termed the lamins. In all cells examined of vertebrates and invertebrates, the lamins exhibit very similar Mr ranging from 60 000 to 80 000. In vertebrates, two groups of lamins can be distinguished by their isoelectric value, one being near-neutral and the other acidic (isoelectric pH values of 5.6 and lower). The lamins represent a family of polypeptides with regions highly conserved during evolution. In certain species, e.g., the amphibian, Xenopus laevis, they exhibit cell type-specific expression during embryonic development, terminal differentiation of certain somatic cells, and gametogenesis. The nuclear lamina of diverse cell types can be composed of one, two or three different lamin polypeptides, without obvious differences in its morphology.

[PMID: 7781761]
Mouse A-type lamin genes were isolated. Structural analyses revealed that all the three known mouse A-type lamins (A, C and C2) were coded in a single genomic locus in a 22 kilobase DNA segment. The three lamins were coded in 12, 10 and 10 exons for A, C and C2, respectively, and shared 8 exons among them. Primer extension analyses identified possible transcription start sites for both A/C and C2 genes suggesting that the locus is under the control of two separate promoters, that is a somatic cell-acting promoter (for A and C) and a testis-specific promoter (for C2) which resides in the first intron of the A/C gene. Sequence characteristics of the possible promoter regions are discussed. Divergence of the two somatic cell-type lamins (A and C) is formally accounted for by differential selection of poly(A) sites together with lamin A-specific splicing.

[PMID: 16179429]
Nuclear lamins comprise the nuclear lamina, a scaffold-like structure that lines the inner nuclear membrane. B-type lamins are present in almost all cell types, but A-type lamins are expressed predominantly in differentiated cells, suggesting a role in maintenance of the differentiated state. Previous studies have shown that lamin A/C is not expressed during mouse development before day 9, nor in undifferentiated mouse embryonic carcinoma cells. To further investigate the role of lamins in cell phenotype maintenance and differentiation, we examined lamin expression in undifferentiated mouse and human embryonic stem (ES) cells. Wide-field and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy and semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that undifferentiated mouse and human ES cells express lamins B1 and B2 but not lamin A/C. Mouse ES cells display high levels of lamins B1 and B2 localized both at the nuclear periphery and throughout the nucleoplasm, but in human ES cells, B1 and B2 expression is dimmer and localized primarily at the nuclear periphery. Lamin A/C expression is activated during human ES cell differentiation before downregulation of the pluripotency marker Oct-3/4 but not before the downregulation of the pluripotency markers Tra-1-60, Tra-1-81, and SSEA-4. Our results identify the absence of A-type lamin expression as a novel marker for undifferentiated ES cells and further support a role for nuclear lamins in cell maintenance and differentiation.

[PMID: 9410886]
The expression of A-type lamins coincides with cell differentiation and as A-type lamins specifically interact with chromatin, a role in the regulation of differential gene expression has been suggested for A-type lamins. Using the mouse Swiss 3T3 cell line as a model, the change in two A-type lamins, lamins A and C, during cellular quiescence has been investigated. This well established model system mimics the first stages of differentiation when cells exit the cell cycle. In fact, quiescence in Swiss 3T3 cells was accompanied by a significant increase (2.6-fold) in lamin A protein levels and a smaller but reproducible increase (1.4-fold) in lamin C. These effects were fully reversible upon restimulation of the cells with serum. No effect upon lamin B levels was observed. Conversely, levels of A-type lamin mRNA decreased markedly as a result of quiescence suggesting transcriptional mechanisms are involved in the change in levels of lamins A and C. No difference in the incorporation of microinjected human lamin A into nuclei of quiescent or proliferating cells was observed. These data suggest A-type lamin binding sites were not limiting and indicated little difference between A-type lamin assembly mechanisms in quiescent and proliferating cells. The data did demonstrate lamin A and lamin C incorporation into the nuclear lamina proceeded by different pathways when microinjected in Swiss 3T3 cells. The incorporation of recombinant lamin C into the nuclear lamina was delayed compared to lamin A and proceeded via intranuclear foci. Such foci were not seen with microinjected lamin A. Instead, recombinant lamin A was rapidly (<20 minutes) incorporated into the nuclear lamina. Comicroinjection of lamin A with lamin C did not prevent foci formation but assisted in the rapid clearing (t1/2=30 minutes) of these structures and the incorporation of both lamins A and C into the lamina. These data suggest that the incorporation of lamin C into the lamina is facilitated by lamin A. They demonstrate a distinct difference in the nuclear assembly pathways of lamins A and C and show for the first time a functional distinction for these two splice variants of the A-type lamin gene. From the differences in assembly pathways and changes in protein levels accompanying quiescence in 3T3 cells, we suggest distinct roles for lamin A and lamin C in proliferating and quiescent states of the cell cycle.

[PMID: 8381765]
The nuclear lamina is a meshwork of intermediate filaments adjacent to the inner nuclear membrane that in mammalian cells is predominantly composed of three proteins: lamin A, lamin B, and lamin C. Because lamin A and C (A-type lamins) expression has been shown to be lacking in several types of undifferentiated or rapidly proliferating cells, we investigated lamin expression in the human liver in conditions with hepatocellular regeneration (cirrhosis of various etiologies and macroregenerative nodules) and in hepatocellular carcinomas of various grades of differentiation. Immunohistochemical stains for A-type lamins and lamin B were performed on frozen tissue sections with the avidin-biotin complex method. Normal and regenerating hepatocytes, biliary epithelial cells (ductal and ductular cells), and hepatocellular carcinoma cells invariably expressed both A-type lamins and lamin B. These findings indicate that in hepatocellular regeneration and malignant transformation the production of both A-type lamins and lamin B is preserved.

[PMID: 17203376]
Gametogenesis and embryogenesis are dynamic developmental stages marked by extensive modifications in the organization of the genome and nuclear architecture. In the literature it is conveyed that only B-type lamins are required in these early stages of development and that A-type lamins are not present or required until differentiation of specific cell types associated with specialized tissue is initiated. To assess the presence of nuclear structures that are putatively involved in genome regulation, we investigated the distribution of lamin proteins throughout the early stages of porcine embryonic development, using testes tissue sections, oocytes and in-vitro fertilized (IVF) porcine embryos and employing anti-lamin antibodies. We have shown that anti-lamin A staining is present at the one-cell, two-cell, four-cell, and six- to eight-cell stages of early porcine embryo development, but diminishes at the morulae and blastocyst stages. Large intranuclear anti-lamin A foci are prominent in the early preimplantation stages. Both anti-lamin A/C and anti-lamin B staining were clearly present in all embryonic stages. Immature porcine oocytes revealed lamin rings using the monoclonal anti-lamin A/C antibody and many immature oocytes exhibited a pale rim staining pattern with anti-lamin A antibody. A-type lamins were not observed in sperm precursor cells. Thus, we have shown that A-type lamins and B-type lamins are present at the nuclear envelope in very early porcine embryos and that lamin A is also found in large intranuclear aggregates in two-cell to eight-cell embryos but is lacking from later embryonic stages.

[PMID: 1808207]
The nuclear lamina is an intermediate filament-type network underlying the inner nuclear membrane. It is believed to be important for nuclear envelope integrity and the organization of interphase chromatin. On the basis of biochemical properties and sequence criteria, vertebrate lamin proteins are classified as either A- or B-type. While B-type lamins are expressed in almost all cell types, no A-type lamins are present in early vertebrate embryos or undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma cell lines. Intriguingly, expression of A-type lamins occurs concomitant with cell differentiation and embryonic development. These findings have led to the hypothesis that A-type lamins might play a role in establishing or stabilizing cell-type specific differences in nuclear organization, which in turn might relate to the developmental potential of a cell. To test this hypothesis, we have stably expressed chicken lamin A in undifferentiated murine embryonal carcinoma (P19) cells, and examined the consequences of ectopic lamin A expression for the differentiation state and potential of these cells. Our results demonstrate that the P19 cells, although normally devoid of lamin A, properly incorporate and process chicken lamin A. Moreover, the stably transfected cell lines maintain the properties of undifferentiated cells, demonstrating that expression of lamin A does not directly induce differentiation. Conversely, when exposed to retinoic acid, an inducer of differentiation, lamin A-expressing P19 cells are able to differentiate normally. Taken together, our results suggest that unscheduled expression of A-type lamins is not sufficient to deregulate cell differentiation programs. The implications of these findings for the possible role for lamin A expression during development are discussed.

[PMID: 2209722]
Hemopoietic cells from blood and bone marrow of mammals usually do not express lamins A/C but only lamin B, and this feature distinguishes these cells from the vast majority of somatic cells of the adult animal, which reveal lamins A/C as well as lamin B. Here we have cultivated rat bone marrow precursor cells and human monocytes isolated from peripheral blood in tissue culture supplemented with certain growth factors. These conditions allow bone marrow precursor cells and monocytes to differentiate almost quantitatively into accessory cells and/or mature macrophages. The different cell types in the cultures can be identified both morphologically and by other assays. Antibodies specific for mouse A/C lamins, human A/C lamins, or B lamins have been used to define the lamin complement as a function of time in culture and of cell type. A dramatic increase in lamin A/C-positive cells was observed in the first 3 days of culture with both accessory cells and macrophages expressing lamins A/C as soon as such cell types could be identified. Parallel in vivo experiments showed that treatment with thioglycollate caused the percentage of lamin A/C-positive peritoneal macrophages to increase from 5 to 80% between Days 0 and 6.

[PMID: 9367621]
We have examined the expression of lamins A, B1, and C in human tissues and cancer cell lines and the function of the lamin A/C and B1 gene promoters in transfected cells. Northern analysis and immunoblotting demonstrated that lamin A/C mRNA and protein were not detectable in some human cell lines whereas lamin B1 was always present. Sequencing of approximately 2.6 kb of the lamin A/C and 1.6 kb of the lamin B1 genes 5' to the translation initiation sites showed that they did not contain typical TATA boxes near the transcription start sites. The lamin B1 and A/C proximal promoter regions were transcribed in transfected HeLa, Raji, and NT2/D1 cell lines even if the cells did not contain detectable endogenous lamin A/C mRNA or protein. These results show that, similar to most cytoplasmic intermediate filament genes, transcriptional regulatory elements in the promoters of the human nuclear lamin A/C and B1 genes do not control their cell type-specific expression in culture lines.