[PMID: 24040872]
Sodium-glucose co-transporters (SGLT2) are mainly expressed in the kidneys and are responsible for the renal handling of glucose load. SGLT2 inhibitors represent the latest oral agents for diabetes treatment. Their unique mechanism of action, which practically spares the insulin secretion or insulin utilization, differentiates the SGLT2 inhibitors from any existing antidiabetic agent. Thus, it is hypothesized that SGLT2 inhibitors can be effectively (and probably safely) combined with any existing antidiabetic agent (including insulin), either as monotherapy, or in dual or triple combinations. All these hypotheses are currently tested in many clinical trials. Currently dapagliflozin, one of the three most advanced SGLT2 inhibitors in the development (along with canagliflozin and empagliflozin), is already in the market in few European countries and canagliflozin has been approved from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in US. The evidence so far shows that SGLT2 inhibitors are equally effective to established antidiabetic agents such as metformin or sulfonylureas in their ability to lower HbA1c. On the other hand, SGLT2 inhibitors increase the possibility of genitourinary infections in type 2 diabetic individuals. Their potency in different populations and with different background therapy, but more importantly their short and long term safety remains to be seen.

[PMID: 24025022]
The sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) is expressed primarily in the kidneys and is involved in the reabsorption of filtered glucose in the renal tubule. Clinical trials of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus demonstrate a significant clinical effect in decreasing serum glucose, hemoglobin A1C, body weight, systolic blood pressure, improving β-cell function, and minimizing the risk of hypoglycemia. This report reviews the potentially beneficial effects of SGLT2 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes mellitus, specifically focusing on canagliflozin, the only SGLT2 inhibitor approved for use in the United States.

[PMID: 22621689]
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease (HIV-1 PR) and renin are primary targets toward AIDS and hypertension therapies, respectively. Molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) free-energy calculations and inhibition assays for canagliflozin, an antidiabetic agent verified its effective binding to both proteins (ΔG(pred) = -9.1 kcal mol(-1) for canagliflozin-renin; K(i,exp)= 628 nM for canagliflozin-HIV-1 PR). Moreover, drugs aliskiren (a renin inhibitor) and darunavir (an HIV-1 PR inhibitor) showed high affinity for HIV-1 PR (K(i,exp)= 76.5 nM) and renin (K(i,pred)= 261 nM), respectively. Importantly, a high correlation was observed between experimental and predicted binding energies (r(2) = 0.92). This study suggests that canagliflozin, aliskiren, and darunavir may induce profound effects toward dual HIV-1 PR and renin inhibition. Since patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) have a high risk of developing hypertension and diabetes, aliskiren-based or canagliflozin-based drug design against HIV-1 PR may eliminate these side-effects and also facilitate AIDS therapy.

[PMID: 21680987]
Hyperglycemia is a defining characteristic of type 2 diabetes mellitus and is a major risk factor associated with the development of many microvascular complications. There are numerous therapies currently available to treat hyperglycemia, but glycemic control rates remain poor. One potential reason is the decline in ß-cell function over time, which decreases the effectiveness of therapies that rely on insulin action. The kidney occupies a central position in the control of glucose homeostasis by its role in gluconeogenesis and by regulating glucose excretion. Under normal conditions, glucose filtered by the kidney is virtually totally reabsorbed in the proximal tubule by the sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2). Inhibition of SGLT2 is an attractive, insulin-independent target for increasing glucose excretion in the setting of hyperglycemia. A number of SGLT2 inhibitors have been synthesized, and results from preclinical studies have shown that they increase glucose excretion and normalize plasma glucose in diabetic models. Initial clinical data are promising and suggest that SGLT2 inhibitors may be a new therapeutic option for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus.

[PMID: 23590413]
Canagliflozin is an orally administered sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor proposed for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Canagliflozin improves glycemic control in an insulin-independent fashion through inhibition of glucose reuptake in the kidney. This article reviews the available data on the pharmacodynamics, the pharmacokinetics and metabolism, and the efficacy and safety of canagliflozin. Relevant articles were identified via PubMed using the search term canagliflozin with no date restriction. The authors also discuss the abstracts from canagliflozin studies presented at large diabetes conferences. Canagliflozin offers a relatively modest reduction in HbA1c, FPG, and PPG. It has a low incidence of hypoglycemia and a reduction in body weight. Dose adjustment may be recommended in the elderly, those on loop diuretics, and those with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60 ml/min/1.73 m(2) if there are concerns or symptoms of volume-related side effects. Issues remain with observed increases in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and the odds of heart attack and stroke. Canagliflozin offers a novel mechanism of action, a modest glycemic control, and a favorable side-effect profile. It was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in April 2013 and is undergoing evaluation by the European Medicines Agency.

[PMID: 24257692]
The proximal tubule's sodium-glucose linked transporter-2 (SGLT2) accounts for the vast majority of glucose reabsorption by the kidney. Its selective inhibition, accordingly, leads to substantial glycosuria, lowering blood glucose, and facilitating weight loss in individuals with diabetes. During the past year, two SGLT2 inhibitors, canagliflozin and dapagliflozin, have been approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Beyond their anti-hyperglycemic properties, however, this new class of drugs has several other attributes that provide a theoretical basis for kidney protection. Like agents that block the renin-angiotensin system, SGLT2 inhibitors also reduce single-nephron glomerular filtration rate (SNGFR) in the chronically diseased kidney, though by quite different mechanisms. Additional potentially beneficial effects of SGLT2 inhibition include modest reductions in blood pressure and plasma uric acid. Finally, cell culture studies indicate that glucose uptake from the tubular lumen, as well as from the basolateral compartment, can contribute to proximal tubular production of extracellular matrix proteins. Whether such attributes will translate into reducing the progression of chronic kidney disease will require the undertaking of long-term, dedicated studies.

[PMID: 23087012]
Despite the number of medications for type 2 diabetes, many people with the condition do not achieve good glycaemic control. Some existing glucose-lowering agents have adverse effects such as weight gain or hypoglycaemia. Type 2 diabetes tends to be a progressive disease, and most patients require treatment with combinations of glucose-lowering agents. The sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) receptor inhibitors are a new class of glucose-lowering agents. To assess the clinical effectiveness and safety of the SGLT2 receptor inhibitors in dual or triple therapy in type 2 diabetes. MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library (all sections); Science Citation Index; trial registries; conference abstracts; drug regulatory authorities; bibliographies of retrieved papers. Randomised controlled trials of SGLT2 receptor inhibitors compared with placebo or active comparator in type 2 diabetes in dual or combination therapy. Systematic review. Quality assessment used the Cochrane risk of bias score. Seven trials, published in full, assessed dapagliflozin and one assessed canagliflozin. Trial quality appeared good. Dapagliflozin 10 mg reduced HbA1c by -0.54% (weighted mean differences (WMD), 95% CI -0.67 to -0.40) compared to placebo, but there was no difference compared to glipizide. Canagliflozin reduced HbA1c slightly more than sitagliptin (up to -0.21% vs sitagliptin). Both dapagliflozin and canagliflozin led to weight loss (dapagliflozin WMD -1.81 kg (95% CI -2.04 to -1.57), canagliflozin up to -2.3 kg compared to placebo). Long-term trial extensions suggested that effects were maintained over time. Data on canagliflozin are currently available from only one paper. Costs of the drugs are not known so cost-effectiveness cannot be assessed. More data on safety are needed, with the Food and Drug Administration having concerns about breast and bladder cancers. Dapagliflozin appears effective in reducing HbA1c and weight in type 2 diabetes, although more safety data are needed.

[PMID: 22547464]
Sodium-glucose co-transporters (SGLTs) have a key role in the re-absorption of glucose in the kidneys. Therefore, inhibition of SGLTs may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for diabetes mellitus. SGLT2 inhibitors enhance renal glucose excretion by inhibiting renal glucose re-absorption and reduce plasma glucose level, as well as they decrease the body weight. Their action is insulin independent and they improve insulin resistance in diabetes mellitus. Numerous SGLT2 inhibitors have been developed and evaluated in clinical trials. Phase III trials are needed to assess the safety of SGLT2 inhibitors. Results suggest that the beneficial effects of SGLT2 inhibition might be achieved without the development of significant side effects.

[PMID: 23895803]
Sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibition is a novel mode of treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor canagliflozin lowered blood glucose, blood pressure, and body weight, with increased risk of urogenital infections in Phase 2 studies. Effects on macrovascular complications of diabetes remain to be determined. CANVAS is a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to evaluate the effects of canagliflozin on the risk of cardiovascular disease and to assess safety and tolerability in patients with inadequately controlled T2DM and increased cardiovascular risk. The first of 2 planned phases randomized 4,330 individuals to placebo, canagliflozin 100 or 300 mg (1:1:1) with planned follow-up of about 2 years to substantiate potential cardiovascular protection by assessing key biomarkers and to achieve initial safety objectives. By the end of mid-September 2012, a total of 7174 patient-years of follow-up were accrued. Mean baseline age was 62 years, duration of diabetes 13 years; hemoglobin A1c 8.2%, fasting plasma glucose 9.3 mmol/L, and body mass index 32 kg/m(2). Of the participants, 34% are female and 57% had a history of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Participants will be followed up to achieve primary safety and tolerability objectives and to investigate secondary outcomes. The planned second phase will not be undertaken. CANVAS will define the effects of canagliflozin on biomarkers and provide data on cardiovascular safety against established regulatory parameters.

[PMID: 10481836]
The mechanism of action of antibipolar drugs like lithium, carbamazepine, and valproate that are used in the treatment of manic-depressive illness, is unknown. Lithium is believed to act through uncompetitive inhibition of inositolmonophosphatase, which results in a depletion of neural cells of inositol and a concomitant modulation of phosphoinositol signaling. Here, we show that lithium ions, carbamazepine, and valproate, but not the tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline, inhibit at therapeutically relevant concentrations and with a time course similar to their clinical actions the high affinity myo-inositol transport in astrocyte-like cells and downregulate the level of the respective mRNA. Inhibition of inositol uptake could thus represent an additional pathway for inositol depletion, which might be relevant in the mechanism of action of all three antibipolar drugs.

[PMID: 23563279]
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) is expressed in the proximal tubules of the kidneys and plays a key role in renal glucose reabsorption. A novel class of antidiabetic medications, SGLT2-selective inhibitors attempt to improve glycemic control in diabetics by preventing glucose from being reabsorbed through SGLT2 and re-entering circulation. Ipragliflozin is an SGLT2 inhibitor in Phase 3 clinical development for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). In this review, we summarize recent animal and human studies on ipragliflozin and other SGLT2 inhibitors including dapagliflozin, canagliflozin, empagliflozin, tofogliflozin, and luseogliflozin. These agents all show potent and selective SGLT2 inhibition in vitro and reduce blood glucose levels and HbA1c in both diabetic animal models and patients with T2DM. SGLT2 inhibitors offer several advantages over other classes of hypoglycemic agents. Due to their insulin-independent mode of action, SGLT2 inhibitors provide steady glucose control without major risk for hypoglycemia and may also reverse β-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance. Other favorable effects of SGLT2 inhibitors include a reduction in both body weight and blood pressure. SGLT2 inhibitors are safe and well tolerated and can easily be combined with other classes of antidiabetic medications to achieve tighter glycemic control. The long-term safety and efficacy of these agents are under evaluation.

[PMID: 23042029]
Reabsorption of glucose in the proximal tubule occurs predominantly via the sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2). There has been intense interest in this transporter as a number of SGLT2 inhibitors have entered clinical development. SGLT2 inhibitors act to lower plasma glucose by promoting glycosuria and this review aims to outline the effect on the diabetic kidney of this hypoglycaemic agent. This review provides an overview of recent findings in this area: the transcriptional control of SGLT2 expression in human proximal tubular cells implicates a number of cytokines in the alteration of SGLT2 expression; experimental data show that SGLT2 inhibition may correct early detrimental effects of diabetes by reducing proximal tubular sodium and glucose transport, suggesting a possible renoprotective effect independent of the glucose lowering effects of these agents; and the nonglycaemic effects of SGLT2 inhibitors may have an impact on renal outcomes. The available clinical evidence shows consistent reduction in glycaemic parameters and some evidence suggests additional effects including weight loss and mild blood pressure reduction. There are some side effects that warrant further investigation and establishing whether SGLT2 inhibition provides a renal benefit relies on future long-term studies with specific renal end-points.

[PMID: 23412078]
Canagliflozin, a sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT) 2 inhibitor, is also a low-potency SGLT1 inhibitor. This study tested the hypothesis that intestinal canagliflozin levels postdose are sufficiently high to transiently inhibit intestinal SGLT1, thereby delaying intestinal glucose absorption. This two-period, crossover study evaluated effects of canagliflozin on intestinal glucose absorption in 20 healthy subjects using a dual-tracer method. Placebo or canagliflozin 300 mg was given 20 min before a 600-kcal mixed-meal tolerance test. Plasma glucose, (3)H-glucose, (14)C-glucose, and insulin were measured frequently for 6 h to calculate rates of appearance of oral glucose (RaO) in plasma, endogenous glucose production, and glucose disposal. Compared with placebo, canagliflozin treatment reduced postprandial plasma glucose and insulin excursions (incremental 0- to 2-h area under the curve [AUC0-2h] reductions of 35% and 43%, respectively; P < 0.001 for both), increased 0- to 6-h urinary glucose excretion (UGE0-6h, 18.2 ± 5.6 vs. <0.2 g; P < 0.001), and delayed RaO. Canagliflozin reduced AUC RaO by 31% over 0 to 1 h (geometric means, 264 vs. 381 mg/kg; P < 0.001) and by 20% over 0 to 2 h (576 vs. 723 mg/kg; P = 0.002). Over 2 to 6 h, canagliflozin increased RaO such that total AUC RaO over 0 to 6 h was <6% lower versus placebo (960 vs. 1,018 mg/kg; P = 0.003). A modest (∼10%) reduction in acetaminophen absorption was observed over the first 2 h, but this difference was not sufficient to explain the reduction in RaO. Total glucose disposal over 0 to 6 h was similar across groups. Canagliflozin reduces postprandial plasma glucose and insulin by increasing UGE (via renal SGLT2 inhibition) and delaying RaO, likely due to intestinal SGLT1 inhibition.

[PMID: 23729000]
Canagliflozin (Invokana™), an oral selective sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, is under global development with Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma and Janssen Pharmaceuticals, a subsidiary of Johnson and Johnson, for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. SGLT2 are mainly located in the proximal tubule of the kidney and are involved in the reabsorption of filtered glucose from the glomeruli into the body. Inhibition of SGLT2 lowers blood glucose in an insulin independent manner as a consequence of blocking reabsorption of filtered glucose in the glomeruli, thereby increasing urinary excretion of glucose and, in turn, potentially reducing bodyweight. Canagliflozin is the first SGLT2 inhibitor to be approved in the USA and is under regulatory review in the EU. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of canagliflozin, leading to its first approval for use in adults with type 2 diabetes.

[PMID: 23326927]
A new mechanism of action in the form of sodium-glucose co-transporter-(SGLT-)2 inhibitors will be available shortly for the treatment of type 2 diabetic patients. Overview. Fasting and postprandial blood glucose and HbA(1c) concentrations are indirectly reduced by the inhibition of glucose reabsorption and increased glycosuria. SGLT-2 inhibitors also have a positive impact on body weight and blood pressure of type 2 diabetics. In the available registration trials conducted to date, the SGLT-2 inhibitors appeared overall as a safe class of drugs. The clinical importance of an increased incidence of genital infections--in particular in special patientpopulations--requires further clarification. Long-term trials are currently underway to verify safety and in particular cardiovascular effects of this drug class.