[PMID: 10403541]
In the present study we examined gene expression and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) activity in leukemic cells isolated from G6PD normal and deficient subjects. The results have shown that G6PD activity strongly increases in G6PD normal leukemic cells as well as in G6PD deficient leukemic cells when compared to peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Higher levels of G6PD gene expression were observed in leukemic cells from G6PD deficient patients compared to G6PD normal. A similar pattern of gene expression was also observed for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMGCoA) reductase. These results support the hypothesis that G6PD deficient cell, in order to sustain their growth, must respond to the low activity of their mutant enzyme with an increase in quantity through an induction of gene expression.

[PMID: 24152564]
Five bromophenols isolated from three Rhodomelaceae algae (Laurencia nipponica, Polysiphonia morrowii, Odonthalia corymbifera) showed inhibitory effects against glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). Among them, the symmetric bromophenol dimer (5) showed the highest inhibitory activity against G6PD.

[PMID: 23534950]
We review here some recent data about Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), the housekeeping X-linked gene encoding the first enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), a NADPH-producing dehydrogenase. This enzyme has been popular among clinicians, biochemists, geneticists and molecular biologists because it is the most common form of red blood cell enzymopathy. G6PD deficient erythrocytes do not generate NADPH in any other way than through the PPP and for this reason they are more susceptible than any other cells to oxidative damage. Moreover, this enzyme has also been of crucial importance in many significant discoveries; indeed, G6PD polymorphisms have been instrumental in studying X-inactivation in the human species, as well as in establishing the clonal nature of certain tumors. G6PD deficiency, generally considered as a mild and benign condition, is significantly disadvantageous in certain environmental conditions like in presence of certain drugs. Nevertheless, G6PD deficiency has been positively selected by malaria, and recent knowledge seems to show that it also confers an advantage against the development of cancer, reduces the risk of coronary diseases and has a beneficial effect in terms of longevity.

[PMID: 21403409]
The cause of hyperbilirubinemia cannot be found in about 45% of cases of neonatal jaundice. Gilbert syndrome (GS) is the most common congenital disease associated with bilirubin metabolism in the liver. Since the screening value of genetic tests cannot be fully determined until accurate data on the prevalence and penetrance of the GS genotype are known, we sought to estimate whether the prevalence of GS is higher in the parents of neonates with severe unexplained indirect hyperbilirubinemia. Case-control study of parents of neonates with severe unexplained indirect hyperbilirubinemia admitted to a neonatal ward. We used the rifampin test (checked bilirubin before and 4 hours after administration of 600 mg rifampin) for diagnosis of GS in parents of 115 neonates with severe unexplained indirect hyperbilirubinemia. We compared the prevalence of GS in these parents with that of a control group of 115 couples referred for premarital counseling. The 115 neonates were aged 5.2 (1.6) days (mean, standard deviation), all were breast-fed, and males constituted 56.5%. Mean total serum bilirubin (TSB) level was 20.96 (5.48) mg/dL. 14.8% were glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency was present in 14.8%, and 10.4% had A, B or O blood group (ABO) incompatibilities with their mothers. There was no difference in the prevalence of GS between parents of the group with hyperbilirubinemia (22.2%) and the control group (19.13%) (P=.42). Mean TSB in neonates with parents who had GS was more (about 3 mg/dL) than in neonates with normal parents (P=.004). Fathers had GS twice as often as the mothers among the parents of neonates with hyperbilirubinemia (P=.003), among the control group (P=.009) and among neonates (P=.014). This study showed that GS cannot cause severe indirect hyperbilirubinemia by itself, but it may have a summative effect on rising bilirubin when combined with other factors, for example, G6PD. Our results showed that in GS, males are affected about twice as much as the females.

[PMID: 24502194]
Recent successes in malaria control have put malaria eradication back on the public health agenda. A significant obstacle to malaria elimination in Asia is the large burden of Plasmodium vivax, which is more difficult to eliminate than Plasmodium falciparum. Persistent P. vivax liver stages can be eliminated only by radical treatment with a ≥ seven-day course of an 8-aminoquinoline, with the attendant risk of acute haemolytic anaemia in individuals with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Primaquine is the only generally available 8-aminoquinoline. Testing for G6PD deficiency is not widely available, and so whilst it is widely recommended, primaquine is often not prescribed. In the past, some countries aiming for vivax malaria eradication deployed mass treatments with primaquine on a massive scale, without G6PD testing. In Azerbaijan, Tajikistan (formerly USSR), North Afghanistan and DPR Korea 8,270,185 people received either a 14-day "standard" or a 17-day "interrupted" primaquine treatment to control post-eradication malaria epidemics. These mass primaquine preventive treatment campaigns were conducted by dedicated teams who administered the drugs under supervision and then monitored the population for adverse events. Despite estimated G6PD prevalences up to 38.7%, the reported frequency of severe adverse events related to primaquine was very low. This experience shows that with careful planning and implementation of mass treatment strategies using primaquine and adequate medical support to manage haemolytic toxicity, it is possible to achieve high population coverage, substantially reduce malaria transmission, and manage the risk of severe acute haemolytic anaemia in communities with a relatively high prevalence of G6PD deficiency safely.

[PMID: 21929367]
Reliable and accurate epidemiological data is a prerequisite for a cost effective screening program for inherited disorders, which however, is lacking in a number of developing countries. Here we report the first detailed population study in the Republic of Guinea, a sub-Saharan West African country, designed to assess the frequency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and hemoglobinopathies, including screening for thalassemia. Peripheral blood samples from 187 Guinean adults were screened for hemoglobin (Hb) variants by standard hematological methods. One hundred and ten samples from males were screened for G6PD deficiency by the fluorescent spot test. Molecular analysis was performed for the most common α-thalassemia (α-thal) deletions, β-globin gene mutations, G6PD variants B (376A), A (376G), A- (376G/202A) and Betica (376G/968C), using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) or sequencing. Of the 187 subjects screened, 36 were heterozygous for Hb S [β6(A3)Glu→Val, GAG>GTG] (allele frequency 9.62%). Sixty-four subjects were heterozygous and seven were homozygous for the -α(3.7) kb deletion (allele frequency 20.85%). β-Thalassemia alleles were detected in five subjects, four with the -29 (A>G) mutation (allele frequency 1.07%) and one with codon 15 (TGG>TAG) (allele frequency 0.96%). The G6PD A- and G6PD Betica deficient variants were highly prevalent with a frequency of 5.7 and 3.3%, respectively. While we did not test for ferritin levels or α(0)-thal, four females (5.2%) had red cell indices strongly suggestive of iron deficient anemia: Hb <9.7 g/dL; MCH <19.3 pg; MCV <68.2; MCHC <31.6 g/dl; RDW >19.8%. Our results are consistent with high frequency of alleles such as Hb S, α-thal and G6PD deficient alleles associated with malaria resistance. Finding a 9.6% Hb S allele frequency supports the notion for a proficient neonatal screening to identify the sickle cell patients, who might benefit from early prophylactic treatment for infections. The incidence of significant iron deficient anemia in women is lower than expected in an under developed country.

[PMID: 15906719]
To establish the neonatal screening method of glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, G6PD activity was measured using the fluorescence spot test (FST) using dried blood samples on filter paper. The G6PD/6PGD rate test of venous blood samples was further performed for confirmation. The positive G6PD deficiency rate was 4.2% and its detection rates were 3.7% for all neonates and 5.2% only for male newborns when FST was used for neonatal screening. Conformation rates by use of G6PD/ 6PGD ratio test for G6PD deficiency were 86.8% and 100% particularly in the severely deficient groups. Both sensitivity and specificity were very high in the severely deficient groups. FST can be used in neonatal screening of G6PD deficiency because of its high accuracy, applicability, and simplicity. Moreover, a high volume of dried blood samples on filter paper can be tested quickly. It is very favorable to diagnose and treat G6PD deficiency early in high incidence districts.

[PMID: 24052930]
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is rare among Japanese ethnicity although it is known as one of the most common hereditary disorders of erythrocytes, causing intravascular hemolysis. It is well-known that G6PD deficiency may cause hemolysis even in the neonatal period. However, most cases are asymptomatic, and the frequency of severe anemia is low. We describe a Japanese male neonatal case of G6PD deficiency presenting as severe, persistent indirect hyperbilirubinemia on day 2 and hemolytic anemia. He was born to non-consanguineous Japanese parents without any family history. We could not find any triggers that could have induced hemolysis during pregnancy. This case encouraged us to investigate G6PD deficiency as a differential diagnosis of severe neonatal jaundice and hemolytic anemia despite the low prevalence in Japan.

[PMID: 9553792]
To discuss regulatory guidelines excluding subjects with erythrocyte glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency from lead-exposed jobs in the light of epidemiology findings on the mortality of these subjects. Two mortality follow-up studies were conducted. The first comprised 1979 male subjects newly identified as G6PD-deficient during a 1981 screening of the G6PD polymorphism among the general population in Sardinia, Italy. The second comprised 1080 male workers employed in maintenance and production departments of a lead smelting plant, who were divided into two subcohorts by erythrocyte G6PD phenotype. As compared with the general male population, G6PD-deficient subjects had significantly fewer deaths than expected from ischemic heart disease (standardized mortality ratio (SMR) = 28; 95% CI 10-62), cerebrovascular diseases (SMR = 22; 95% CI 6-55), and liver cirrhosis (SMR = 12; 95% CI 0-66). Among lead smelters the standardized mortality rates from cardiovascular diseases and all cancers observed among the G6PD-deficient subcohort were lower than those seen among subjects with the wild-type G6PD. No death from disease of the blood and hematopoietic system was observed among G6PD-deficient subjects in these two follow-up studies. These studies did not provide evidence of hypersensitivity to lead hematotoxicity among G6PD-deficient individuals at exposure levels within the current standards. Provided that workplace exposure complies with current standards, the hypothetical benefit of excluding G6PD-deficient individuals from lead-exposed jobs should be weighted against the loss of personal abilities and the economic damage in a social environment with diffuse unemployment.

[PMID: 23696099]
To identify novel genetic loci influencing interindividual variation in red blood cell (RBC) traits in African-Americans, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 2315 individuals, divided into discovery (n = 1904) and replication (n = 411) cohorts. The traits included hemoglobin concentration (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), RBC count, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). Patients were participants in the electronic MEdical Records and GEnomics (eMERGE) network and underwent genotyping of ~1.2 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms on the Illumina Human1M-Duo array. Association analyses were performed adjusting for age, sex, site, and population stratification. Three loci previously associated with resistance to malaria-HBB (11p15.4), HBA1/HBA2 (16p13.3), and G6PD (Xq28)-were associated (P ≤ 1 × 10(-6)) with RBC traits in the discovery cohort. The loci replicated in the replication cohort (P ≤ 0.02), and were significant at a genome-wide significance level (P < 5 × 10(-8)) in the combined cohort. The proportions of variance in RBC traits explained by significant variants at these loci were as follows: rs7120391 (near HBB) 1.3% of MCHC, rs9924561 (near HBA1/A2) 5.5% of MCV, 6.9% of MCH and 2.9% of MCHC, and rs1050828 (in G6PD) 2.4% of RBC count, 2.9% of MCV, and 1.4% of MCH, respectively. We were not able to replicate loci identified by a previous GWAS of RBC traits in a European ancestry cohort of similar sample size, suggesting that the genetic architecture of RBC traits differs by race. In conclusion, genetic variants that confer resistance to malaria are associated with RBC traits in African-Americans.

[PMID: 22639416]
Malaria is still one of the most threatening diseases worldwide. The high drug resistance rates of malarial parasites make its eradication difficult and furthermore necessitate the development of new antimalarial drugs. Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for severe malaria and therefore of special interest with regard to drug development. Plasmodium parasites are highly dependent on glucose and very sensitive to oxidative stress; two observations that drew interest to the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) with its key enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). A central position of the PPP for malaria parasites is supported by the fact that human G6PD deficiency protects to a certain degree from malaria infections. Plasmodium parasites and the human host possess a complete PPP, both of which seem to be important for the parasites. Interestingly, there are major differences between parasite and human G6PD, making the enzyme of Plasmodium a promising target for antimalarial drug design. This review gives an overview of the current state of research on glucose-6-phosphate metabolism in P. falciparum and its impact on malaria infections. Moreover, the unique characteristics of the enzyme G6PD in P. falciparum are discussed, upon which its current status as promising target for drug development is based.

[PMID: 3582603]
Per cent stimulation of GR activity by FAD in vitro and PNP oxidase activity were measured in G6PD deficiency, heterozygous beta-thalassaemia and controls. It is confirmed that, in contrast to the high stimulation of GR by FAD commonly found in in thalassaemia indicating red-cell deficiency of FAD, and shown here to be greater in the Italian subjects, GR is usually saturated with FAD in G6PD deficiency, leading to high in vitro activity. Unexpectedly, on the other hand, low FMN-dependent PNP oxidase activity due to red-cell deficiency of FMN, confirmed by response to oral riboflavin, was found in the majority of subjects with G6PD deficiency, similar to that found in heterozygous beta-thalassaemia. Whereas this is explained in thalassaemia by an inherited slow red-cell metabolism of riboflavin to FMN, it is suggested that in G6PD deficiency an increased rate of red-cell metabolism of FMN to FAD leads to the low FMN and high FAD. When G6PD deficiency occurs with heterozygous beta-thalassaemia, GR is usually saturated with FAD as in G6PD deficiency alone, unless there is an inherited, very slow red-cell metabolism of riboflavin to FMN. The part played by GR in haemolytic crises in G6PD deficiency is discussed.

[PMID: 24316370]
Red blood cells (RBCs) contain large amounts of iron and operate in highly oxygenated tissues. As a result, these cells encounter a continuous oxidative stress. Protective mechanisms against oxidation include prevention of formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), scavenging of various forms of ROS, and repair of oxidized cellular contents. In general, a partial defect in any of these systems can harm RBCs and promote senescence, but is without chronic hemolytic complaints. In this review we summarize the often rare inborn defects that interfere with the various protective mechanisms present in RBCs. NADPH is the main source of reduction equivalents in RBCs, used by most of the protective systems. When NADPH becomes limiting, red cells are prone to being damaged. In many of the severe RBC enzyme deficiencies, a lack of protective enzyme activity is frustrating erythropoiesis or is not restricted to RBCs. Common hereditary RBC disorders, such as thalassemia, sickle-cell trait, and unstable hemoglobins, give rise to increased oxidative stress caused by free heme and iron generated from hemoglobin. The beneficial effect of thalassemia minor, sickle-cell trait, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency on survival of malaria infection may well be due to the shared feature of enhanced oxidative stress. This may inhibit parasite growth, enhance uptake of infected RBCs by spleen macrophages, and/or cause less cytoadherence of the infected cells to capillary endothelium.

[PMID: 23479361]
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd) has been shown to protect against malaria infection and severe manifestations in African and Asia, but there is a scarcity of studies in the Americas. This study aimed to study the prevalence of G6PDd and its association with malaria occurrence in the Brazilian Amazon. A cross-sectional study was conducted in the male population to estimate the prevalence of G6PDd and malaria infection. G6PD deficient samples were genotyped to identify the deficient variant. Number of previous malaria episodes and need for blood transfusion during malaria episodes were recorded by applying a standardized questionary. From a sample of 1478 male individuals, 66 were detected as G6PD deficient, resulting in a prevalence of of 4.5% (95% CI = 3.44-5.56%). Fifty six G6PD deficient individuals (3.8%; 95% CI = 2.82-4.77) presented the G6PD A-variant mutation, while 10 individuals (0.7%; 95% CI = 0.42-0.97) severely deficient were genotyped as carriers of the G6PD Mediterranean variant. After adjusting for age, G6PD deficient individuals were less likely to report the occurrence of malaria episodes, and the protective effect was related to the enzyme activity, with carriers of the GG6PD A-variant presenting a 88% reduction (AOR: 0.119; 95% CI = 0.057-0.252; p < 0.001) and carriers of the Meditarrenean variant presenting 99% lower risk (AOR: 0.010; 95% CI = 0.002-0.252; p < 0.001) when compared to non-deficient individuals. On the other hand, G6PD deficient subjects reported higher need of transfusion during malaria episodes (p < 0.001). G6PD enzyme activity was directly related to susceptibility to malaria in the Brazilian Amazon, where P. vivax predominates. Severe G6PDd was associated with considerable higher risk of malaria-related transfusions.

[PMID: 24188096]
Malaria elimination will be possible only with serious attempts to address asymptomatic infection and chronic infection by both Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax. Currently available drugs that can completely clear a human of P. vivax (known as "radical cure"), and that can reduce transmission of malaria parasites, are those in the 8-aminoquinoline drug family, such as primaquine. Unfortunately, people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency risk having severe adverse reactions if exposed to these drugs at certain doses. G6PD deficiency is the most common human enzyme defect, affecting approximately 400 million people worldwide.Scaling up radical cure regimens will require testing for G6PD deficiency, at two levels: 1) the individual level to ensure safe case management, and 2) the population level to understand the risk in the local population to guide Plasmodium vivax treatment policy. Several technical and operational knowledge gaps must be addressed to expand access to G6PD deficiency testing and to ensure that a patient's G6PD status is known before deciding to administer an 8-aminoquinoline-based drug.In this report from a stakeholder meeting held in Thailand on October 4 and 5, 2012, G6PD testing in support of radical cure is discussed in detail. The focus is on challenges to the development and evaluation of G6PD diagnostic tests, and on challenges related to the operational aspects of implementing G6PD testing in support of radical cure. The report also describes recommendations for evaluation of diagnostic tests for G6PD deficiency in support of radical cure.