[PMID: 21098481]
Precise control of the timing of translational activation of dormant mRNAs stored in oocytes is required for normal progression of oocyte maturation. We previously showed that Pumilio1 (Pum1) is specifically involved in the translational control of cyclin B1 mRNA during Xenopus oocyte maturation, in cooperation with cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein (CPEB). It was reported that another Pumilio, Pumilio2 (Pum2), exists in Xenopus oocytes and that this protein regulates the translation of RINGO mRNA, together with Deleted in Azoospermia-like protein (DAZL). In this study, we characterized Pum1 and Pum2 biochemically by using newly produced antibodies that discriminate between them. Pum1 and Pum2 are bound to several key proteins involved in translational control of dormant mRNAs, including CPEB and DAZL, in immature oocytes. However, Pum1 and Pum2 themselves have no physical interaction. Injection of anti-Pum1 or anti-Pum2 antibody accelerated CPEB phosphorylation, cyclin B1 translation, and oocyte maturation. Pum1 phosphorylation coincides with the dissociation of CPEB from Pum1 and the translational activation of cyclin B1 mRNA, a target of Pum1, whereas Pum2 phosphorylation occurred at timing earlier than that for Pum1. Some, but not all, of cyclin B1 mRNAs release the deadenylase PARN during oocyte maturation, whereas Pum1 remains associated with the mRNA. On the basis of these findings, we discuss the functions of Pum1 and Pum2 in translational control of mRNAs during oocyte maturation.

[PMID: 34541851]
Human Pumilio (hPUM) is a structurally well-analyzed RNA-binding protein that has been used recently for artificial RNA binding. Structural analysis revealed that amino acids at positions 12, 13, and 16 in the repeats from R1 to R8 each contact one specific RNA base in the eight-nucleotide RNA target. The functions of the N- and C-terminal flanking repeats R1' and R8', however, remain unclear. Here, we report how the repeats contribute to overall RNA binding. We first prepared three mutants in which R1' and/or R8' were deleted and then analyzed RNA binding using gel shift assays. The assays showed that all deletion mutants bound to their target less than the original hPUM, but that R1' contributed more than R8', unlike <i>Drosophila</i> PUM. We next investigated which amino acid residues of R1' or R8' were responsible for RNA binding. With detailed analysis of the protein tertiary structure, we found a hydrophobic core in each of the repeats. We therefore mutated all hydrophobic amino residues in each core to alanine. The gel shift assays with the resulting mutants revealed that both hydrophobic cores contributed to the RNA binding: especially the hydrophobic core of R1' had a significant influence. In the present study, we demonstrated that the flanking R1' and R8' repeats are indispensable for RNA binding of hPUM and suggest that hydrophobic R1'-R1 interactions may stabilize the whole hPUM structure.

[PMID: 16954190]
Puf proteins bind RNA sequence specifically and regulate translation and stability of target mRNAs. A "code" for RNA recognition has been deduced from crystal structures of the Puf protein, human Pumilio1, where each of eight repeats binds an RNA base via a combination of three side chains at conserved positions. Here, we report the creation of seven soluble mutant proteins with predictably altered sequence specificity, including one that binds tightly to adenosine-uracil-rich element RNA. These data show that Pumilio1 can be used as a scaffold to engineer RNA-binding proteins with designed sequence specificity.

[PMID: 30289101]
SummaryTranslational regulation of mRNAs is crucial for promoting various cellular and developmental processes. Pumilio1 (Pum1) has been shown to play key roles in translational regulation of target mRNAs in many systems of diverse organisms. In zebrafish immature oocytes, Pum1 was shown to bind to cyclin B1 mRNA and promote the formation of cyclin B1 RNA granules. This Pum1-mediated RNA granule formation seemed critical to determine the timing of translational activation of cyclin B1 mRNA during oocyte maturation, leading to activation of maturation/M-phase-promoting factor (MPF) at the appropriate timing. Despite its fundamental importance, the mechanisms of translational regulation by Pum1 remain elusive. In this study, we examined the phosphorylation of Pum1 as a first step to understand the mechanisms of Pum1-mediated translation. SDS-PAGE analyses and phosphatase treatments showed that Pum1 was phosphorylated at multiple sites during oocyte maturation. This phosphorylation began in an early period after induction of oocyte maturation, which preceded the polyadenylation of cyclin B1 mRNA. Interestingly, depolymerization of actin filaments in immature oocytes caused phosphorylation of Pum1, disassembly of cyclin B1 RNA granules, and polyadenylation of cyclin B1 mRNA but not translational activation of the mRNA. Overexpression of the Pum1 N-terminus prevented the phosphorylation of Pum1, disassembly of cyclin B1 RNA granules, and translational activation of the mRNA even after induction of oocyte maturation. These results suggest that Pum1 phosphorylation in the early period of oocyte maturation is one of the key processes for promoting the disassembly of cyclin B1 RNA granules and translational activation of target mRNA.

[PMID: 21397187]
Human PUMILIO1 (PUM1) and PUMILIO2 (PUM2) are members of the PUMILIO/FBF (PUF) family that regulate specific target mRNAs posttranscriptionally. Recent studies have identified mRNA targets associated with human PUM1 and PUM2. Here, we explore the structural basis of natural target RNA recognition by human PUF proteins through crystal structures of the RNA-binding domains of PUM1 and PUM2 in complex with four cognate RNA sequences, including sequences from p38α and erk2 MAP kinase mRNAs. We observe three distinct modes of RNA binding around the fifth RNA base, two of which are different from the prototypical 1 repeat:1 RNA base binding mode previously identified with model RNA sequences. RNA-binding affinities of PUM1 and PUM2 are not affected dramatically by the different binding modes in vitro. However, these modes of binding create structurally variable recognition surfaces that suggest a mechanism in vivo for recruitment of downstream effector proteins defined by the PUF:RNA complex.

[PMID: 25768905]
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is a paradigmatic neurodegenerative proteinopathy, in which a mutant protein (in this case, ATAXIN1) accumulates in neurons and exerts toxicity; in SCA1, this process causes progressive deterioration of motor coordination. Seeking to understand how post-translational modification of ATAXIN1 levels influences disease, we discovered that the RNA-binding protein PUMILIO1 (PUM1) not only directly regulates ATAXIN1 but also plays an unexpectedly important role in neuronal function. Loss of Pum1 caused progressive motor dysfunction and SCA1-like neurodegeneration with motor impairment, primarily by increasing Ataxin1 levels. Breeding Pum1(+/-) mice to SCA1 mice (Atxn1(154Q/+)) exacerbated disease progression, whereas breeding them to Atxn1(+/-) mice normalized Ataxin1 levels and largely rescued the Pum1(+/-) phenotype. Thus, both increased wild-type ATAXIN1 levels and PUM1 haploinsufficiency could contribute to human neurodegeneration. These results demonstrate the importance of studying post-transcriptional regulation of disease-driving proteins to reveal factors underlying neurodegenerative disease.

[PMID: 34705895]
The cellular prion protein PrPC is necessary for prion replication, and its reduction greatly increases life expectancy in animal models of prion infection. Hence the factors controlling the levels of PrPC may represent therapeutic targets against human prion diseases. Here we performed an arrayed whole-transcriptome RNA interference screen to identify modulators of PrPC expression. We cultured human U251-MG glioblastoma cells in the presence of 64'752 unique siRNAs targeting 21'584 annotated human genes, and measured PrPC using a one-pot fluorescence-resonance energy transfer immunoassay in 51'128 individual microplate wells. This screen yielded 743 candidate regulators of PrPC. When downregulated, 563 of these candidates reduced and 180 enhanced PrPC expression. Recursive candidate attrition through multiple secondary screens yielded 54 novel regulators of PrPC, 9 of which were confirmed by CRISPR interference as robust regulators of PrPC biosynthesis and degradation. The phenotypes of 6 of the 9 candidates were inverted in response to transcriptional activation using CRISPRa. The RNA-binding post-transcriptional repressor Pumilio-1 was identified as a potent limiter of PrPC expression through the degradation of PRNP mRNA. Because of its hypothesis-free design, this comprehensive genetic-perturbation screen delivers an unbiased landscape of the genes regulating PrPC levels in cells, most of which were unanticipated, and some of which may be amenable to pharmacological targeting in the context of antiprion therapies.

[PMID: 34531333]
Posttranscriptional regulation of cancer gene expression programs plays a vital role in carcinogenesis; identifying the critical regulators of tumorigenesis and their molecular targets may provide novel strategies for cancer diagnosis and therapeutics. Highly conserved RNA-binding protein Pumilio-1 (PUM1) regulates mouse growth and cell proliferation, propelling us to examine its role in cancer. We found human <i>PUM1</i> is highly expressed in a diverse group of cancer, including prostate cancer; enhanced PUM1 expression is also correlated with reduced survival among prostate cancer patients. Detailed expression analysis in twenty prostate cancer tissues showed enhanced expression of <i>PUM1</i> at mRNA and protein levels. Knockdown of <i>PUM1</i> reduced prostate cancer cell proliferation and colony formation, and subcutaneous injection of <i>PUM1</i> knockdown cells led to reduced tumor size. Downregulation of PUM1 in prostate cancer cells consistently elevated cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (CDKN1B) protein expression through increased translation but did not impact its mRNA level, while overexpression of PUM1 reduced CDKN1B protein level. Our finding established a critical role of PUM1 mediated translational control, particularly the PUM1-CDKN1B axis, in prostate cancer cell growth and tumorigenesis. We proposed that PUM1-CDKN1B regulatory axis may represent a novel mechanism for the loss of CDKN1B protein expression in diverse cancers and potential targets for therapeutics development.

[PMID: 33508364]
Colon cancer is the third leading cause of death worldwide and sixth in India, where it is the cause of 5.8% of the total deaths. Pumilio-1 (PUM1) is an RNA binding protein whose regulatory role is by binding to the consensus 5'UGUANAUA3' sequence on the 3'UTR of the mRNA targets and post-transcriptionally repressing their expression. This study is the first of its kind to report the expression or function of PUM1 in colon cancer. We found that PUM1 mRNA expression is high in primary and metastatic colon cancer cell lines when compared to the normal colon cell line. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed similar trend wherein compared to the normal colon tissue, PUM1 was found to be overexpressed in both adenocarcinoma and in metastatic carcinoma. This confirms the role of PUM1 in colon cancer progression. PUM1 overexpression study in HCT116 revealed that cells transfected with PUM1 plasmid show an increased rate of proliferation, migration and colony formation. Overexpressing PUM1 increases the number and size of spheroids indicating the role of PUM1 in maintaining cancer stem cells. Overall, this is the first study that has shown the role of PUM1 in colon cancer development.

[PMID: 30256721]
Mouse PUMILIO1 (PUM1) and PUMILIO2 (PUM2) belong to the PUF (Pumilio/FBF) family, a highly conserved RNA binding protein family whose homologues play critical roles in embryonic development and germ line stem cell maintenance in invertebrates. However, their roles in mammalian embryonic development and stem cell maintenance remained largely uncharacterized. Here we report an essential requirement of the Pum gene family in early embryonic development. A loss of both Pum1 and Pum2 genes led to gastrulation failure, resulting in embryo lethality at E8.5. Pum-deficient blastocysts, however, appeared morphologically normal, from which embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could be established. Both mutant ESCs and embryos exhibited reduced growth and increased expression of endoderm markers Gata6 and Lama1, making defects in growth and differentiation the likely causes of gastrulation failure. Furthermore, ESC Gata6 transcripts could be pulled down via PUM1 immunoprecipitation and mutation of conserved PUM-binding element on 3'UTR (untranslated region) of Gata6 enhanced the expression of luciferase reporter, implicating PUM-mediated posttranscriptional regulation of Gata6 expression in stem cell development and cell lineage determination. Hence, like its invertebrate homologues, mouse PUM proteins are conserved posttranscriptional regulators essential for embryonic and stem cell development.

[PMID: 25896760]
Pumilio is a member of the highly conserved PUF family of RNA-binding proteins that function as a developmental regulator in diverse animal species. Two Pumilio genes, Pum1 and Pum2, have been identified in mammals and are found to be involved in sperm development, neuron development as well as human diseases such as neurodegeneration. Generation of animal models disrupting different parts of Pum protein could help to further dissect their physiological function. Here we described characterization and analysis of a mouse line possessing a gene trap mutation of the Pumilio1 (Pum1) gene. Mice homozygous for the mutation (Pum1(XE002)) cannot be recovered in the adult offspring, at birth or at different time points of embryonic development (E18, E14, E12). Careful analysis of preimplantation embryos showed that no homozygous blastocysts could be detected on day 3.5 of gestation. 96-hr in vitro culture of 1-cell embryos either by natural mating or in vitro fertilization between heterozygotes failed to uncover any homozygous blastocysts, suggesting an early loss of homozygous preimplantation embryos. The lack of Pum1 gene trap homozygotes suggests a role of Pum1 in very early embryonic development or fertilization. This novel animal model affecting the beginning of embryonic development could help to understand not only the genetic mechanism underlying preimplantation embryonic development but also the translational regulation in development and diseases.

[PMID: 29490074]
Specific manipulation of RNA is necessary for the research in biotechnology and medicine. The RNA-binding domains of Pumilio/fem-3 mRNA binding factors (PUF domains) are programmable RNA binding scaffolds used to engineer artificial proteins that specifically modulate RNAs. However, the native PUF domains generally recognize 8-nt RNAs, limiting their applications. Here, we modify the PUF domain of human Pumilio1 to engineer PUFs that recognize RNA targets of different length. The engineered PUFs bind to their RNA targets specifically and PUFs with more repeats have higher binding affinity than the canonical eight-repeat domains; however, the binding affinity reaches the peak at those with 9 and 10 repeats. Structural analysis on PUF with nine repeats reveals a higher degree of curvature, and the RNA binding unexpectedly and dramatically opens the curved structure. Investigation of the residues positioned in between two RNA bases demonstrates that tyrosine and arginine have favored stacking interactions. Further tests on the availability of the engineered PUFs in vitro and in splicing function assays indicate that our engineered PUFs bind RNA targets with high affinity in a programmable way.

[PMID: 17024422]
Pumilio is a sequence-specific RNA-binding protein that regulates translation from the relevant mRNA. The PUF-domain, the RNA-binding motif of Pumilio, is highly conserved across species. In the present study, we have identified two pumilio genes (pumilio-1 and pumilio-2) in rainbow trout and analyzed their expression patterns in its tissues. Pumilio-1 mRNA and pumilio-2A mRNA code for typical full length Pumilio proteins that contain a PUF-domain, whereas pumilio-2B mRNA is a splice variant of pumilio-2 and encodes a protein that lacks the PUF-domain. We have also identified a novel 72-bp exon that has not been reported in other animal species but is conserved in fish species. The insertion of this novel exon leads to the expression of an isoform of the Pumilio-2 protein with a slightly altered conformation of the PUF-domain. Pumilio-1 mRNA and pumilio-2A mRNA (irrespective of the presence of the 72-bp exon) are expressed in both the brain and ovaries at high levels, whereas pumilio-2B mRNA is expressed at low levels in all the rainbow trout tissues examined. Western blot analysis also indicates that the full length Pumilio proteins are expressed predominantly in the brain and ovaries. These data suggest that the Pumilio proteins have physiological roles and are involved in regulatory mechanisms in rainbow trout.

[PMID: 31897787]
The elimination of schistosomiasis, a parasitic disease caused by Schistosoma and a major source of morbidity and mortality in developing countries, faces serious challenges. Although the pumilio protein regulates the reproductive organ development in many species, its role in Schistosoma japonicum is unknown. Thus, this study investigated the function of pumilio in S. japonicum reproduction. The complete coding sequences of S. japonicum Pumilio1 (SjPum1) and SjPum2 genes were cloned and characterized. The full-length open-reading frame SjPum1 (2613 nucleotides) and SjPum2 (4479 nucleotides) genes were obtained. Bioinformatics analysis showed that those genes belonged to the PUF (pumilio and FBF) family. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses revealed that SjPum1 and SjPum2 were differentially expressed throughout the S. japonicum life cycle and were highly expressed in reproductive organs. In situ hybridization results showed that mRNA expression of SjPum2 was higher than that of SjPum1 in the ovary and testis. Knocking down SjPum2 using RNA interference techniques to explore potential reproductive functions showed that compared with the control (untransfected or scrambled mRNA-transfected) worms, the morphology of both male and female reproductive organs was altered, the number of eggs produced by paired females was significantly decreased, and the transcription levels of caspase 3 and caspase 7 genes related to apoptosis were significantly increased. The transcription level of Nanos1 gene which related to reproduction was also significantly increased. Therefore, SjPum2 may play a role in the reproductive development of S. japonicum.

[PMID: 32437472]
Posttranscriptional regulation plays a fundamental role in the biology of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Many studies have demonstrated that multiple mRNAs are coregulated by one or more RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that orchestrate mRNA expression. A family of RBPs, which is known as the Pumilio-FBF (PUF) family, is highly conserved among different species and has been associated with the undifferentiated and differentiated states of different cell lines. In humans, two homologs of the PUF family have been found: Pumilio 1 (PUM1) and Pumilio 2 (PUM2). To understand the role of these proteins in human ESCs (hESCs), we first assessed the influence of the silencing of PUM1 and PUM2 on pluripotency genes and found that the knockdown of Pumilio genes significantly decreased the OCT4 and NANOG mRNA levels and reduced the amount of nuclear OCT4, which suggests that Pumilio proteins play a role in the maintenance of pluripotency in hESCs. Furthermore, we observed that PUM1-and-PUM2-silenced hESCs exhibited improved efficiency of in vitro cardiomyogenic differentiation. Through an in silico analysis, we identified mRNA targets of PUM1 and PUM2 that are expressed at the early stages of cardiomyogenesis, and further investigation will determine whether these target mRNAs are active and involved in the progression of cardiomyogenesis. Our findings contribute to the understanding of the role of Pumilio proteins in hESC maintenance and differentiation.