[PMID: 24863848]
The different clinical forms of leprosy are mainly related to the variety of immunological responses to the infection. Several forms of lepromatous leprosy are recognized, including macular, nodular, and diffuse. Lucio's phenomenon is a rare but distinctive skin eruption seen in patients with diffuse lepromatous leprosy. The diffuse lesions of Lucio's phenomenon have a predilection for the extremities, can include nodules, and heal with atrophic stellate scars; histologically, a necrotizing vasculitis accompanied by a nonspecific inflammatory reaction may be seen. Because of its rarity and similarity with some manifestations of the rheumatic disease and other causes of vasculitis, Lucio's phenomenon may not be easily recognized, especially in non-endemic countries, which leads to confusing diagnosis and loss of time for treatment. We report five patients with vasculitis caused by Lucio's phenomenon.

[PMID: 34672479]
Leprosy is a chronic disease with clinical presentations according to the immunologic spectrum. Lepromatous form is the most advanced, with the highest transmissibility and risk of causing disabilities. Lucio's phenomenon is a rare manifestation among lepromatous patients with a rapid and severe evolution and high mortality. It is difficult to differentiate from ulcerative/necrotic erythema nodosum leprosum and has no consensus on how it should be treated. This article is a qualitative review of the literature after the introduction of multidrug therapy, aiming to bring consensus related to the clinical, laboratory and histopathological diagnostic criteria of the disease and its management.

[PMID: 22475236]
Lucio's phenomenon is a rare leprosy reaction characterised by bizarrely-shaped, purpuric skin lesions and ulceration. It occurs in diffuse lepromatous leprosy and it is mainly reported in patients from Mexico and the Caribbean. We describe the case of a 90-year-old Aruban man with recurrent leg ulcers and flexion contractures of the lower extremities. Occurrence of Lucio's phenomenon led to a diagnosis of diffuse lepromatous leprosy. Presence of Mycobacterium leprae was demonstrated in skin, bone marrow and lymph nodes. Lucio's phenomenon led to a diagnosis of leprosy. Leprosy is still endemic in Aruba.

[PMID: 31783808]
Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae. It is a polymorphic disease with a wide range of cutaneous and neural manifestations. Ulcer is not a common feature in leprosy patients, except during reactional states, Lucio's phenomenon (LP), or secondary to neuropathies. We report eight patients with multibacillary leprosy who presented specific skin ulcers as part of their main leprosy manifestation. Ulcers were mostly present on lower limbs (eight patients), followed by the upper limbs (three patients), and the abdomen (one patient). Mean time from onset of skin ulcers to diagnosis of leprosy was 17.4 months: all patients were either misdiagnosed or had delayed diagnosis, with seven of them presenting grade 2 disability by the time of the diagnosis. Reactional states, LP or neuropathy as potential causes of ulcers were ruled out. Biopsy of the ulcer was available in seven patients: histopathology showed mild to moderate lympho-histiocytic infiltrate with vacuolized histiocytes and intact isolated and grouped acid-fast bacilli. Eosinophils, vasculitis, vasculopathy or signs of chronic venous insufficiency were not observed. Skin lesions improved rapidly after multidrug therapy, without any concomitant specific treatment for ulcers. This series of cases highlights the importance of recognizing ulcers as a specific cutaneous manifestation of leprosy, allowing diagnosis and treatment of the disease, and therefore avoiding development of disabilities and persistence of the transmission chain of M. leprae.

[PMID: 15985035]
Lucio's phenomenon/erythema necroticans is a peculiar reaction pattern that occurs in untreated pure primitive diffuse lepromatous leprosy (PPDL) and/or relapsing leprosy recognized as spotted leprosy of Lucio. The small number of reported cases in the world literature suggests that it is fairly uncommon. Its clinical features are fairly characteristic and consist of extensive, bizarre, painful ulcerations of the skin, with constitutional symptoms being conspicuous by their absence. The clinical diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic pathology marked by proliferation and mobilization of polyblasts and histiocytes, dilatation, endothelial proliferation, luminal occlusion, and thrombosis of the superficial and mid-dermal blood vessels and demonstration of acid-fast bacilli in the blood vessel walls. Its precise pathogenesis is still unclear, but is believed to occur either through the usual or the alternate pathway of complement activation in the natural history of erythema nodosum leprosum. The clinical and immunological features of reactions in leprosy, including erythema nodosum leprosum, are well known and have been critically evaluated elsewhere.

[PMID: 19702985]
Lucio's phenomenon is a rare and aggressive necrotising variant of erythema nodosum leprosum that classically occur in patients with undiagnosed, diffuse non-nodular lepromatous leprosy. It is a potentially fatal leprosy reaction characterised by extensive, bizarrely-shaped, painful purpuric skin lesions and ulcerations. Lucio's phenomenon is very rarely reported outside of Mexico and Costa Rica. We describe 3 cases seen in Johor, Malaysia. The first two cases responded to the prompt simultaneous institution of daily rifampicin, dapsone, clofazimine and prednisolone. Case 3 continued to have new lesions and extension of existing lesions while on dapsone and clofazimine. The subsequent addition of rifampicin and prednisolone prevented new lesion formation but patient succumbed to the extensive cutaneous infarcts and consequent sepsis. Early diagnosis and prompt institution of multi-drug therapy together with prednisolone may improve the prognosis and outcome of Lucio's phenomenon.

[PMID: 25509720]
Lucio's phenomenon (LPh) is considered a necrotizing panvasculitis and a variant of leprosy Type 2 reaction, clinically characterised by necrotic-haemorrhagic lesions on the extremities and trunk. LPh is observed in diffuse lepromatous leprosy (DLL or Lucio-Latapí leprosy). This is a distinct form of lepromatous leprosy (LL) reported mainly in Mexico. Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) has been rarely described in LPh. We report a case of Lucio-Latapí leprosy with LPh observed in a patient from the province of El Oro in Ecuador, who presented clinical manifestations of long standing DLL (non-nodular infiltration of the skin, collapse of the nasal pyramid, madarosis, atrophy of the earlobes), of LPh (necrotic-haemorrhagic macules with irregular shapes) and of APS (necrosis of the right big and second toe). Histopathology showed perineural and periadnexal foamy macrophages with numerous bacilli (diagnostic of LL) in the subcutis, a mild lobular panniculitis with a large subcutaneous vessel infiltrated by macrophages in the wall (typical of LPh) and vessels of the superficial and mid dermis occluded by thrombi but without signs of vasculitis (typical of occlusive vasculopathy as in APS). Our observations suggest that some cases of LPh may be associated with APS. Anti-cardiolipin antibodies (aCL) and lupus anticoagulant (LA) should be tested in patients with LPh because this may have therapeutic implications.

[PMID: 22570037]
Lucio's phenomenon is defined as a variant of type 2 leprosy reaction. It is a rare event, occurring in the evolution of leprosy of Lucio and other forms of lepromatous leprosy. It has an exacerbated proliferation of Hansen bacilli in its pathophysiology, which invade blood vessel walls and injure endothelial cells, causing endothelial proliferation and decreasing the vascular lumen. This fact, associated with inflammatory reactions and changes in the coagulation system causes vascular thrombosis, ischemia, infarction and tissue necrosis, leading to the histopathological characteristic of the phenomenon. We report a case of lepromatous leprosy with irregular treatment that developed Lucio's phenomenon. Treatment with multidrug therapy, antibiotics, steroids and thalidomide achieved a favorable outcome.

[PMID: 24346890]
Lucio's phenomenon represents a serious cutaneous necrotizing reaction, which can occur with Lucio's leprosy and also in other forms of lepromatous leprosy. The authors discuss the case of a 63-year-old male patient presenting with ulcers and necrotic cutaneous lesions on the limbs, torso and face, associated with recurring sinusitis, hoarseness and a weight loss of 25 kilos over the last year. Bacilloscopy of intradermal scrapings showed a bacilloscopic index of 5 and the histopathological findings were compatible with the diagnosis of Lucio's phenomenon. The chosen treatment was exclusively multibacillary multidrug therapy, resulting in important dermatological improvement after one month of therapy. The authors present an impressive case of Lucio's phenomenon with an exceptional response to treatment exclusively with multibacillary multidrug therapy.

[PMID: 19078473]
Hansen's disease is a chronic granulomatous disease of infectious origin. It has a worldwide distribution and a variety of clinical manifestations often involving the skin, nasal mucosa, and peripheral nerves. Lepromatous leprosy characterizes the condition of a large group of patients with little or no resistence to the infection. Several forms of lepromatous leprosy are recognized, including macular, nodular, and diffuse. Lucio's phenomenon is a rare but distinctive skin eruption seen in patients with diffuse lepromatous leprosy. The diffuse lesions of Lucio's phenomenon have a predilection for the extremities, can include nodules, and heal with atrophic stellate scars; histologically, a necrotizing vasculitis accompanied by a nonspecific inflammatory reaction may be seen. We describe two patients with Lucio's phenomenon who presented with nontender, painless, skin lesions with nodules in part perceptible only by palpation. Both patients were treated with multidrug therapy, and immunosuppressive doses of steroids as the suggested optimal treatment for this reactional state. However, Lucio's phenomenon is frequently fatal as a result of bacterial infection or sepsis, and both patients reported here died. We call attention to this particular and unusual skin manifestation of lepromatous leprosy, which can mimic rheumatic disease and other causes of vasculitis. This is especially likely to be unrecognized in nonendemic countries but cases will occasionally be seen in this age of extensive international travel.

[PMID: 31114260]
Lucio's phenomenon (LP) is a special reactional state associated with diffuse multibacillary leprosy; both exhibit a limitative global distribution mainly in Mexico and Central America. We report a case of a 28-year-old female leprosy patient in the People's Republic of China, together with LP and positive anticardiolipin antibody, characterized by vascular thrombosis and invasion of blood vessel walls by leprosy bacilli, causing extensive skin ulcers and followed by a large number of atrophic scars.

[PMID: 17544965]
The different clinical forms of leprosy are mainly related to the variety of immunological responses to the infection. Thus, lepromatous leprosy occurs in patients with a poor cell-mediated immunity to Mycobacterium leprae, whereas tuberculoid leprosy is associated with a high resistance to leprosy bacillus. Intermediate forms, including borderline tuberculoid leprosy, borderline lepromatous leprosy, and borderline leprosy, are a continuous and unstable spectrum of the disease. Leprosy reactions are rare and not well-known states that interrupt the usual chronic course and clinical stability of patients with leprosy. They are expressions of immunological perturbations. Attending to the clinical and histopathological manifestations, leprosy reactions may be separated in 2 or 3 different variants: reverse reaction (type I), erythema nodosum leprosum (type II), erythema polymorphous (type II) and Lucio's phenomenon, mainly considered a type II reaction, but sometimes designated type III. Type I leprosy reaction, also named "upgrading reaction," occurs in borderline leprosy states and is associated with a shift toward the tuberculoid pole. Type II reaction usually occurs in lepromatous leprosy, and there are 3 different clinical variants, including erythema nudosum leprosum, erythema polymorphous-like reaction, and Lucio's phenomenon.

[PMID: 29048291]
Diffuse multibacillary leprosy of Lucio and Latapí is mainly reported in Mexico and Central America. We report a case in a 65-year-old man in Peru. He also had Lucio's phenomenon, characterized by vascular thrombosis and invasion of blood vessel walls by leprosy bacilli, causing extensive skin ulcers.

[PMID: 17506277]
O Lucio's phenomenon is an uncommon type 2 reactional state occurring exclusively in patients with diffuse lepromatous leprosy (Lucio-Latapi leprosy). Previous case reports have been most frequent in Central America and rare in Asia and Africa. Lucio's phenomenon is characterized by necrotic ulcerations of the skin preferentially on the lower extremities usually in association with ongoing Lucio lepromatosis. The purpose of this report is to describe an unusual case of Lucio's phenomenon occurring four years after successful treatment of diffuse lepromatous leprosy. The patient was a 51-year-old man who had presented diffuse lepromatous leprosy ongoing since 1998. Diagnosis was documented based on histological and bacteriologic evidence. After successful treatment using dapsone (100 mg/d), rifadine (600 mg/month) and ethionamide (250 mg/d), the patient was lost from follow-up for 4 years. In January 2005, he consulted again for alteration of general status. Clinical examination showed inflammatory livedo on the lower extremities in association with several infiltrating maculo-papular lesions and painful erythemato-pupuric lesions on the legs and buttocks. The patient's skin was dry, shiny and galabrous with alopecia of the eyelashes and eyebrows. Examination of smear samples (skin and nasal) to identify mycobacterium leprae was negative. Histological study demonstrated epidermic necrosis with aspects of leucocytoclastic vasculitis. No Virchow cells were detected and Ziehl staining was negative. Search for circulating immune complexes and antiphospholipid antibodies was negative. Diagnosis of Lucio's phenomenon was made and the patient was treated using prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/d in association with rifampicine (600 mg/month) and dapsone (100 mg/d). Outcome was favorable after one month of treatment. Lucio's phenomenon has rarely been observed in Tunisia. To our knowledge this is the third case reported from Tunisia and only 13 cases have been reported in the world since 1983. In all cases including the two from Tunisia, Lucio's phenomenon occurred during the course of treatment of ongoing Lucio-Latapi lepromatous leprosy (2). The remarkable features of our case are that Lucio's phenomenon occurred a long time after successful treatment of lepromatous leprosy and that the patient responded promptly to treatment. The pathogenesis of Lucio's phenomenon is often compared with that of erythema nodosum leprosum. Discussion focuses on pathophysiologic features and natural course of Lucio's phenomenon.

[PMID: 26566619]
Lucio's phenomenon is a rare manifestation of untreated leprosy which is seen almost exclusively in regions surrounding the Gulf of Mexico. Its occurrence elsewhere though documented is considered uncommon. We present a case of Lucio's phenomenon in a previously undiagnosed leprosy patient who presented to us with its classical skin manifestations. A 64 year old South Asian (Sri Lankan) male with a history of chronic obstructive airway disease presented to us with fever and cough. He had a generalized smooth and shiny skin with ulcerating skin lesions afflicting the digits of the fingers. The lesions progressed to involve the extremities of the body and healed with crusting. Based on the clinical and investigational findings Tuberculosis and common vasculitic conditions were suspected and excluded. The unusual skin manifestations prompted a biopsy, and wade fite stained revealed Mycobacterium bacilli. In context of the clinical picture and histological findings, Lucio's phenomenon was suspected. A clinical diagnosis of Lucio's phenomenon occurring in the backdrop of lepromatous leprosy was made. Though leprosy is still a prevalent disease, it has manifestations that are not easily recognized or fully appreciated. Regional patterns of atypical manifestations should not limit better understanding of rarer manifestations as it will aid in clinching an early diagnosis and instituting prompt treatment, thereby reducing morbidity and mortality.