[PMID: 26442520]
Cauda equina syndrome refers to dysfunction of the cauda equina, the collection of ventral and dorsal lumbar, sacral and coccygeal nerve roots that surround the filum terminale. This most commonly occurs as a result of compression by a herniated lumbosacral disc. However, the syndrome may also complicate metastatic cancer or a primary neoplasm within or infiltrating the spinal canal. An accurate and timely diagnosis is critical to avoid irreversible loss of neurological function. The clinician and radiologist must therefore be aware of the many possible causes to guide timely management. Here we review the diverse neoplastic causes affecting the cauda equina nerve roots from a neuroimaging-based perspective. We divide them by location into intramedullary neoplasms at the conus (such as astrocytoma), intradural-extramedullary neoplasms (such as schwannoma and leptomeningeal metastases) and extradural neoplasms (such as spinal metastases from systemic neoplasms). We also discuss the clinical features associated with cauda equina tumours, with special focus on cauda equina syndrome.

[PMID: 25495513]
Schwannoma is a relatively common benign spinal cord and/or cauda equina tumor; however, giant cauda equina schwannoma with extensive scalloping of the lumbar vertebral body is a rare pathology, and the treatment strategy, including the use of surgical procedures, is controversial. In this report, we present a rare case of a giant lumbar schwannoma of the cauda equina with extremely large scalloping of the vertebral body, and we discuss the surgical strategy we used to treat this pathology. A 42-year-old Japanese man presented to our department with complaints of a gait disturbance and muscle weakness in the left lower limb. His muscle strength in the proximal part of the left lower limb was grade 2 or 3/5, and he exhibited a mild urinary disturbance on the first visit. X-ray and computed tomography myelography of the lumbar spine showed an extremely large erosive lesion at the L3 vertebral body. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine showed a large soft-tissue mass in the spinal canal at L2-L3 and the vertebral body at L3. A one-stage complete tumor resection and instrumented circumferential fusion were performed via a posterior approach, and a good outcome was achieved after the surgery. We performed one-stage posterior surgery in a patient with a giant cauda equina schwannoma with extensive scalloping of the vertebral body, and a good post-operative outcome was achieved.

[PMID: 22254963]
After spinal cord injury, electrical stimulation of the roots inside the spinal column at the level of the cauda equina is a safe and effective way to regain some degree of control over lower body function, e.g. bladder and bowel management and leg movement. The success of current systems used for so-called intrathecal stimulation is limited by the low number of stimulation channels, which are in consequence of the maximum acceptable number of transdural cables. In order to overcome this limitation, we developed an active electrode with integrated electronics, providing four individual stimulation channels that requires one cable only. This paper outlines the different elements of the so-called active book with the emphasis on its preliminary construction and assembly.

[PMID: 27753733]
Lumbar spinal stenosis typically presents with neurogenic intermittent claudication. The aim of this study was to investigate cauda equina conduction time (CECT) in patients with neurogenic intermittent claudication caused by lumbar spinal stenosis and its relationship with age and body height in normal subjects. The study included 172 normal subjects (group C) (mean age 44.1 ± 16.6 years; mean height 163.7 ± 8.9 cm). Forty-seven patients (group L) (mean age 71.3 ± 8.7 years; mean height 158.8 ± 11.2 cm) underwent surgery because of neurogenic intermittent claudication in cauda equina type of lumbar spinal stenosis. Motor-evoked potentials from the abductor hallucis were recorded. Magnetic stimulation was delivered at the S1 spinous process. Compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) and F-waves were also recorded after supramaximal electric stimulation of tibial nerves. The peripheral motor conduction time (PMCT) was calculated from the latencies of CMAPs and F-waves as follows: (CMAPs + F-waves - 1)/2. The CECT was calculated by subtracting the onset latency of the motor-evoked potentials from PMCT. The mean values for F-wave latencies, motor-evoked potential latencies, and CECT were 44.5 ± 3.3, 20.6 ± 1.8, and 3.4 ± 0.8 milliseconds, respectively. F-wave and motor-evoked potential latencies showed significant positive linear correlations with age and body height. However, no significant correlation was found between CECT and age (P = 0.43) or body height (P = 0.26). Mean CECT was 5.7 ± 1.5 in group L. There was a significant difference between groups C and L (P < 0.05). The CECT value of normal subjects was 3.4 ± 0.8 milliseconds regardless of age and body height. We suggest that CECT may be a useful factor to consider when evaluating patients with neurogenic intermittent claudication.

[PMID: 3356808]
Using a variety of neuroanatomical and histological techniques, we compare the spinal cord and peripheral nerve distribution in the tails of larvae from Xenopus laevis and three species of Rana. The relatively large, postsacral spinal cord of Xenopus contains abundant motoneurons and their axons. Spinal nerves exit from the spinal cord in a regular array, one nerve per myotome, from the cervical region to near the end of the tail. Somata of motoneurons innervating caudal myotomes are found along the entire length of the tail. In contrast, the caudal cord of Rana is reduced to a filum terminale consisting of little more than an ependymal tube; spinal nerves to all caudal myotomes leave the cord in the sacral region and reach their motor targets via a cauda equina and caudal plexus. Motoneuron cell bodies innervating caudal myotomes are found only in the sacral region. The Rana larval pattern is similar to that of adult frogs and mammals, whereas the Xenopus larval pattern is more like that of salamanders and reptiles. These gross neuroanatomical differences are not due to differences in the size or developmental stage of the tadpoles, but instead are associated with differences in the swimming behavior of the larvae. The presence of motoneurons in the caudal spinal cord of Xenopus may provide local intermyotomal control within the tail; the elongated topography of the cord appears to permit finer, rostral-to-caudal regulation of neuromuscular activity. The Rana spinal cord, on the other hand--with motoneurons clustered anteriorly--may produce concurrent firing of adjacent ipsilateral myotomes, but at the expense of fine intermyotomal regulation. The fact that nerves in the tail of Xenopus enter and exit from the spinal cord locally, as opposed to far anteriorly as in Rana, means that for tadpoles of the same size, reflex arc lengths are many times shorter in Xenopus.

[PMID: 22996855]
Cauda equina syndrome is a well described state of neurologic compromise due to lumbosacral root compression. In most cases, it is due to a herniated disc, tumor, infection, or hematoma. We report a case of rapid lumbar synovial cyst expansion leading to acute cauda equina syndrome and compare it to similar cases in the literature. The patient is a 49-year-old woman with a history of chronic low back pain who developed cauda equina syndrome. Serial lumbar magnetic resonance imaging studies demonstrated a significant increase in the size of a lumbar synovial cyst over a 2 week interval. After an unsuccessful attempt to relieve her acute symptoms with computed tomography-guided cyst aspiration, an L4-5 posterior spinal decompression with excision of the synovial cyst was performed. Postoperatively the patient's perineal numbness, bladder incontinence, and associated pain complaints resolved. The only residual symptom at one month follow-up was continued numbness in the right lower limb in an L5 distribution. This report adds to 6 other well described similar cases found in the literature by illustrating several important points. First, a lumbar synovial cyst is a rare but possible cause of acute cauda equina syndrome. Second, magnetic resonance imaging is the test of choice to diagnose and characterize lumbar synovial cysts; serial imaging can detect fluctuations in cyst size. Third, percutaneous treatment of lumbar synovial cysts is variable in efficacy and proved to be unsuccessful in our patient. Finally, surgical management has shown high success rates for symptomatic cysts. Specifically, in the setting of acute cauda equina syndrome secondary to a lumbar synovial cyst, urgent surgical decompression has led to resolution of neurologic symptoms in most reported cases. A lumbar synovial cyst is an uncommon cause of acute cauda equina syndrome. Prompt diagnosis and treatment may lead to reduced morbidity associated with this condition.

[PMID: 3806684]
The spinal cord of two tetraodontiform fishes, the Japanese file fish (Navodon modestus) and the panther puffer (Takifugu pardalis), are unusual among vertebrates in having a markedly abbreviated spinal cord with a long and flattened filum terminale. Only the rostral short part of the cord of both species is cylindrical; the greater part of the cord is markedly flat. The majority of the spinal nerve roots leave the short cylindrical part. The flattened part of the cord contains the central canal, myelinated nerve fibers, and a few motoneurons surrounding the cauda equina, and it is histologically similar to the filum terminale of amphibians and mammals. The spinal cords of other teleosts, the sun-fish and angler, also are abbreviated and possess a filum terminale and cauda equina. These orders possess an enormous head and short trunk. However, the correlation between this body form and an abbreviated cord is not causal, since the tetraodontiform species described here show ordinary body proportions. The spinal cord may be abbreviated in tetraodontiform fishes in general.

[PMID: 32541159]
Malignant spinal cord compression(MSCC)is defined as a compression of the spinal cord or cauda equina with neuropathy caused by tumor spreading to the vertebral body. The common symptoms of MSCC are back pain, neck pain, muscle weakness, sensory reduction, bladder and rectal disturbance. The risk of MSCC is relatively high in patients with lung cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer. MSCC is one of the oncologic emergencies that requires prompt diagnosis and treatment to preserve and improve neurological function. Evaluation by magnetic resonance imaging(MRI)and computed tomography( CT)are useful for the diagnosis. The prognosis of these patients is often poor at the time of diagnosis of MSCC, thus it is important for deciding the treatment strategy to consider the prognosis and background of the patient in addition to the objective findings including the degree of MSCC and spinal instability. Treatment options consist of medical, surgical, and radiation therapy. We need a multidisciplinary approach because the pathology of MSCC involves multiple departments, such as medical oncology, orthopedics, and radiology. Supportive care including rehabilitation and preventing skeletal related events are also important. The cancer board, in which each physician and multidisciplinary health care professionals regularly have a discussion and review the cases, is required.

[PMID: 33261250]
We report the case of a young girl (17-year-old) wounded by an accidental gunshot. The bullet entered through the skin midline over the navel area, passed through the stomach perforating the vena cava and, by breaking the right pedicle of L4, moved inside the vertebral canal (bridging the cauda equina) stopping just in front of the body of S2. Because of the sudden onset of acute abdomen due to a massive retroperitoneal hematoma, the patient underwent emergency explorative laparotomy with the evacuation of the hematoma and the suture of the perforated cava vein, the peritoneum, and the stomach. No neurological deficits were observed after the gunshot. Two weeks later, the patient underwent spinal surgery to remove the bullet from the spinal canal, which was performed successfully without any instrumentation and with no onset of new neurological signs and symptoms or surgery-related complications. Patient was discharged on day 9 after surgery in good general conditions.

[PMID: 23101243]
Thermoesthesia-and-algesthesia disorders have been registered in the dermatomes of cauda equina roots of patients with lumbar spine osteochondrosis in all the cases. Negative changes in the sensitivity of this type are manifested themselves as follows: 1) 2-8-degree increases of thresholds; 2) 3-6-degree decreases of thresholds; 3) absence of thermal sense. In the presence of reflex syndromes (lumbalgia and lumbar ischialgia) the disorders in L4, L5, S1 dermatomes have been determined to the greatest degree. Thermoesthesia-and-algesthesia disorders are more pronounced in patients with the radicular syndrome than in those with the reflex syndromes. The most improvement ofthermoesthesia-and-algesthesia values is observed in L5 dermatome of patients with lumbalgia and lumbar ischialgia after complex conservative therapy. The treatment performed does not result in significant thermoesthesia-and-algesthesia improvement for the limb with radiculopathy events and in the dermatome of the root compressed in patients with the radicular syndrome. Positive changes in contralateral limb are more pronounced.

[PMID: 11311464]
Single or double-level compression of the lumbosacral nerve roots located in the dural sac results in a polyradicular symptomatology clinically diagnosed as cauda equina syndrome. The cauda equina nerve roots provide the sensory and motor innervation of most of the lower extremities, the pelvic floor and the sphincters. Therefore, in a fully developed cauda equina syndrome, multiple signs of sensory disorders may appear. These disorders include low-back pain, saddle anesthesia, bilateral sciatica, then motor weakness of the lower extremities or chronic paraplegia and, bladder dysfunction. Multiple etiologies can cause the cauda equina syndrome. Among them, non-neoplastic compressive etiologies such as herniated lumbosacral discs and spinal stenosis and spinal neoplasms play a significant role in the development of the cauda equina syndrome. Non-compressive etiologies of the cauda equina syndrome include ischemic insults, inflammatory conditions, spinal arachnoiditis and other infectious etiologies. The use of canine, porcine and rat models mimicking the cauda equina syndrome enabled discovery of the effects of the compression on nerve root neural and vascular anatomy, the impairment of impulse propagation and the changes of the neurotransmitters in the spinal cord after compression of cauda equina. The involvement of intrinsic spinal cord neurons in the compression-induced cauda equina syndrome includes anterograde, retrograde and transneuronal degeneration in the lumbosacral segments. Prominent changes of NADPH diaphorase exhibiting, Fos-like immunoreactive and heat shock protein HSP72 were detected in the lumbosacral segments in a short-and long-lasting compression of the cauda equina in the dog. Developments in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with back pain, sciatica and with a herniated lumbar disc are mentioned, including many treatment options available.

[PMID: 18664636]
Cauda equina syndrome is a relatively uncommon condition typically associated with a large, space-occupying lesion within the canal of the lumbosacral spine. The syndrome is characterized by varying patterns of low back pain, sciatica, lower extremity sensorimotor loss, and bowel and bladder dysfunction. The pathophysiology remains unclear but may be related to damage to the nerve roots composing the cauda equina from direct mechanical compression and venous congestion or ischemia. Early diagnosis is often challenging because the initial signs and symptoms frequently are subtle. Classically, the full-blown syndrome includes urinary retention, saddle anesthesia of the perineum, bilateral lower extremity pain, numbness, and weakness. Decreased rectal tone may be a relatively late finding. Early signs and symptoms of a developing postoperative cauda equina syndrome are often attributed to common postoperative findings. Therefore, a high index of suspicion is necessary in the postoperative spine patient with back and/or leg pain refractory to analgesia, especially in the setting of urinary retention. Regardless of the setting, when cauda equina syndrome is diagnosed, the treatment is urgent surgical decompression of the spinal canal.

[PMID: 10797973]
Penetrating spinal cord injuries (P.S.C.I.) are rarely described in Sub Saharian countries in spite of an increasing number of wars. To study epidemiology management and prognosis of P.S.C.I. in Senegal, population of 16 patients collected from Fann Hospital in Dakar has been studied. 9 cases were related on gunshot or shrapnel injuries and 6 were stab-wounded. 8 came from war practice and 7 from civilian practice. The point of entry was at the posterior or lateral part of the body and continuous leaking of cerebral spinal fluid from this point was founded only in one patient. Patients showed a clinical picture of a complete spinal cord section syndrome, 3 spinal cord hemisection Brown Sequard syndromes, 3 cauda equina syndromes and 1 monoradicular syndrome. Spinal X-rays or myelography may lead to an accurate evaluation of the extent of bone tissue destruction. Anatomical evaluation of roots and spinal cord lesions were more difficult when C.T. scan or R.M.I. is not available. Penetrating spinal cord injury with foreign body included or myelography stop or showing cauda equina syndrome should be operated on. 9 of our patients has benefited of spine surgical posterior approach (laminectomy). Immediate vital prognosis is good regarding the fact that visceral associated lesions were rare (2 cases). Functional recovery is fair only 46.6% of patients expressed partial or complete recovery. Prognosis factors such as injuring agent and initial neurological status has been discussed. Prognosis of penetrating spinal cord injuries could be improved by immediate and multidisciplinary management.

[PMID: 34321945]
Primary cauda equina lymphoma is an extremely rare entity previously documented in only 24 reported cases. Primary cauda equina lymphoma represents a subtype of neurolymphomatosis, which occurs when lymphoma cells with neurotropism infiltrate and destroy peripheral nerves, spinal nerve roots, nerve plexuses and cranial nerves. The cauda equina is an anatomic structure located in the lower part of the spinal canal consisting of multiple lumbar and sacral nerve roots. Herein, we report a unique case of primary cauda equina diffuse large B-cell lymphoma presenting as a tumor mass in the lower spinal canal, which was treated with a CNS-centric treatment approach followed by autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

[PMID: 22764663]
Intradural extramedullary type of spinal hydatid disease is a rare variety of hydatid disease, and is even rarer in paediatric age group. Spinal hydatid disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of spinal cord compression syndrome in endemic countries and should be evaluated with imaging and serological investigations. Our case was a 9- year-old boy who presented with lower back pain lasting for 8 months and progressive bilateral lower extremities weakness lasting for 2 month. Neurological examination was suggestive of lower motor neuron type of paraperesis. Magnetic resonance images of the lumbar spine showed an intradural cystic lesion displacing and compressing the lower cord and cauda equina. The cystic mass was explored with L1-L4 laminectomy and after durotomy; it was separated from cord and dura mater by hydrodissection. It contained a clear fluid. The pathological diagnosis was hydatid disease.