[PMID: 27221146]
Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) that is defined by a CAG expansion in exon 1 of the huntingtin gene leading to the production of mutant huntingtin (mHtt). To date, the disease pathophysiology has been thought to be primarily driven by cell-autonomous mechanisms, but, here, we demonstrate that fibroblasts derived from HD patients carrying either 72, 143 and 180 CAG repeats as well as induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) also characterized by 143 CAG repeats can transmit protein aggregates to genetically unrelated and healthy host tissue following implantation into the cerebral ventricles of neonatal mice in a non-cell-autonomous fashion. Transmitted mHtt aggregates gave rise to both motor and cognitive impairments, loss of striatal medium spiny neurons, increased inflammation and gliosis in associated brain regions, thereby recapitulating the behavioural and pathological phenotypes which characterizes HD. In addition, both in vitro work using co-cultures of mouse neural stem cells with 143 CAG fibroblasts and the SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line as well as in vivo experiments conducted in newborn wild-type mice suggest that exosomes can cargo mHtt between cells triggering the manifestation of HD-related behaviour and pathology. This is the first evidence of human-to-mouse prion-like propagation of mHtt in the mammalian brain; a finding which will help unravel the molecular bases of HD pathology as well as to lead to the development of a whole new range of therapies for neurodegenerative diseases of the CNS.

[PMID: 12046502]
Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder caused by high instability and extension of CAG sequences within the coding region of IT15 gene. It affects both sexes and age at onset of the disease may be different but usually occurs in midlife. The term Juvenile Huntington's disease is generally applied to 10% of the cases with onset before 20. We present clinical features and results of DNA analysis in 16 patients from 14 families aged 9 to 36. The age of onset was between 5 to 20 years; duration of the disease was from 2 to 16 years. In 10 cases the mutated gene was transmitted by the affected father; only in two cases by the mother. In all cases anticipation manifested by earlier onset of the disease in subsequent generations and expansion of CAG repeats was documented. The number of CAG repeats was between 50 and 92 (mean 67.3). Progressive mental deterioration, declining school performance, hyperactivity and emotional disturbances were the first symptoms of juvenile HD. Neuropsychological assessment showed mean IQ in Wechsler test 59.6 and Mini-Mental State Examination scores 22.8. Rigidity and bradykinesia were predominant features in the cases with juvenile onset, the remaining ones developed choreatic movements. Three persons had epileptic seizures; two (both females) revealed behaviour and psychiatric disturbances. Amplitudes of somatosensory evoked potentials, visual evoked potentials and brainstem auditory evoked potentials were markedly reduced. MRI of the brain showed atrophy of heads of the caudate nuclei, putamen and globus pallidus.

[PMID: 28986324]
Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by a CAG repeat expansion that encodes a polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion in the HD disease protein, huntingtin (HTT). PolyQ expansion promotes misfolding and aggregation of mutant HTT (mHTT) within neurons. The cellular pathways, including ubiquitin-dependent processes, by which mHTT is regulated remain incompletely understood. Ube2W is the only ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) known to ubiquitinate substrates at their amino (N)-termini, likely favoring substrates with disordered N-termini. By virtue of its N-terminal polyQ domain, HTT has an intrinsically disordered amino terminus. In studies employing immortalized cells, primary neurons and a knock-in (KI) mouse model of HD, we tested the effect of Ube2W deficiency on mHTT levels, aggregation and neurotoxicity. In cultured cells, deficiency of Ube2W activity markedly decreases mHTT aggregate formation and increases the level of soluble monomers, while reducing mHTT-induced cytotoxicity. Consistent with this result, the absence of Ube2W in HdhQ200 KI mice significantly increases levels of soluble monomeric mHTT while reducing insoluble oligomeric species. This study sheds light on the potential function of the non-canonical ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, Ube2W, in this polyQ neurodegenerative disease.

[PMID: 30850940]
Mutations in the HTT gene, consisting of expansion of CAG triplets, cause the Huntington's disease (HD), one of the major neurodegenerative disorders. Formation of aggregates of mutant huntingtin (mHTT, the product of the mutant HTT gene) leads to cellular dysfunctions, and subsequent neurodegeneration which manifest clinically as motor abnormalities and cognitive deficits. We recently used immortalized HEK-293 cells expressing the 1st exon of the mutant HTT gene as a cellular model of HD, and showed that the stimulation of autophagy by genistein corrected the mutant phenotype. However, effects of genistein on HD patient-derived cells remained unknown. In this report, we demonstrated that genistein also instigated degradation of mHTT in fibroblasts derived from HD patients. This was assessed as a significant decrease in the levels of HTT in HD fibroblasts measured by Western-blotting, and the disappearance of intracellular mHTT aggregates in cells observed by fluorescent microscopy. Fibroblasts derived from control persons were not affected by genistein treatment. These results indicate that genistein can improve HD phenotype in patient-derived cells, and substantiates the need for further studies of this isoflavone as a potential therapeutic agent.

[PMID: 26369532]
Huntington's disorder (HD), caused by mutations of the IT-15 gene, is an autosomal genetic disease that causes the breakdown of the nerve cells in the brain. The IT-15 gene encodes the huntingtin (Htt) protein. Htt, along with its interacting partners, are involved in maintaining proper communication among neurons. Our work is based on the interaction behavior between Htt (in three polyglutamine (polyQ) states that is Htt 0Q, 17Q and 36Q) and SH3GL3 interacting protein by using computational methods. We used the HADDOCK docking platform to find out the extent of interaction between Htt polyQ models and SH3GL3. The Htt36Q (mutated) showed higher interaction than Htt17Q (native) with SH3GL3. Molecular dynamics simulation was performed to uncover the structural fluctuations of polyQ models and their complexes. RMSD, Rg, SASA, and total interaction energy graph showed significant results, where as mutant Htt showed higher fluctuations and flexibility than native Htt. The increase in the length of polyQ was found to affect the stability, flexibility, and compactness of the protein and its complex. Our research provided a propitious approach to understand the consequence of polyglutamination in Htt and its relation with HD.

[PMID: 28817209]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a fully penetrant neurodegenerative disease caused by a dominantly inherited CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the huntingtin gene on chromosome 4. In Western populations HD has a prevalence of 10.6-13.7 individuals per 100 000. It is characterized by cognitive, motor and psychiatric disturbance. At the cellular level mutant huntingtin results in neuronal dysfunction and death through a number of mechanisms, including disruption of proteostasis, transcription and mitochondrial function and direct toxicity of the mutant protein. Early macroscopic changes are seen in the striatum with involvement of the cortex as the disease progresses. There are currently no disease modifying treatments; therefore supportive and symptomatic management is the mainstay of treatment. In recent years there have been significant advances in understanding both the cellular pathology and the macroscopic structural brain changes that occur as the disease progresses. In the last decade there has been a large growth in potential therapeutic targets and clinical trials. Perhaps the most promising of these are the emerging therapies aimed at lowering levels of mutant huntingtin. Antisense oligonucleotide therapy is one such approach with clinical trials currently under way. This may bring us one step closer to treating and potentially preventing this devastating condition.

[PMID: 24296361]
Huntington's disease is an inherited disorder caused by expanded stretch of consecutive trinucleotides (cytosine-adenosine-guanine, CAG) within the first exon of the huntingtin (HTT) gene on chromosome 4 (p16.3). The mutated huntingtin (mHTT) gains toxic function, probably through mechanisms that involve aberrant interactions in several pathways, causing cytotoxicity. Pathophysiology of disease involves several tissues; indeed it has been shown that there is a broad toxic effect of mHTT in the peripheral tissue of patients with HD, not only in the central nervous system. In this study we compared gene expression profiles (GEP) of HD fibroblasts and matched controls using microarray technology. We used RT-PCR to test the consistency of the microarray data and we found four genes up-regulated in HD patients with respect to control individuals. The genes appear to be involved in different pathways that have been shown to be perturbed even in HD models and patients. Although our study is preliminary and has to be extended to a larger cohort of HD patients and controls, nevertheless it shows that gene expression profiles seem to be altered in the fibroblasts of HD patients. Validation of the differential expressions at the protein level is required to ascertain if this cell type can be considered a suitable model for the identification of HD biomarkers.

[PMID: 29178352]
Two decades ago, researchers identified that a CAG expansion mutation in the huntingtin (HTT) gene was involved in the pathogenesis of Huntington's disease (HD). However, since the identification of the HTT gene, there has been no advance in the development of therapeutic strategies to prevent or reduce the progression of HD. With the recent advances in stem cell biology and human cell reprogramming technologies, several novel and exciting pathways have emerged allowing researchers to enhance their understanding of the pathogenesis of HD, to identify and screen potential drug targets, and to explore alternative donor cell sources for cell replacement therapy. This review will discuss the role of compensatory neurogenesis in the HD brain, the use of stem cell-based therapies for HD to replace or prevent cell loss, and the recent advance of cell reprogramming to model and/or treat HD. These new technologies, coupled with advances in genome editing herald a promising new era for HD research with the potential to identify a therapeutic strategy to alleviate this debilitating disorder. Stem Cells 2018;36:146-160.

[PMID: 17503740]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder that occurs in patients with a mutation in the huntingtin or IT15 gene. Patients are plagued by early cognitive signs, motor deficits, and psychiatric disturbances. Symptoms are attributed to cell death in the striatum and disruption of cortical-striatal circuitry. Mechanisms of cell death are unclear, but processes involving mitochondrial abnormalities, excitotoxicity, and abnormal protein degradation have been implicated. Many factors likely contribute to neuron death and dysfunction, and this has made it difficult to systematically address the pathology in HD. Pharmaceutical therapies are commonly used in patients to treat disease symptoms. These have limited benefit and do not address the inexorable disease progression. Several neuroprotective therapies are being evaluated in animal models of HD as well as in clinical trials. Similarly, cell replacement strategies such as fetal transplantation have been used in the clinic with minimal success, making future cell replacement strategies such as stem cell therapy uncertain. This review describes the disease pathology in HD and addresses many of the past and emerging therapeutic strategies.

[PMID: 9392570]
Huntington's disease is an inherited disorder caused by expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in the IT15 gene, which leads to expansion of a polyglutamine tract within the protein called huntingtin. Despite the characterization of the IT15 gene and the mutation involved in the disease, the normal function of huntingtin and the effects of the mutation on its function and on its neuronal location remain unknown. To study whether mutated huntingtin has the same neuronal distribution and intracellular location as normal huntingtin, we analyzed immunohistochemically both forms of this protein in the brain of 5 controls and 5 patients with Huntington's disease. We show that the distribution of mutated huntingtin is, like that of the normal form, heterogeneous throughout the brain, but is not limited to vulnerable neurons in Huntington's disease, supporting the hypothesis that the presence of the mutated huntingtin in a neuron is not in itself sufficient to lead to neuronal death. Moreover, whereas normal huntingtin is detected in some neuronal perikarya, nerve fibers, and nerve endings, the mutated form is observed in some neuronal perikarya and proximal nerve processes but is not detectable in nerve endings. Our results suggest that the expression or processing of the mutated huntingtin in perikarya and nerve endings differs quantitatively or qualitatively from the expression of the normal form in the same neuronal compartments.

[PMID: 8774958]
Positional cloning has shown that the Huntington disease (HD) mutation is an expanded trinucleotide repeat in the IT15 gene. Although this mutation clearly produces the HD phenotype, the function of the Huntington disease protein remains undefined. One recent immunocytochemical study suggested that the IT15 protein preferentially localizes to the nucleus of affected neuronal cells. If this result is accurate, it could link the biochemical function of this protein to nuclear activities such as gene regulation. To examine the nuclear transport of the Huntington disease protein, we searched for basic peptide motifs that could produce nuclear localization. One peptide (RRKGKEK) was identified that is highly homologous to a consensus nuclear localization signal. When fused to the cytoplasmic reporter protein, beta-galactosidase, nuclear localization was observed in stably transformed human cell lines. In a complementary study, an anti-peptide polyclonal antibody, raised against a sequence adjacent to the putative nuclear localization sequence, detected the IT15 protein in the nucleus of human cells. These results extend and confirm the previous localization studies and identify an IT15 peptide motif that can function for nuclear localization.

[PMID: 29172480]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that is caused by abnormal expansion of CAG repeats in the HTT gene. The transcribed mutant RNA contains expanded CAG repeats that translate into a mutant huntingtin protein. This expanded CAG repeat also causes mis-splicing of pre-mRNA due to sequestration of muscle blind like-1 splicing factor (MBNL1), and thus both of these elicit the pathogenesis of HD. Targeting the onset as well as progression of HD by small molecules could be a potent therapeutic approach. We have screened a set of small molecules to target this transcript and found Myricetin, a flavonoid, as a lead molecule that interacts with the CAG motif and thus prevents the translation of mutant huntingtin protein as well as sequestration of MBNL1. Here, we report the first solution structure of the complex formed between Myricetin and RNA containing the 5'CAG/3'GAC motif. Myricetin interacts with this RNA via base stacking at the AA mismatch. Moreover, Myricetin was also found reducing the proteo-toxicity generated due to the aggregation of polyglutamine, and further, its supplementation also improves neurobehavioral deficits in the HD mouse model. Our study provides the structural and mechanistic basis of Myricetin as an effective therapeutic candidate for HD and other polyQ related disorders.

[PMID: 23223017]
A mutation in the huntingtin (Htt) gene produces mutant Htt and Huntington's disease (HD), a neurodegenerative disorder. HD patients have oxidative damage in the brain, but the causes are unclear. Compared with controls, we found brain levels of NADPH oxidase (NOX) activity, which produces reactive oxygen species (ROS), elevated in human HD postmortem cortex and striatum and highest in striatum of presymptomatic individuals. Synaptosome fractions from cortex and striatum of HD(140Q/140Q) mice had elevated NOX activity at 3 months of age and a further rise at 6 and 12 months compared with synaptosomes of age-matched wild-type (WT) mice. High NOX activity in primary cortical and striatal neurons of HD(140Q/140Q) mice correlated with more ROS and neurite swellings. These features and neuronal cell death were markedly reduced by treatment with NOX inhibitors such as diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), apocynin (APO) and VAS2870. The rise in ROS levels in mitochondria of HD(140Q/140Q) neurons followed the rise in NOX activity and inhibiting only mitochondrial ROS was not neuroprotective. Mutant Htt colocalized at plasma membrane lipid rafts with gp91-phox, a catalytic subunit for the NOX2 isoform. Assembly of NOX2 components at lipid rafts requires activation of Rac1 which was also elevated in HD(140Q/140Q) neurons. HD(140Q/140Q) mice bred to gp91-phox knock-out mice had lower NOX activity in the brain and in primary neurons, and neurons had normal ROS levels and significantly improved survival. These findings suggest that increased NOX2 activity at lipid rafts is an early and major source of oxidative stress and cell death in HD(140Q/140Q) neurons.

[PMID: 25416977]
Huntington's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder of the brain that is caused by the mutation of the gene which produces a protein called huntingtin (htt). The mutation is based on the continuous repetition of the trinucleotide CAG which in turn makes the protein toxic for the brain cells. As a result neurons which contain the mutant protein begun to atrophy. The loss of those brain cells can cause many problems to the patients, even death. The aim of this paper is to report the problems caused to the brain by the mutant protein, specifically in the area of basal ganglia, the area that is the most affected by the disease, as well as the symptoms and metabolic changes to which the patient is subjected. Finally, the summary of the methods for a more timely and accurate diagnosis of the disease is based on these changes in order to simplify and facilitate the lives of inflicted people by means of the administration of the appropriate treatment.

[PMID: 11723754]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a late onset, incurable, autosomal dominantly-inherited, progressive neuropsychiatric disease, characterised by chorea, changes in personality, mood and behaviour, and dementia. Huntington's disease is a clinical diagnosis. The advent of DNA diagnosis has made predictive, prenatal and preimplantation testing possible for at-risk persons or asymptomatic carriers. The prevalence is estimated to be 3-10/100,000 among individuals of European descent; HD is less common in other ethnic groups. Huntington's disease is caused by an expanded trinucleotide CAG repeat in the HD gene on chromosome 4. The gene encodes for the protein huntingtin, with an as yet unknown function. The mutated huntingtin has an elongated stretch of glutamines which leads to a gain of function such as overactivity, excitotoxicity, or to interactions with other proteins.