[PMID: 24985919]
Katayama fever is an acute clinical condition characterised by high fever, dry cough and general malaise occurring during early Schistosoma spp. infection. It is predominantly reported in travellers from non-endemic regions. Whereas the immunological response to Schistosoma infection is well characterised, alterations in inflammatory markers and coagulation in response to acute infection are poorly understood. Here we report the clinical, laboratory and radiological characteristics of three returning travellers with Katayama fever. Inflammatory markers and coagulation status were assessed repeatedly during follow-up to characterise the host response to infection. Radiographic findings were correlated with clinical and laboratory markers. Clinical symptoms were suggestive of a significant inflammatory response in all patients including high fever (>39°C), cough, and general malaise. Classical inflammatory markers including blood sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and serum amyloid A were only moderately elevated. Marked eosinophilia (33-42% of white blood cells) was observed and persisted despite anti-inflammatory and anthelminthic treatment for up to 32 weeks. Analysis of blood coagulation markers indicated increased coagulability reflected by elevated D-dimer values (0.57-1.17 μg/ml) and high thrombin generating potentials (peak thrombin activity: 311-384 nM). One patient showed particularly high levels of microparticle-associated tissue factor activity at initial presentation (1.64 pg/ml). Multiple pulmonary and hepatic opacities demonstrated by computed tomography (CT) scanning were associated with raised inflammatory markers in one patient. The characterisation of the inflammatory response, blood coagulation parameters and radiological findings in three patients adds to our current understanding of Katayama fever and serves as a starting point for further systematic investigations of the pathophysiology of this acute helminthic infection.

[PMID: 24916752]
The gold standard for laboratory diagnosis of schistosomiasis is the presence of typical eggs in stool or urine. The laboratory diagnosis of schistosomiasis and Katayama syndrome in returning travellers is difficult because the number of excreted eggs is often very limited. In early infections and in patients with only a few contacts with contaminated water, the total number of parasites, migrating larvae or schistosomulae, and adult worms, is very low. Eggs can only be found in faeces or urine when there is at least one pair of adult worms at the final location. The number of parasites increases as a function of the number of contacts with infected water. The exact latency between contamination and egg production is unknown. It is estimated that excretion of eggs starts after 40-50 days. The specific diagnosis of early schistosomiasis and Katayama fever relies essentially on serologic tests or preferably on PCR (if available). These assays are much more sensitive (up to four times) in the early phase of schistosomiasis than microscopic examination for typical eggs. Eosinophilia (sometimes exceeding 50%) is often present in patients with acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever), but may be limited or absent in late fibrotic manifestations of the disease.

[PMID: 1901428]
Katayama fever or acute schistosomiasis probably occurs more commonly than is recorded. Interviews with a 3-man scuba diving team who had had contact with a large dam in an endemic area of the eastern Transvaal Lowveld at the same time and contact area on the same day during late summer of 1986 are discussed. Two, who had not previously been exposed to infected water, presented with Katayama fever, due to Schistosoma mansoni infection, 21 days after contact and it took 30-36 months for them to recover fully after several treatments. The third patient, a keen water-sportsman and resident in the endemic area for a period of 10 years, presented with a mild infection, probably due to acquired immunity initiated during previous contacts with infected water; he took about a year to recover. The pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of the 3 cases are described in the light of recent observations made elsewhere on Katayama fever cases and the effects of chemotherapy on the course of illness. The necessity of obtaining basic information on the travel and water-contact activities of patients in order to make a diagnosis is emphasised.

[PMID: 19009810]
A 35-year-old man presented with fever and severe urticaria after visiting Uganda. His symptoms were caused by acute invasive schistosomiasis, also known as Katayama fever.

[PMID: 1411323]
A 34-year-old male developed acute Katayama fever with fever, diarrhoea, joint pains, headache, urticarial rash and eosinophilia 18 days after falling into and spending 15 min in the water during water-skiing in the outlet of the Volta river. Low anti-schistosomal antibody titres were found by the immunofluorescence assay after 4 weeks, and the first Schistosoma mansoni eggs were found in faeces after 6 weeks. Both symptoms and eosinophilia increased the first days after treatment with oxamniquine, after which he improved gradually. Examination of frozen sera by the newly developed Magnetic Beads Antigen Capture-EIA (MBAC-EIA) later demonstrated a peak in schistosomal circulating anodic antigen (CAA) levels of diagnostic significance already 4 weeks after he was infected.

[PMID: 2511623]
A 19-year-old male university student of West Indian origin presented with fever, rigor, watery diarrhoea and noted intermittent generalised giant urticarial wheals of 2 weeks' duration. He swam in Lake Victoria, Uganda, 6 weeks previously and developed a swimmers' itch. Ova of Schistosoma mansoni was demonstrated by the formol-ether concentration method of the faeces. An initial single dose (40 mg/kg) of praziquantel with prednisolone 40 mg once daily for 5 days was given with no clinical deterioration of his condition. It is therefore safe and beneficial to give corticosteroid with chemotherapy in acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever).

[PMID: 15582175]
Acute schistosomiasis, called safari's fever in Africa and Katayama fever in Japan, is an immunoallergic reaction due to transcutaneous penetration of infective cercaria. We report the collective case of seven young adults spending holidays in Mali. An eighteen years-old girl presents fever, headache, diarrhoea and abdominal pains at return from Dogon country (south of Mali). After turned down malaria and with the notion of bathing in fresh water followed by pruritus, we think to safari's fever. So we alarm all other members of the group. All can be treated to avoid chronic schistosomiasis. These observations recall that acute schistosomiasis is a real danger for tourists when bathing in fresh water in endemic areas of Africa. Education of travellers is necessary. Occurrence of safari's fever should alert physicians to prevent chronic schistosomiasis.

[PMID: 24469437]
Schistosomiasis is the second most common socio-economically devastating parasitic disease after malaria, affecting about 240 million residents of developing countries. In Africa, it predominantly manifests as urogenital disease, and the main infective agent is Schistosoma hematobium. Endemicity is propagated by poor socio-economic status and environmental degradation due to rapid urbanization. Recreational swimming is a potent medium for the spread of disease in children and adolescents. Most affected individuals are asymptomatic. The male and female worms are equipped with an extraordinary capacity for immune evasion and are able to co-habit for several decades within the pelvic venous plexus. Eggs deposited in the bladder wall resist elimination by type 1 T lymphocytes. Instead, they are sustained by pro-fibrogenic encapsulation (as modulated by type 2 helper cells). Progressive bladder disease results in obstructive uropathy and predisposes to (mostly) squamous cell carcinoma. Schistosomal glomerulopathy manifests as a clinical spectrum of asymptomatic proteinuria, nephrosis and/or nephritic syndrome. Findings on renal biopsy may be influenced by co-morbidity with Salmonella bacteria, amyloidosis and hepatitis C infection. Potentially fatal Katayama fever and spinal radiculopathy may ensue in tourists visiting an endemic zone. Early detection by urine microscopy is hampered by low urinary excretion rates of the parasite eggs. Although useful in travelers with newly acquired disease, the results of the serological antibody assay may be false positive in residents of an endemic zone. Cystoscopy, however, may be invaluable. Due to its safety, effectiveness and once-daily dosing, praziquantel is the drug of choice. An integrated approach that includes mass chemotherapy, environmental health programs and public health education is the most cost-effective preventive strategy.

[PMID: 2515622]
The best therapeutic approach to acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever) is still unsettled. In this paper we report a synergistic effect between schistosomicides and steroids in the treatment of the early stages of Schistosoma mansoni infection in the mouse. CBA mice infected with 150 S. mansoni cercariae were treated with oxamniquine or praziquantel and dexamethasone or prednisolone. The rate of parasite egg excretion by treated mice and appropriate controls was monitored, and the mice were perfused 43 d after infection for estimation of worm burdens and tissue egg densities. Mice treated with schistosomicides alone or with schistosomicides plus steroids had worm burdens of similar size. Significant reductions in egg counts were, however, recorded in faeces, and in the intestines and livers (with consequent reduction in liver pathology), of mice treated with schistosomicide and steroid, when compared to mice treated with schistosomicide alone or steroid alone. The apparent inhibition of fecundity of S. mansoni by combining these drugs has clear implications for treatment of the Katayama syndrome.

[PMID: 16169593]
To investigate the characteristics of imported Katayama fever (acute schistosomiasis) as well as evolution and outcome under treatment. Between April 2000 and September 2004, we included prospectively all patients with confirmed diagnosis of Katayama fever. Follow-up was maintained at least until 6 months after symptoms resolved. Praziquantel (PZQ) was given as soon as the diagnosis was probable, most of the time with steroids. Twenty-three patients were diagnosed with Katayama fever by Schistosoma egg detection and/or by seroconversion. Clinical features were non-specific, with mainly respiratory and/or gastrointestinal symptoms. Diagnosis was confirmed at presentation in 17/23 (74%) patients, of whom 15 by serology. Immediate clinical exacerbation occurred in five of nine patients not given steroids concomitantly with PZQ. After initial resolution, fever recurred in five (22%) patients. When compiling initial and recurrent episodes (n=28), respiratory symptoms tended to occur at an earlier stage after exposure, while abdominal complaints were more frequent later. All patients were completely cured, sometimes after repeated treatments. Clinical presentation of Katayama fever is non-specific and involves respiratory and abdominal symptoms. Recurrence of fever is not unusual despite anti-helminthic treatment. Optimal therapeutic strategy remains to be defined to prevent recurrence.

[PMID: 24176480]
Fever is the most common reason that children and infants are brought to emergency departments. Emergency physicians face the challenge of quickly distinguishing benign from life-threatening conditions. The management of fever in children is guided by the patient's age, immunization status, and immune status as well as the results of a careful physical examination and appropriate laboratory tests and radiographic views. In this article, the evaluation and treatment of children with fevers of known and unknown origin are described. Causes of common and dangerous conditions that include fever in their manifestation are also discussed.

[PMID: 8115806]
Three distinct syndromes caused by schistosomiasis have been described: cercarial dermatitis or swimmer's itch, acute schistosomiasis or Katayama fever, and chronic schistosomiasis. Complications of acute schistosomiasis have also been reported. The absence of a serological marker for the acute stage has hindered early diagnosis and treatment. Recently, an ELISA test using KLH (keyhole limpet haemocyanin) as antigen, has proved useful in differentiating acute from chronic schistosomiasis mansoni. Clinical and experimental evidence indicate that steroids act synergistically with schistosomicides in the treatment of Katayama syndrome. In this paper, clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic features of acute schistosomiasis are updated.

[PMID: 22470757]
Schistosomiasis is a helminthic infection that is endemic in tropical and subtropical regions. Pulmonary involvement can be divided into two categories: acute or chronic compromise. Chronic and recurrent infection develops in persons living or travelling in endemic areas. In the lungs, granuloma formation and fibrosis around the schistosome eggs retained in the pulmonary vasculature may result in obliterative arteriolitis and pulmonary hypertension leading to cor pulmonale. Acute schistosomiasis is associated with primary exposure and is commonly seen in nonimmune travelers. The common CT findings in acute pulmonary schistosomiasis are small pulmonary nodules ranging from 2 to 15 mm and larger nodules with ground glass-opacity halo. Katayama fever is a severe clinical manifestation of acute involvement. We present a case of pulmonary involvement in schistosomiasis and provide a discussion about typical imaging findings in the acute and chronic form.

[PMID: 7676521]
Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever) may present with a broad spectrum of symptoms three to six weeks after primary infection by Schistosoma (S) mansoni, S. japonicum or, more rarely, S. haematobium. The acute phase of schistosomiasis is frequently confused with other feverish diseases. It occurs almost exclusively in nonimmune visitors to endemic areas. We describe seven cases of acute S. mansoni infection. The pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis and treatment are briefly discussed. Katayama fever should be considered in patients returning from endemic areas with fever and eosinophilia. Clinically normal, but potentially exposed travel companions should be examined as well. Early diagnosis and treatment may be important in preventing the infection's serious sequelae of the infection.

[PMID: 10996126]
The literature on the assessment of morbidity due to Schistosoma mansoni infection is updated. Imaging techniques such as ultrasonography, echodoppler cardiography, computerized tomography (CT scan) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) introduced a new perspective, and expanded our knowledge on morbidity. Three well-defined syndromes caused by schistosomiasis mansoni have been described: the stage of invasion, acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever), and chronic schistosomiasis. Complications of the acute and chronic syndromes have also been reported: pulmonary hypertension, neuroschistosomiasis, association with Salmonella, association with Staphylococci, viral hepatitis B, glomerulonephritis. In most individuals with hepatosplenic schistosomiasis the spleen is increased in size. Hepatosplenic schistosomiasis can, however, occur without splenomegaly. The definition of hepatosplenic schistosomiasis in endemic areas as the finding of S. mansoni eggs in the stools in an individual with hepatosplenomegaly is not satisfactory anymore. Many aspects of morbidity are expected to change after schistosomiasis control. Some are expected to change quickly (worm burden, Salmonella bacteremia, hepatosplenic schistosomiasis in children) whereas others shall remain for years (pulmonary hypertension, glomerulonephritis, neuroschistosomiasis). Intestinal schistosomiasis in individuals with low worm burdens is very difficult to diagnose and therefore laborious to control.