[PMID: 22956324]
Non-enzymatic deamidation accumulates in aging tissues in vivo and has been proposed to be potentially useful as a molecular clock. The process continues post mortem, and here we explore the increase in levels of deamidation in archaeological collagen, as measured during Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS) analysis. With the high sensitivity of current generation mass spectrometers, ZooMS provides a non-destructive and highly cost-effective method to characterise collagen peptides. Deamidation can be detected by mass spectrometry as a +0.984 Da mass shift; therefore, aside from its original purpose, peptide mass-fingerprinting for bone identification, ZooMS concurrently yields a 'thermal indicator' of the samples. By analysis of conventional ZooMS spectra, we determined the deamidation rate for glutamine residues in 911 bone collagen samples from 50 sites, with ages varying from medieval to Palaeolithic. The degree of deamidation was compared to diagenetic parameters and nearby sequence properties. The extent of deamidation was found to be influenced more by burial conditions and thermal age than, for example, chronological age, the extent of bioerosion or crystallinity. The method lends itself mostly to screening heterogenic deposits of bone to identify outliers.

[PMID: 21800128]
Bones are potentially the best age indicators in a stratigraphic study, because they are closely related to the layer in which they are found. Collagen is the most suitable fraction and is the material normally used in radiocarbon dating. Bone contaminants can strongly alter the carbon isotopic fraction values of the samples, so chemical pretreatment for (14)C dating by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) is essential. The most widespread method for collagen extraction is based on the Longin procedure, which consists in HCl demineralization to dissolve the inorganic phase of the samples, followed by dissolution of collagen in a weak acid solution. In this work the possible side effects of this procedure on a modern bone are presented; the extracted collagen was analyzed by ATR-IR spectroscopy. An alternative procedure, based on use of HF instead of HCl, to minimize unwanted degradation of the organic fraction, is also given. A study by ATR-IR spectroscopic analysis of collagen collected after different demineralization times and with different acid volumes, and a study of an archaeological sample, are also presented.

[PMID: 20131322]
We report a novel method for the chromatographic separation and measurement of stable carbon isotope ratios (delta(13)C) of individual amino acids in hair proteins and bone collagen using the LC-IsoLink system, which interfaces liquid chromatography (LC) with isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS). This paper provides baseline separation of 15 and 13 of the 18 amino acids in bone collagen and hair proteins, respectively. We also describe an approach to analysing small hair samples for compound-specific analysis of segmental hair sections. The LC/IRMS method is applied in a historical context by the delta(13)C analysis of hair proteins and bone collagen recovered from six individuals from Uummannaq in Greenland. The analysis of hair and bone amino acids from the same individual, compared for the first time in this study, is of importance in palaeodietary reconstruction. If hair proteins can be used as a proxy for bone collagen at the amino acid level, this validates compound-specific isotope studies using hair as a model for palaeodietary reconstruction. Our results suggest that a small offset observed in the bulk delta(13)C values of the hair and bone samples may be attributed to two factors: (i) amino acid compositional differences between hair and bone proteins, and (ii) differential turnover rates of the tissues and the amino acid pools contributing to their synthesis. This application proposes that hair may be a useful complementary or alternative source of compound-specific paleodietary information.

[PMID: 18174420]
We used authentication tests developed for ancient DNA to evaluate claims by Asara et al. (Reports, 13 April 2007, p. 280) of collagen peptide sequences recovered from mastodon and Tyrannosaurus rex fossils. Although the mastodon samples pass these tests, absence of amino acid composition data, lack of evidence for peptide deamidation, and association of alpha1(I) collagen sequences with amphibians rather than birds suggest that T. rex does not.

[PMID: 22517758]
Archaeological bones are usually dated by radiocarbon measurement of extracted collagen. However, low collagen content, contamination from the burial environment, or museum conservation work, such as addition of glues, preservatives, and fumigants to "protect" archaeological materials, have previously led to inaccurate dates. These inaccuracies in turn frustrate the development of archaeological chronologies and, in the Paleolithic, blur the dating of such key events as the dispersal of anatomically modern humans. Here we describe a method to date hydroxyproline found in collagen (~10% of collagen carbon) as a bone-specific biomarker that removes impurities, thereby improving dating accuracy and confidence. This method is applied to two important sites in Russia and allows us to report the earliest direct ages for the presence of anatomically modern humans on the Russian Plain. These dates contribute considerably to our understanding of the emergence of the Mid-Upper Paleolithic and the complex suite of burial behaviors that begin to appear during this period.

[PMID: 16323185]
Matjes River Rock Shelter is a large shell midden on the southern coast of South Africa. Stable nitrogen (delta(15)N) and carbon (delta(13)C) isotope ratios were measured in bone collagen and dentine from human skeletons excavated from this site in order to establish a weaning curve in mid-Holocene hunter-gatherers. delta(15)N results show a progressive increase in individuals from birth to 1.5 years old. delta(13)C results are more tightly clustered and mirror the steady progressive change seen for delta(15)N. We deduce that children at Matjes River Rock Shelter were breastfed for at least the first 1.5 years after birth, and were weaned sometime between 2-4 years of age. A similar pattern was documented for historic-era Kalahari foraging people, where the interbirth spacing was approximately 3 years. This study provides the first direct evidence for an extended period of breastfeeding, and thus long interbirth intervals, among prehistoric foragers, even when those foragers lived in an environment with abundant food resources.

[PMID: 21959970]
As part of the road widening scheme between London and Dover, Oxford Archaeology South uncovered a large boundary ditch of Iron Age origin that contained Iron Age and Roman inhumations, adjacent to which was a small mid-late Roman cemetery, interpreted as a rural cemetery for Romano-British farmers. Grave goods in the cemetery were restricted to a few individuals with hobnailed boots. Bulk bone collagen isotopic analysis of 11 skeletons of Iron Age and Roman date gave a typical C(3) terrestrial signal (average δ(13) C = -19.8‰, δ(15) N = 9.3‰), but also revealed one (SK12671) with a diet which included a substantial C(4) component (δ(13) C = -15.2‰, δ(15) N = 11.2‰). This is only the second such diet reported in Roman Britain. Subsequent δ(18) O(c) and (87) Sr/(86) Sr measurements on the dental enamel in this individual were, however, consistent with a "local" origin, indicating that either C(4) protein was consumed in Late Roman Britain, or that he came from somewhere else, but where conditions gave rise to similar isotopic values. If we accept the latter, then it indicates that using oxygen and strontium isotopes alone to identify "incomers" may be problematic. The provision of hobnailed boots for the dead appears to have had a strong symbolic element in Late Roman Britain. We suggest that in this case the boots may be significant, in that he was being equipped for the long march home.

[PMID: 1910520]
Mass spectrometric analysis of the stable carbon isotope composition (13C/12C or delta 13C) of bone collagen from human remains recovered at archaeological sites provides a direct chemical method for investigating dietary patterns of prehistoric human populations. This methodology is based on the facts that (1) different food items within the human diet have distinct delta 13C values, and (2) the delta 13C value of human bone collagen is determined by the delta 13C value of the diet. Studies of the development of subsistence patterns based on corn agriculture, one of the most significant developments in North American prehistory, can benefit from the use of stable carbon isotope techniques because corn has a high delta 13C value relative to other components of the human diet. Measurements of delta 13C of bone collagen from prehistoric human skeletal remains from southeastern Missouri and northeastern Arkansas indicate that intensive corn agriculture began in this region around A.D. 1000, that the incorporation of corn into the human diet was a rapid phenomenon, and that 35 to 77% of the human diet from A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1600 consisted of corn. Results from an isochronous population in southeastern South Dakota (A.D. 1400) suggest that 78 to 90% of the diet of this group consisted of corn, with no difference between males and females. Coupled with more traditional archaeological methods, stable carbon isotope analysis of bone collagen can significantly enhance reconstruction of dietary patterns of prehistoric humans.

[PMID: 21606484]
There is growing evidence supporting the need for a broad scale investigation of the proteins and protein modifications in the organic matrix of bone and the use of these measures to predict fragility fractures. However, limitations in sample availability and high heterogeneity of bone tissue cause unique experimental and/or diagnostic problems. We addressed these by an innovative combination of laser capture microscopy with our newly developed liquid chromatography separation methods, followed by gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis. Our strategy allows in-depth analysis of very limited amounts of bone material, and thus, can be important to medical sciences, biology, forensic, anthropology, and archaeology. The developed strategy permitted unprecedented biochemical analyses of bone-matrix proteins, including collagen modifications, using nearly nanoscale amounts of exceptionally homogenous bone tissue. Dissection of fully mineralized bone-tissue at such degree of homogeneity has not been achieved before. Application of our strategy established that: (1) collagen in older interstitial bone contains higher levels of an advanced glycation end product pentosidine then younger osteonal tissue, an observation contrary to the published data; (2) the levels of two enzymatic crosslinks (pyridinoline and deoxypiridinoline) were higher in osteonal than interstitial tissue and agreed with data reported by others; (3) younger osteonal bone has higher amount of osteopontin and osteocalcin then older interstitial bone and this has not been shown before. Taken together, these data show that the level of fluorescent crosslinks in collagen and the amount of two major noncollagenous bone matrix proteins differ at the level of osteonal and interstitial tissue. We propose that this may have important implications for bone remodeling processes and bone microdamage formation.

[PMID: 16921562]
The scope of compound-specific stable isotope analysis has recently been increased with the development of the LC IsoLink which interfaces high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) to provide online LC/IRMS. This enables isotopic measurement of non-volatile compounds previously not amenable to compound-specific analysis or requiring substantial modification for gas chromatography/combustion/isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC/C/IRMS), which results in reduced precision. Amino acids are an example of such compounds. We present a new chromatographic method for the HPLC separation of underivatized amino acids using an acidic, aqueous mobile phase in conjunction with a mixed-mode stationary phase that can be interfaced with the LC IsoLink for compound-specific delta13C analysis. The method utilizes a reversed-phase Primesep-A column with embedded, ionizable, functional groups providing the capability for ion-exchange and hydrophobic interactions. Baseline separation of 15 amino acids and their carbon isotope values are reported with an average standard deviation of 0.18 per thousand (n = 6). In addition delta13C values of 18 amino acids are determined from modern protein and archaeological bone collagen hydrolysates, demonstrating the potential of this method for compound-specific applications in a number of fields including metabolic, ecological and palaeodietary studies.

[PMID: 24327307]
Bones are one of the few organs in which uranyl (UO2(2+)) accumulates. This large dioxo-cation displays affinity for carboxylates, phenolates and phosphorylated functional groups in proteins. The noncollagenous protein osteopontin (OPN) plays an important role in bone homeostasis. It is mainly found in the extracellular matrix of mineralized tissues but also in body fluids such as milk, blood and urine. Furthermore, OPN is an intrinsically disordered protein, which, like other proteins of the SIBLING family, contains a polyaspartic acid sequence and numerous patterns of alternating acidic and phosphorylated residues. All these properties led to the hypothesis that this protein could be prone to UO2(2+) binding. In this work, a simple purification procedure enabling highly purified bovine (bOPN) and human OPN (hOPN) to be obtained was developed. Various biophysical approaches were set up to study the impact of phosphorylations on the affinity of OPN for UO2(2+) as well as the formation of stable complexes originating from structural changes induced by the binding of this metal cation. The results obtained suggest a new mechanism of the interaction of UO2(2+) with bone metabolism and a new role for OPN as a metal transporter.

[PMID: 24019191]
This study presents the first sulphur isotope data of modern and archaeological cod (Gadus morhua) bone collagen, undertaken to identify large-scale spatial variability of significance as both baseline values for studies of human diet and a potential variable in isotope-based studies of fish trading. Collagen was extracted from modern and archaeological cod bones using a weak HCl solution and analysed for its sulphur isotopic composition by isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS). The archaeological cod have sulphur isotope values ranging from +9.1‰ to +18.2‰, whereas values for modern specimens range from +14.8‰ to +18.3‰. The modern data show values implying less freshwater influence, consistent with their offshore catch locations, but also corroborate some of the regional variability evident from the archaeological evidence. The archaeological data have a large range of sulphur isotope values compared with the modern populations, probably indicating they were taken from a wide range of geographic locations, including both coastal and offshore locales. They show broad trends of regional difference that may relate to both the fish populations targeted (e.g. 'inshore' versus 'offshore') and the baseline values of the local ecosystem (e.g. degree of freshwater input from river systems).

[PMID: 22125157]
Single-compound analysis of stable or radio-isotopes has found application in a number of fields ranging from archaeology to forensics. Often, the most difficult part of these analyses is the development of a method for isolating the compounds of interest.Here, we describe three complementary preparative HPLC procedures suitable for separating and isolating single amino acids from bone collagen or hair keratin with minimal isotopic contamination. Using preparative reversed-phase, ion-pair, or mixed-mode chromatography of underivatized amino acids in aqueous mobile phases, single amino acids can be isolated and further analyzed using mass spectrometric techniques.

[PMID: 19899187]
Species identification of fragmentary bone, such as in rendered meat and bone meal or from archaeological sites, is often difficult in the absence of clear morphological markers. Here we present a robust method of analysing genus-specific collagen peptides by mass spectrometry simply by using solid-phase extraction (a C18 ZipTip) for peptide purification, rather than liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS). Analysis of the collagen from 32 different mammal species identified a total of 92 peptide markers that could be used for species identification, for example, in processed food and animal feed. A set of ancient (>100 ka@10 degrees C) bone samples was also analysed to show that the proposed method has applications to archaeological bone identification.

[PMID: 21953954]
Results are presented of a comparison of the amino acid (AA) δ(13)C values obtained by gas chromatography-combustion-isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC/C/IRMS) and liquid chromatography-isotope ratio mass spectrometry (LC/IRMS). Although the primary focus was the compound-specific stable carbon isotope analysis of bone collagen AAs, because of its growing application for palaeodietary and palaeoecological reconstruction, the results are relevant to any field where AA δ(13)C values are required. We compare LC/IRMS with the most up-to-date GC/C/IRMS method using N-acetyl methyl ester (NACME) AA derivatives. This comparison involves the analysis of standard AAs and hydrolysates of archaeological human bone collagen, which have been previously investigated as N-trifluoroacetyl isopropyl esters (TFA/IP). It was observed that, although GC/C/IRMS analyses required less sample, LC/IRMS permitted the analysis of a wider range of AAs, particularly those not amenable to GC analysis (e.g. arginine). Accordingly, reconstructed bulk δ(13)C values based on LC/IRMS-derived δ(13)C values were closer to the EA/IRMS-derived δ(13)C values than those based on GC/C/IRMS values. The analytical errors for LC/IRMS AA δ(13)C values were lower than GC/C/IRMS determinations. Inconsistencies in the δ(13)C values of the TFA/IP derivatives compared with the NACME- and LC/IRMS-derived δ(13)C values suggest inherent problems with the use of TFA/IP derivatives, resulting from: (i) inefficient sample combustion, and/or (ii) differences in the intra-molecular distribution of δ(13)C values between AAs, which are manifested by incomplete combustion. Close similarities between the NACME AA δ(13)C values and the LC/IRMS-derived δ(13)C values suggest that the TFA/IP derivatives should be abandoned for the natural abundance determinations of AA δ(13)C values.

[PMID: 21953952]
In archaeological studies, the isotopic enrichment values of carbon and nitrogen in bone collagen give a degree of information on dietary composition. The isotopic enrichments of individual amino acids from bone collagen and dietary protein have the potential to provide more precise information about the components of diet. A limited amount of work has been done on this, although the reliability of these studies is potentially limited by fractionation arising through hydrolysis of whole plant tissue (where reaction between amino acids and carbohydrates may occur) and, for certain amino acids, the use of derivatives (particularly trifluoroacetyl derivatives) for gas chromatography/isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC/IRMS) analysis. The present study takes the approach of extracting the protein components of plant tissues before hydrolysis and using liquid chromatography/isotope ratio mass spectrometry (LC/IRMS), which does not require derivatisation, for measurement of the isotopic enrichment of the amino acids. The protocol developed offers a methodology for consistent measurement of the δ(13)C values of amino acids, allowing isotopic differences between the individual amino acids from different plant tissues to be identified. In particular, there are highly significant differences between leaf and seed protein amino acids (leaf minus grain) in the cases of threonine (-4.1‰), aspartic acid (+3.5‰) and serine (-3.2‰). In addition to its intended application in archaeology, the technique will be of value in the fields of plant sciences, nutrition and environmental food-web studies.