[PMID: 16963707]
The identification of cis-regulatory elements is central to understanding gene transcription. Hypersensitivity of cis-regulatory elements to digestion with DNaseI remains the gold-standard approach to locating such elements. Traditional methods used to identify DNaseI hypersensitive sites are cumbersome and can only be applied to short stretches of DNA at defined locations. Here we report the development of a novel genomic array-based approach to DNaseI hypersensitive site mapping (ADHM) that permits precise, large-scale identification of such sites from as few as 5 million cells. Using ADHM we identified all previously recognized hematopoietic regulatory elements across 200 kb of the mouse T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia-1 (Tal1) locus, and, in addition, identified two novel elements within the locus, which show transcriptional regulatory activity. We further validated the ADHM protocol by mapping the DNaseI hypersensitive sites across 250 kb of the human TAL1 locus in CD34+ primary stem/progenitor cells and K562 cells and by mapping the previously known DNaseI hypersensitive sites across 240 kb of the human alpha-globin locus in K562 cells. ADHM provides a powerful approach to identifying DNaseI hypersensitive sites across large genomic regions.

[PMID: 6310495]
We have detected a DNAseI hypersensitive site in the ribosomal DNA spacer of Xenopus laevis and Xenopus borealis. The site is present in blood and embryonic nuclei of each species. In interspecies hybrids, however, the site is absent in unexpressed borealis rDNA, but is present normally in expressed laevis rDNA. Hypersensitive sites are located well upstream (over lkb) of the pre-ribosomal RNA promoter. Sequencing of the hypersensitive region in borealis rDNA, however, shows extensive homology with the promoter sequence, and with the hypersensitive region in X. laevis. Of two promoter-like duplications in each spacer, only the most upstream copy is associated with hypersensitivity to DNAaseI. Unlike DNAaseI, Endo R. MspI digests the rDNA of laevis blood nuclei at a domain extending downstream from the hypersensitive site to near the 40S promoter. Since the organisation of conserved sequence elements within this "proximal domain" is similar in three Xenopus species whose spacers have otherwise evolved rapidly, we conclude that this domain plays an important role in rDNA function.

[PMID: 16857058]
Transposable elements (TEs) are abundant genomic sequences that have been found to contribute to genome evolution in unexpected ways. Here, we characterize the evolutionary and functional characteristics of TE-derived human genome regulatory sequences uncovered by the high throughput mapping of DNaseI-hypersensitive (HS) sites. Human genome TEs were found to contribute substantially to HS regulatory sequences characterized in CD4+ T cells: 23% of HS sites contain TE-derived sequences. While HS sites are far more evolutionarily conserved than non HS sites in the human genome, consistent with their functional importance, TE-derived HS sites are highly divergent. Nevertheless, TE-derived HS sites were shown to be functionally relevant in terms of driving gene expression in CD4+ T cells. Genes involved in immune response are statistically over-represented among genes with TE-derived HS sites. A number of genes with both TE-derived HS sites and immune tissue related expression patterns were found to encode proteins involved in immune response such as T cell specific receptor antigens and secreted cytokines as well as proteins with clinical relevance to HIV and cancer. Genes with TE-derived HS sites have higher average levels of sequence and expression divergence between human and mouse orthologs compared to genes with non TE-derived HS sites. The results reported here support the notion that TEs provide a specific genome-wide mechanism for generating functionally relevant gene regulatory divergence between evolutionary lineages. This article was reviewed by Wolfgang J. Miller (nominated by Jerzy Jurka), Itai Yanai and Mikhail S.Gelfand.

[PMID: 10828050]
Mammalian beta-globin loci are composed of multiple orthologous genes whose expression is erythroid specific and developmentally regulated. The expression of these genes both from the endogenous locus and from transgenes is strongly influenced by a linked 15-kilobase region of clustered DNaseI hypersensitive sites (HSs) known as the locus control region (LCR). The LCR encompasses 5 major HSs, each of which is highly homologous among humans, mice, and other mammals. To analyze the function of individual HSs in the endogenous murine beta-globin LCR, we have used homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells to produce 5 mouse lines, each of which is deficient for 1 of these major HSs. In this report, we demonstrate that deletion of the conserved region of 5'HS 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5/6 abolishes HS formation at the deletion site but has no influence on the formation of the remaining HSs in the LCR. Therefore, in the endogenous murine locus, there is no dominant or initiating site whose formation must precede the formation of the other HSs. This is consistent with the idea that HSs form autonomously. We discuss the implications of these findings for current models of beta-globin regulation.

[PMID: 15070753]
Comprehensive identification of sequences that regulate transcription is one of the major goals of genome biology. Focal alteration in chromatin structure in vivo, detectable through hypersensitivity to DNaseI and other nucleases, is the sine qua non of a diverse cast of transcriptional regulatory elements including enhancers, promoters, insulators, and locus control regions. We developed an approach for genome-scale identification of DNaseI hypersensitive sites (HSs) via isolation and cloning of in vivo DNaseI cleavage sites to create libraries of active chromatin sequences (ACSs). Here, we describe analysis of >61,000 ACSs derived from erythroid cells. We observed peaks in the density of ACSs at the transcriptional start sites of known genes at non-gene-associated CpG islands, and, to a lesser degree, at evolutionarily conserved noncoding sequences. Peaks in ACS density paralleled the distribution of DNaseI HSs. ACSs and DNaseI HSs were distributed between both expressed and nonexpressed genes, suggesting that a large proportion of genes reside within open chromatin domains. The results permit a quantitative approximation of the distribution of HSs and classical cis-regulatory sequences in the human genome.

[PMID: 11409913]
A number of DNaseI-hypersensitive (DH) sites have been mapped within a regulatory region situated upstream of the human apolipoprotein B (apoB) promoter (-5262 to -899) that is required for high level expression of human apoB transgenes in the livers of mice. These DH sites were observed in nuclei from transcriptionally active liver-derived HepG2 cells, but were absent from transcriptionally inactive HeLa cell nuclei. Several nuclear protein binding sites were detected in the DNaseI-hypersensitive region by DNaseI footprinting with HepG2 nuclear extracts, representing putative binding sites for the liver-specific activators. The locations of binding sites for these transcription factors were revealed via computer analysis of the DNA sequence of this region against a transcription factor database. Many micrococcal nuclease hypersensitive (MH) sites were also observed in nuclei from HepG2 cells but not in HeLa cell nuclei, implying that in hepatic cells, nucleosomes are either absent or have been displaced from this region by the liver-specific transcriptional activators, as inferred by the correspondence between the DH sites, the MH sites and the footprints.

[PMID: 3004939]
To assess possible alterations of c-myc transcriptional control in murine B-cell tumors, we have investigated the pattern of DNaseI hypersensitive sites in the gene's putative regulatory region and within the gene in a variety of genomic contexts. A number of such sites were found in several cell types, but none of these was detectable in a gene which was shown to be transcriptionally silent by the criterion of elongation of nascent transcripts in isolated nuclei. These results differ from those of a previous study, in which a DNaseI-hypersensitive site approximately 2 kb upstream of the gene was proposed to be associated with negative regulation of c-myc transcription in human cells. An analysis of DNA sequences presented here reveals that this region is highly homologous between mouse and human, suggesting that these upstream hypersensitive sites do not reflect species-specific regulatory elements. We also present data indicating that this hypersensitive site distinguishes the c-myc alleles in translocation-positive plasma cell tumors which lack c-myc rearrangement. Furthermore, we report the existence of hypersensitive sites within the gene. One of these appears to be associated with cryptic promoters that are employed only when the normal promoters are lost as a consequence of chromosome translocation. These results are discussed in the context of c-myc translocation and gene breakage and with respect to possible stage-specific regulation of the gene's transcriptional competence.

[PMID: 17389645]
Mapping sites within the genome that are hypersensitive to digestion with DNaseI is an important method for identifying DNA elements that regulate transcription. The standard approach to locating these DNaseI-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) has been to use Southern blotting techniques, although we, and others, have recently published alternative methods using a range of technologies including high-throughput sequencing and genomic array tiling paths. In this article, we describe a novel protocol to use real-time PCR to map DHS. Advantages of the technique reported here include the small cell numbers required for each analysis, rapid, relatively low-cost experiments with minimal need for specialist equipment. Presented examples include comparative DHS mapping of known TAL1/SCL regulatory elements between human embryonic stem cells and K562 cells.

[PMID: 11567985]
The mammalian beta-globin locus is a multigenic, developmentally regulated, tissue-specific locus from which gene expression is regulated by a distal regulatory region, the locus control region (LCR). The functional mechanism by which the beta-globin LCR stimulates transcription of the linked beta-like globin genes remains unknown. The LCR is composed of a series of 5 DNaseI hypersensitive sites (5'HSs) that form in the nucleus of erythroid precursors. These HSs are conserved among mammals, bind transcription factors that also bind to other parts of the locus, and compose the functional components of the LCR. To test the hypothesis that individual HSs have unique properties, homologous recombination was used to construct 5 lines of mice with individual deletions of each of the 5'HSs of the endogenous murine beta-globin LCR. Here it is reported that deletion of 5'HS1 reduces expression of the linked genes by up to 24%, while deletion of 5'HS4 leads to reductions of up to 27%. These deletions do not perturb the normal stage-specific expression of genes from this multigenic locus. In conjunction with previous studies of deletions of the other HSs and studies of deletion of the entire LCR, it is concluded that (1) none of the 5'HSs is essential for nearly normal expression; (2) none of the HSs is required for proper developmental expression; and (3) the HSs do not appear to synergize either structurally or functionally, but rather form independently and appear to contribute additively to the overall expression from the locus.

[PMID: 21685456]
To understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie global transcriptional regulation, it is essential to first identify all the transcriptional regulatory elements in the human genome. The advent of next-generation sequencing has provided a powerful platform for genome-wide analysis of different species and specific cell types; when combined with traditional techniques to identify regions of open chromatin [DNaseI hypersensitivity (DHS)] or specific binding locations of transcription factors [chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)], and expression data from microarrays, we become uniquely poised to uncover the mysteries of the genome and its regulation. To this end, we have performed global meta-analysis of the relationship among data from DNaseI-seq, ChIP-seq and expression arrays, and found that specific correlations exist among regulatory elements and gene expression across different cell types. These correlations revealed four distinct modes of chromatin domain structure reflecting different functions: repressive, active, primed and bivalent. Furthermore, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites were identified based on these integrative data. Our findings uncovered a complex regulatory process involving by DNaseI HS sites and histone modifications, and suggest that these dynamic elements may be responsible for maintaining chromatin structure and integrity of the human genome. Our integrative approach provides an example by which data from diverse technology platforms may be integrated to provide more meaningful insights into global transcriptional regulation.

[PMID: 19728890]
Mapping DNaseI hypersensitive sites is commonly used to identify regulatory regions in the genome. However, currently available methods are either time consuming and laborious, expensive or require large numbers of cells. We aimed to develop a quick and straightforward method for the analysis of DNaseI hypersensitive sites that overcomes these problems. We have developed a modified Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) approach for the identification and analysis of genomic regulatory regions. The utility of this approach was demonstrated by simultaneously analysing 20 loci from the ENCODE project for DNaseI hypersensitivity in a range of different cell lines. We were able to obtain reproducible results with as little as 5 x 10(4) cells per DNaseI treatment. Our results broadly matched those previously reported by the ENCODE project, and both technical and biological replicates showed high correlations, indicating the sensitivity and reproducibility of this method. This new method will considerably facilitate the identification and analysis of DNaseI hypersensitive sites. Due to the multiplexing potential of MLPA (up to 50 loci can be examined) it is possible to analyse dozens of DNaseI hypersensitive sites in a single reaction. Furthermore, the high sensitivity of MLPA means that fewer than 10(5) cells per DNaseI treatment can be used, allowing the discovery and analysis of tissue specific regulatory regions without the need for pooling. This method is quick and easy and results can be obtained within 48 hours after harvesting of cells or tissues. As no special equipment is required, this method can be applied by any laboratory interested in the analysis of DNaseI hypersensitive regions.

[PMID: 19488879]
Historically, the simplest method to robustly identify active gene regulatory elements has been enzymatic digestion of nuclear DNA by nucleases such as DNaseI. Regions of extreme chromatin accessibility to DNaseI, commonly known as DNaseI hypersensitive sites, have been repeatedly shown to be markers for all types of active cis-acting regulatory elements, including promoters, enhancers, silencers, insulators, and locus control regions. However, the original classical method, which for over 25 years relied on Southern blot, was limited to studying only small regions of the genome. Here we describe the detailed protocol for DNase-chip, a high-throughput method that allows for a targeted or genome-wide identification of cis-acting gene regulatory elements.

[PMID: 11231273]
Expression of the Cyp19 gene, encoding aromatase cytochrome P450, is driven by several tissue-specific promoters. The underlying mechanisms of this complex regulation have not yet been elucidated in detail. In the present report we investigate a possible link between chromatin structure and tissue-specific regulation of the bovine Cyp19 gene. We analysed the DNA methylation status and mapped DNaseI hypersensitive sites in the region encompassing the Cyp19 promoter 1.1 (P1.1) which controls Cyp19 expression in the bovine placenta. We show that P1.1 is hypomethylated in placental cotyledons (foetal layer) whereas it is methylated in placental caruncles (maternal layer), testis and corpus luteum. Furthermore, two placenta-specific DNaseI hypersensitive sites, HS1 and HS2, were observed within P1.1. Both DNA hypomethylation and the presence of DNaseI hypersensitive sites correlate with transcriptional activity of P1.1. Sequence analysis of hypersensitive sites revealed potential cis-regulatory elements, an E-box in HS1 and a trophoblast-specific element-like sequence in HS2. It could be demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays that both sequence motifs are specific targets for placenta-derived nuclear factors. In conclusion, observed tissue-specific differences of the chromatin structure which correlate with tissue-specific promoter activity suggest that chromatin might be an important regulator of aromatase expression in cattle.

[PMID: 22761590]
Understanding the molecular basis for phenotypic differences between humans and other primates remains an outstanding challenge. Mutations in non-coding regulatory DNA that alter gene expression have been hypothesized as a key driver of these phenotypic differences. This has been supported by differential gene expression analyses in general, but not by the identification of specific regulatory elements responsible for changes in transcription and phenotype. To identify the genetic source of regulatory differences, we mapped DNaseI hypersensitive (DHS) sites, which mark all types of active gene regulatory elements, genome-wide in the same cell type isolated from human, chimpanzee, and macaque. Most DHS sites were conserved among all three species, as expected based on their central role in regulating transcription. However, we found evidence that several hundred DHS sites were gained or lost on the lineages leading to modern human and chimpanzee. Species-specific DHS site gains are enriched near differentially expressed genes, are positively correlated with increased transcription, show evidence of branch-specific positive selection, and overlap with active chromatin marks. Species-specific sequence differences in transcription factor motifs found within these DHS sites are linked with species-specific changes in chromatin accessibility. Together, these indicate that the regulatory elements identified here are genetic contributors to transcriptional and phenotypic differences among primate species.

[PMID: 18283123]
Embryonic stem (ES) cells offer insight into early developmental fate decisions, and their controlled differentiation may yield vast regenerative potential. The molecular determinants supporting ES cell self-renewal are incompletely understood. The homeodomain proteins Nanog and Oct4 are essential for mouse ES cell self-renewal. Using a high-throughput approach, we discovered DNaseI hypersensitive sites and potential regulatory elements along a 160-kb region of the genome that includes GDF3, Dppa3, and Nanog. We analyzed gene expression, chromatin occupancy, and higher-order chromatin structure throughout this gene locus and found that expression of the reprogramming factor Oct4 is required to maintain its integrity.

[PMID: 18726358]
HMG proteins are abundant chromosomal non-histone proteins. It has been suggested that the HMG proteins may play an important role in the structure and function of chromatin. In the present study, the binding of HMG proteins (HMG1/2 and HMG14/17) to the core DNA sequence of DNaseI hypersensitive site 2 (HS2core DNA sequence, -10681-10970 bp) in the locus control region (LCR) of the human beta-like globin gene cluster has been examined by using both thein vitro nucleosome reconstitution and the gel mobility shift assays. Here we show that HMG1/2 can bind to the naked HS2core DNA sequence, however, HMG14/17 cannot. Using thein vitro nucleosome reconstitution we demonstrate that HMG14/17 can bind to the HS2core DNA sequence which is assembled into nucleosomes with the core histone octamer transferred from chicken erythrocytes. In contrast, HMG1/2 cannot bind to the nucleosomes reconstitutedin vitro with the HS2core DNA sequence. These results indicate that the binding patterns between HMG proteins and the HS2core DNA sequence which exists in different states (the naked DNA or thein vitro reconstituted nucleosomal DNA) are quite different. We speculate that HMG proteins might play a critical role in the regulation of the human beta-like globin gene's expression.