[PMID: 20606162]
Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA) is an inherited erythroblastopenia associated with mutations in at least 8 different ribosomal protein genes. Mutations in the gene encoding ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) have been identified in approximately 25% of DBA families. Most of these mutations disrupt either the translation or stability of the RPS19 protein and are predicted to cause DBA by haploinsufficiency. However, approximately 30% of RPS19 mutations are missense mutations that do not alter the stability of the RPS19 protein and are hypothesized to act by a dominant negative mechanism. To formally test this hypothesis, we generated a transgenic mouse model expressing an RPS19 mutation in which an arginine residue is replaced with a tryptophan residue at codon 62 (RPS19R62W). Constitutive expression of RPS19R62W in developing mice was lethal. Conditional expression of RPS19R62W resulted in growth retardation, a mild anemia with reduced numbers of erythroid progenitors, and significant inhibition of terminal erythroid maturation, similar to DBA. RNA profiling demonstrated more than 700 dysregulated genes belonging to the same pathways that are disrupted in RNA profiles of DBA patient cells. We conclude that RPS19R62W is a dominant negative DBA mutation.

[PMID: 29044489]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) features hypoplastic anemia and congenital malformations, largely caused by mutations in various ribosomal proteins. The aim of this study was to characterize the spectrum of genetic lesions causing DBA and identify genotypes that correlate with phenotypes of clinical significance. Seventy-four patients with DBA from across Canada were included. Nucleotide-level mutations or large deletions were identified in 10 ribosomal genes in 45 cases. The RPS19 mutation group was associated with higher requirement for chronic treatment for anemia than other DBA groups. Patients with RPS19 mutations, however, were more likely to maintain long-term corticosteroid response without requirement for further chronic transfusions. Conversely, patients with RPL11 mutations were less likely to need chronic treatment. Birth defects, including cardiac, skeletal, hand, cleft lip or palate and genitourinary malformations, also varied among the various genetic groups. Patients with RPS19 mutations had the fewest number of defects, while patients with RPL5 had the greatest number of birth defects. This is the first study to show differences between DBA genetic groups with regards to treatment. Previously unreported differences in the rate and types of birth defects were also identified. These data allow better patient counseling, a more personalized monitoring plan, and may also suggest differential functions of DBA genes on ribosome and extra-ribosomal functions.

[PMID: 24675553]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome characterized by hypoproliferative anemia, associated physical malformations and a predisposition to cancer. DBA has been associated with mutations and deletions in the large and small ribosomal protein genes, and genetic aberrations have been detected in ∼50-60% of patients. In this study, nine Korean DBA patients were screened for mutations in eight known DBA genes (RPS19, RPS24, RPS17, RPS10, RPS26, RPL35A, RPL5 and RPL11) using the direct sequencing method. Mutations in RPS19, RPS26 and RPS17 were detected in four, two and one patient, respectively. Among the mutations detected in RPS19, two mutations were novel (c.26T>A, c.357-2A>G). For the mutation-negative cases, array-CGH analysis was performed to identify copy-number variations, and no deletions involving the known DBA gene regions were identified. The relative mRNA expression of RPS19 estimated using real-time quantitative PCR analysis revealed two- to fourfold reductions in RPS19 mRNA expression in three patients with RPS19 mutations, and p53 protein expression analysis by immunohistochemistry showed variable but significant nuclear staining in the DBA patients. In conclusion, heterozygous mutations in the known DBA genes RPS19, RPS26 and RPS17 were detected in seven out of nine Korean DBA patients. Among these patients, RPS19 was the most frequently mutated gene. In addition, decreased RPS19 mRNA expression and p53 overexpression were observed in the Korean DBA patients, which supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency and p53 hyperactivation represent a central pathway underlying the pathogenesis of DBA.

[PMID: 18768533]
Mutations in the ribosomal protein S19 gene (RPS19) have been found in 25% of patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia, a rare syndrome of congenital bone marrow failure characterized by erythroblastopenia and various malformations. Mechanistic understanding of the role of RPS19 in normal erythropoiesis and in the Diamond-Blackfan anemia defect is still poor. However, defective ribosome biogenesis and, in particular, impaired 18S ribosomal RNA maturation have been documented in association with various identified RPS19 mutations. Recently, new genes, all encoding ribosomal proteins, have been found to be mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia, adding further support to the concept that ribosome biogenesis plays an important role in regulating erythropoiesis. We previously showed variability in the levels of expression and subcellular localization of a subset of RPS19 mutant proteins. To define the mechanistic basis for this variability better, we studied a large number of mutant proteins and characterized both RPS19 expression level using a specific antibody against RPS19 and RPS19 subcellular localization after transfection of Cos-7 cells with various green fluorescent protein-RPS19 mutants. To investigate the role of the proteasome in RPS19 degradation, we examined the effect of various proteasome inhibitors, namely lactacystin, MG132, and bortezomib on RPS19 expression and subcellular localization We found two distinct classes of RPS19 protein defects in Diamond-Blackfan anemia based on the stability of the mutant proteins: (i) slightly decreased to normal levels of expression and normal nucleolar localization and (ii) markedly deficient expression and failure to localize to the nucleolus. All the proteasome inhibitors tested were able to restore the expression levels and normal subcellular localization of several unstable mutant proteins. Our findings demonstrate an important role for the proteasomal degradation pathway in regulating the expression levels and nucleolar localization of certain mutant RPS19 proteins in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

[PMID: 23990987]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare inherited bone marrow failure syndrome that is characterized by pure red-cell aplasia and associated physical deformities. It has been proven that defects of ribosomal proteins can lead to this disease and that RPS19 is the most frequently mutated gene in DBA patients. Previous studies suggest that p53-dependent genes and pathways play important roles in RPS19-deficient embryos. However, whether there are other vital factors linked to DBA has not been fully clarified. In this study, we compared the whole genome RNA-Seq data of zebrafish embryos injected with RPS19 morpholino (RPS19 MO), RPS19 and p53 morpholino simultaneously (RPS19+p53 MO) and control morpholino (control). We found that genes enriched in the functions of hematological systems, nervous system development and skeletal and muscular disorders had significant differential expression in RPS19 MO embryos compared with controls. Co-inhibition of p53 partially alleviates the abnormalities for RPS19-deficient embryos. However, the hematopoietic genes, which were down-regulated significantly in RPS19 MO embryos, were not completely recovered by the co-inhibition of p53. Furthermore, we identified the genome-wide p53-dependent and -independent genes and pathways. These results indicate that not only p53 family members but also other factors have important impacts on RPS19-deficient embryos. The detection of potential pathogenic genes and pathways provides us a new paradigm for future research on DBA, which is a systematic and complex hereditary disease.

[PMID: 12718904]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome characterized by a specific deficiency in erythroid progenitors. Since some patients with DBA develop a reduction in thrombocytes and granulocytes with age, we asked whether multipotent hematopoietic progenitors from DBA patients had normal proliferative capacity in liquid expansion cultures. CD34(+) cells derived from DBA patients showed deficient proliferation in liquid culture containing IL-3, IL-6, and SCF. Single CD34(+) CD38(-) cells from DBA patients exhibited deficient proliferation recruitment in a limiting dilution assay containing IL-3, IL-6, SCF, Tpo, FL, and G-CSF or containing IL-3, IL-6, and SCF. Our findings suggest that the underlying hematopoietic defect in DBA may not be limited to the erythroid lineage. Since a fraction of DBA patients have a deficiency in ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), we constructed lentiviral vectors containing the RPS19 gene for overexpression in hematopoietic progenitors from RPS19-deficient DBA patients. Enforced expression of the RPS19 transgene improved the proliferation of CD34(+) cells from DBA patients with RPS19 mutation. Similarly, enforced expression of RPS19 improved erythroid development of RPS19-deficient hematopoietic progenitors as determined by colony assays and erythroid differentiation cultures. These findings suggest that gene therapy for RPS19-deficient DBA is feasible.

[PMID: 23257444]
This study was aimed to explore the mutations of ribosomal protein (RP) genes in patients with Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA). Twenty-one cases of DBA admitted in our hospital from Dec 2008 to Aug 2012 were screened by PCR for mutations in the nine known genes associated with DBA: RPS19, RPS24, RPS17, RPL5, RPL11, RPS7, RPL35a, RPS10 and RPS26. The results found that 8 patients (38.1%) with DBA had mutations in the genes coding for ribosomal protein, in which RPS19 mutation was identified in 3 patients, RPS24, RPS7, RPL5, RPL11 and RPL35A mutations were identified respectively in 1 of the patient. No mutations were detected in RPS17, RPS10 or RPS26 genes. Thumb anomalies were found in 2 patients with RPL11 or RPL5 mutation, and hypospadias was found in 1 patient with RPS19 mutation. It is concluded that the mutation frequency of the genes coding for ribosomal protein in the patients with DBA here is lower than that in western countries. The hypospadias can be observed in some patients with RPS19 mutation and some dactyl anomalies are associated with RPL11 and RPL5 mutations.

[PMID: 17053056]
The gene encoding the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) is frequently mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), a congenital erythroblastopenia. The consequence of these mutations on the onset of the disease remains obscure. Here, we show that RPS19 plays an essential role in biogenesis of the 40S small ribosomal subunit in human cells. Knockdown of RPS19 expression by siRNAs impairs 18S rRNA synthesis and formation of 40S subunits and induces apoptosis in HeLa cells. Pre-rRNA processing is altered, which leads to an arrest in the maturation of precursors to the 18S rRNA. Under these conditions, pre-40S particles are not exported to the cytoplasm and accumulate in the nucleoplasm of the cells in perinuclear dots. Consistently, we find that ribosome biogenesis and nucleolar organization is altered in skin fibroblasts from DBA patients bearing mutations in the RPS19 gene. In addition, maturation of the 18S rRNA is also perturbed in cells from a patient bearing no RPS19-related mutation. These results support the hypothesis that DBA is directly related to a defect in ribosome biogenesis and indicate that yet to be discovered DBA-related genes may be involved in the synthesis of the ribosomal subunits.

[PMID: 12586610]
Ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) is frequently mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), a rare congenital hypoplastic anemia. Recent studies have shown that RPS19 expression decreases during terminal erythroid differentiation. Currently no information is available on the subcellular localization of normal RPS19 and the potential effects of various RPS19 mutations on cellular localization. In the present study, using wild-type and mutant RPS19 cDNA, we explored the subcellular distribution of normal and mutant proteins in a fibroblast cell line (Cos-7 cells). RPS19 was detected primarily in the nucleus, and more specifically in the nucleoli, where RPS19 colocalized with the nucleolar protein nucleolin. Using various N-terminal and C-terminal deletion constructs, we identified 2 nucleolar localization signals (NoSs) in RPS19: the first comprising amino acids Met1 to Arg16 in the NH2-terminus and the second comprising Gly120 to Asn142 in the COOH-terminus. Importantly, 2 mutations identified in DBA patients, Val15Phe and Gly127Gln, each of which localized to 1 of the 2 NoS, failed to localize RPS19 to the nucleolus. In addition to their mislocalization, there was a dramatic decrease in the expression of the 2 mutant proteins compared to the wild type. This decrease in protein expression was specific for the mutant RPS19, since expression of other proteins was normal. The present findings enable us to document the nucleolar localization signals in RPS19 and help define the phenotypic consequences of some mutations in RPS19 in DBA.

[PMID: 17082006]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare congenital pure red cell aplasia characterized by normochromic macrocytic anemia, reticulocytopenia, and normocellular bone marrow with a selective deficiency of erythroid precursors. Ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), currently the only gene associated with DBA, is mutated in 25% of DBA patients, but its role in erythropoiesis is unknown. We attempted to elucidate the importance of RPS19 in translation in relation to the pathogenesis of DBA. We measured translation and proliferation rates in unstimulated and phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated lymphocytes isolated from DBA patients, as well as in K562 cells expressing several RPS19 mutants to directly test the effect of RPS19 mutations on translation. The effect of leucine on overall translation was also studied. We found that the level of translation was on average 48-73% of controls in both unstimulated and PHA-activated DBA lymphocytes irrespective of mutations in RPS19. The addition of leucine increased the translational level in RPS19-non-mutated DBA cells, but not in cells with an RPS19 mutation. In unstimulated DBA cells, proliferation was significantly impaired in both RPS19-mutated and non-mutated cells, but in both groups could be efficiently activated by PHA. Studies on K562 cells showed that RPS19 mutations affecting RPS19 conserved arginines R56Q and R62Q could significantly inhibit the rate of protein synthesis, indicating the importance of RPS19 in translation. Our results indicate that inefficient translation may be the main cause of DBA, and administration of leucine may be beneficial for at least some DBA patients.

[PMID: 15523650]
Mutations in the ribosomal protein (RP)S19 gene have been found in about 25% of the cases of Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), a rare congenital hypoplastic anemia that includes variable physical malformations. Various mutations have been identified in the RPS19 gene, but no investigations regarding the effect of these alterations on RPS19 mRNA levels have been performed. It is well established that mutated mRNA containing a premature stop codon (PTC) or lacking a stop codon can be rapidly degraded by specific mechanisms called nonsense mediated decay (NMD) and nonstop decay. To study the involvement of such mechanisms in DBA, we analyzed immortalized lymphoblastoid cells and primary fibroblasts from patients presenting different kinds of mutations in the RPS19 gene, generating allelic deletion, missense, nonsense, and nonstop messengers. We found that RPS19 mRNA levels are decreased in the cells with allelic deletion and, to a variable extent, also in all the cell lines with PTC or nonstop mutations. Further analysis showed that translation inhibition causes a stabilization of the mutated RPS19 mRNA. Our findings indicate that NMD and nonstop decay affect the expression of mutated RPS19 genes; this may help to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations in DBA.

[PMID: 26447946]
The clear connection between ribosome biogenesis dysfunction and specific hematopoiesis-related disorders prompted us to examine the role of critical lineage-specific transcription factors in the transcriptional regulation of ribosomal protein (RP) genes during terminal erythroid differentiation. By applying EMSA and ChIP methodologies in mouse erythroleukemia cells we show that GATA1 and PU.1 bind in vitro and in vivo the proximal promoter region of the RPS19 gene which is frequently mutated in Diamond-Blackfan Anemia. Moreover, ChIPseq data analysis also demonstrates that several RP genes are enriched as potential GATA1 and PU.1 gene targets in mouse and human erythroid cells, with GATA1 binding showing an association with higher ribosomal protein gene expression levels during terminal erythroid differentiation in human and mouse. Our results suggest that RP gene expression and hence balanced ribosome biosynthesis may be specifically and selectively regulated by lineage specific transcription factors during hematopoiesis, a finding which may be clinically relevant to ribosomopathies.

[PMID: 17186470]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare congenital red-cell aplasia characterized by anemia, bone-marrow erythroblastopenia, and congenital anomalies and is associated with heterozygous mutations in the ribosomal protein (RP) S19 gene (RPS19) in approximately 25% of probands. We report identification of de novo nonsense and splice-site mutations in another RP, RPS24 (encoded by RPS24 [10q22-q23]) in approximately 2% of RPS19 mutation-negative probands. This finding strongly suggests that DBA is a disorder of ribosome synthesis and that mutations in other RP or associated genes that lead to disrupted ribosomal biogenesis and/or function may also cause DBA.

[PMID: 17376718]
The gene encoding the small subunit ribosomal protein 19 (RPS19) is mutated in about 25% of cases of the bone marrow failure syndrome Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA), a childhood disease characterized by failure of red cell production. In these cases DBA is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and RPS19 haploinsufficiency is thought to cause the disease. To study the molecular pathogenesis of DBA we used siRNA to decrease the level of RPS19 in two human cell lines, HeLa cells and U-2 OS osteosarcoma cells. Cells with reduced RPS19 levels showed a dramatic reduction in the amounts of small 40S ribosome subunits and mature 80S ribosomes and an excess of large 60S subunits. These cells were defective in 18S rRNA production and accumulated 21S and 20S nuclear pre-rRNA molecules, suggesting that RPS19 is required for specific steps in rRNA processing. RPS19 depletion produced a reduction in steady-state levels of RPS6 and RPS16 via a post-transcriptional mechanism while the levels of RPL7 and RPL26 were unaltered, indicating that levels of ribosomal proteins are determined by subunit assembly. This has interesting implications for the pathogenesis of DBA suggesting that deficiency of any of the RPS proteins might have a similar effect and thus may be responsible for causing DBA. Finally in cell lines from DBA patients with mutations we find increased levels of 21S rRNA precursors but no abnormality in the ribosome profile on sucrose gradients or in the steady-state levels of RPS19 suggesting that some cells can partially compensate for the loss of one allele of RPS19. We conclude that defects in ribosome biogenesis may underlie the pathology of Diamond Blackfan Anemia.

[PMID: 11424144]
We report on maternal first cousins with bilateral microtia, micrognathia, cleft palate and hematologic findings of Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA). The similarity of findings shared between our cases and a female reported by Hasan and Inoue [1993] suggests that this is a distinctive syndrome, rather than a chance association. DBA is a heterogeneous disorder, caused in about 25% of cases by heterozygous mutations in the RPS19 gene (DBA1). Mutation analysis in our cases did not show an RPS19 mutation, and 2 alleles were present in each. Segregation analysis for DBA1 on chromosome 19 and DBA2 on 8p23 was not consistent with linkage. We conclude that this syndrome of microtia, cleft palate and DBA is not allelic to known DBA loci.

[PMID: 12351378]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome characterized by a specific deficiency in erythroid progenitors. Forty percent of the patients are blood transfusion-dependent. Recent reports show that the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) gene is mutated in 25% of all patients with DBA. We constructed oncoretroviral vectors containing the RPS19 gene to develop gene therapy for RPS19-deficient DBA. These vectors were used to introduce the RPS19 gene into CD34(+) bone marrow (BM) cells from 4 patients with DBA with RPS19 gene mutations. Overexpression of the RPS19 transgene increased the number of erythroid colonies by almost 3-fold. High expression levels of the RPS19 transgene improved erythroid colony-forming ability substantially whereas low expression levels had no effect. Overexpression of RPS19 had no detrimental effect on granulocyte-macrophage colony formation. Therefore, these findings suggest that gene therapy for RPS19-deficient patients with DBA using viral vectors that express the RPS19 gene is feasible.