[PMID: 12242022]
Leptin, the adipocyte-secreted hormone, exerts its main function as regulator of food intake and energy expenditure through central effects at the hypothalamic level. However, it appeared that this cytokine-like peptide has also direct effects on other peripheral tissues and cell types. Remarkable effects have been demonstrated on the immune function in vivo and in vitro. Monocytes are one of the target cells of leptin, and we have demonstrated that secretion of L-1Ra, an IL-1 receptor antagonist, is induced by leptin. In human obesity leptin and IL-1Ra levels are elevated, and these levels are decreased after weight loss. It is discussed that IL-1Ra may contribute to central leptin resistance.

[PMID: 11606782]
White adipose tissue plays an integral role in energy metabolism and is governed by endocrine, autocrine, and neural signals. Neural control of adipose metabolism is mediated by sympathetic neurons that innervate the tissue. To investigate the effects of this innervation, an ex vivo system was developed in which 3T3-L1 adipocytes are cocultured with sympathetic neurons isolated from the superior cervical ganglia of newborn rats. In coculture, both adipocytes and neurons exhibit appropriate morphology, express cell-type-specific markers, and modulate key metabolic processes in one another. Lipolysis (stimulated by beta-adrenergic agents) and leptin secretion by adipocytes are down-regulated by neurons in coculture, effects apparently mediated by neuropeptide Y (NPY). Secretion of NPY by neurons is up-regulated dramatically by the presence of adipocytes in coculture and appears to be mediated by an adipocyte-derived soluble factor. Insulin, an antilipolytic agent, down-regulates NPY secretion. Our findings suggest that an adipocyte-derived factor(s) up-regulates the secretion of NPY by sympathetic neurons, which, in turn, attenuates lipolytic energy mobilization by adipocytes.

[PMID: 23376443]
Leptin, a 16-kDa protein that is mainly secreted by adipocytes, plays a protective role in many cell types. It has been shown that leptin acts in the central and peripheral immune system to protect thymocytes. Cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) is an enzyme that can specifically initiate the release of arachidonic acid (AA) to produce eicosanoids, which regulate inflammation and immune responses. Our previous work has shown that leptin is important to prevent apoptosis of thymocytes. However, the role of cPLA(2) is still unclear, and the precise mechanism also remains to be elucidated. In this work, we demonstrated that leptin inhibited the LPS-induced toxicity and apoptosis of thymocytes. Western blot and RT-PCR showed that leptin led to a reduction of cPLA(2) activity and mRNA level, as well as caspase-3 cleavage. Moreover, we found that leptin could decrease the activation of p38 MAPK. Accordingly, we pre-treated apoptotic thymocytes with the p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580 and observed an effect similar to the leptin alone treated group. SB203580 also suppressed expression of cPLA(2) and cleavage of caspase-3. Based on these results, we suggest that leptin could attenuate LPS-induced apoptotic injury in mouse thymocyte cells, mainly through the p38/cPLA(2) signalling pathway. The study of the regulatory role of leptin in LPS-induced thymocyte apoptosis can help to explain the role of leptin in the immune system and may provide a novel treatment option in cases of severe trauma, infection, shock, organ failure and autoimmune disease caused by thymic atrophy.

[PMID: 22692856]
Leptin, an adipose secreted cytokine, is implicated in mammary cancer stem cell self-renewal and tumor growth in murine mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-Wnt-1 transgenic mice. In vitro studies indicate that leptin induces expression of cyclin D1, a cell-cycle control protein necessary for mammary tumor development. The aim of the present study was to assess cyclin D1 expression in spontaneous tumors that develop in the MMTV-Wnt-1 transgenic mice and interrogate the in vivo effect of leptin. Cells derived from spontaneous MMTV-Wnt-1 tumors were orthotopically transplanted into wild-type, leptin-deficient, and hyperleptinemic mice. After 6 weeks, tumors were collected and formalin fixed. Immunoflurescence staining was used to assess cyclin D1, keratin 8, α-SMA, phospho-AKT expression. Cyclin D1 is expressed exclusively in luminal keratin 8 immunoreactive tumor cells and is dependent on the adipose secreted hormone leptin. Tumor cell transplant into leptin-deficient mice resulted in approximately an 80 % reduction of cyclin D1 immunoreactivity in keratin 8 luminal epithelial cells, and this was independent of Akt activation. These data and our previous findings indicate that inhibition of leptin signaling provides an excellent therapeutic target for breast cancer. The current data indicate that in luminal mammary tumors, leptin antagonists would potentially inhibit growth in a cyclin D1-dependent mechanism. In contrast, in basal mammary tumors, leptin antagonists would inhibit growth in an Akt-dependent manner leading to reduction in cancer stem cell self-renewal. Thus, leptin therapeutics may inhibit breast cancer via distinct mechanisms related to tumor type.

[PMID: 10443698]
Leptin is a circulating hormone secreted by adipose and a few other tissues. The leptin receptor consists of a single transmembrane-spanning polypeptide that is present as a long physiologically important form as well as in several short isoforms. Recent studies have suggested that the anterior pituitary may have a role in the regulatory effects of leptin in animal models. To test this possibility in human pituitaries, we examined the expression of leptin and OB-R in normal and neoplastic pituitaries, and the possible functions of leptin in the pituitary were also analyzed. Leptin was present in 20-25% of anterior pituitary cells and was expressed in most normal anterior pituitary cells, including ACTH (70% of ACTH cells), GH (21%), FSH (33%), LH (29%), TSH (32%), and folliculo-stellate cells (64%), but was colocalized with very few PRL cells (3%), as detected by double labeling immunohistochemistry with two different antileptin antibodies. In addition, leptin expression was detected by RT-PCR in some pituitary tumors, including ACTH (three of four), GH (one of four), null cells (two of four), and gonadotroph (one of four) tumors as well as in normal pituitary. Immunohistochemical staining showed greater immunoreactivity for leptin in normal pituitaries compared to adenomas. Treatment of an immortalized cultured anterior pituitary cell line, HP75, with leptin stimulated pancreastatin secretion in vitro. Leptin also inhibited cell growth in the human HP75 and in the rat pituitary GH3 cell lines. Both long (OB-Rb) and common (OB-Ra) forms of the leptin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid and leptin receptor protein were expressed in normal and neoplastic anterior pituitary cells. These findings show for the first time that leptin is expressed by most human anterior pituitary cell types and that there is decreased leptin protein immunoreactivity in pituitary adenomas compared to that in normal pituitary tissues. We also show that OB-Rb is widely expressed by normal and neoplastic anterior pituitary cells, implicating an autocrine/paracrine loop in the production and regulation of leptin in the pituitary.

[PMID: 12448771]
Leptin, a 16-kDa hormone, plays an important role in the control of food intake and in energy homeostasis both in rodents and in man. Leptin is mainly produced and secreted by adipocytes, but other tissues and gastric glands have also recently been shown to produce it in a dual (endocrine and exocrine) mode. In addition, a leptin receptor has been detected in taste cells of mouse circumvallate papillae and in rat intestinal epithelium. These data prompted us to carry out a detailed study of human salivary glands as potential leptin-producing organs. Biopsies of salivary glands (submandibular and parotid) obtained from male and female patients during surgery for different clinical indications were subjected to immunohistochemical study for the presence of leptin, its functional receptor, insulin and glucagon. The presence and cellular distribution of glucocorticoid receptor in leptin-secreting cells were also investigated. Double immunohistochemical staining (silver-gold intensification and avidin-biotin-peroxidase) was used for the visualization of glucocorticoid receptor and leptin labelling, respectively. The results show that intralobular duct cells of submandibular and parotid glands are immunoreactive for leptin, leptin receptor and glucagon but not for insulin. Leptin was also detected in some microglobules in whole saliva obtained from four healthy volunteers. Co-localization for leptin, leptin receptor and glucocorticoid receptor in the same cell type suggested a functional relationship between glucocorticoid hormone and leptin secretion also at the level of the salivary glands.

[PMID: 17639037]
Adipokines (leptin, adiponectin, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)) secreted from adipose tissue have come to be recognized for their contribution to the mechanisms by which obesity and related metabolic disorders influence breast cancer risk. In this review, we discuss the direct and indirect effects of these protein factors on the biological and clinical aspects of breast cancer biology, and emphasize their distinctive modes of action through endocrine-, paracrine-, and autocrine-mediated pathways. The stimulatory effects of leptin on breast cancer growth were considered to occur primarily via activation of the estrogen receptor; however, new evidence suggests that leptin may be acting on downstream cell signaling pathways in both estrogen-dependent and -independent cell types. Another secretory adipokine, HGF, may act largely not only to promote tumor cell invasion, but also to enhance tumor growth indirectly by stimulating angiogenesis. In contrast, adiponectin, an endogenous insulin sensitizer, exerts a direct growth-inhibitory effect on tumor cells by downregulating cell proliferation and upregulating apoptosis, and also inhibits tumor-related angiogenesis.

[PMID: 17132702]
Adipokines are a group of fat-secreted hormones and cytokines, including leptin and adiponectin, with important functions in humans. Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is associated with markedly raised plasma adipokines, suggesting increased production in this setting. We have shown that low pH down-regulates leptin production. The current study was designed to test if novel pH-neutral PD fluids may regulate leptin and adiponectin secretion in vitro. We exposed 3T3-L1 adipocytes to a 50 : 50 mixture of dialysate and M199 containing 10% serum for upto 48 h. Dialysates were commercial PD fluids, i.e. conventional acidic, lactate-buffered solutions (PD-acid) and pH-neutral lactate-buffered (PD-Bal) or bicarbonate-buffered solutions (PD-Bic). Leptin and adiponectin concentrations in culture-cell media were measured by ELISA. Compared with PD-acid, PD-Bal and PD-Bic produced a 25 and 43% increase, respectively, in leptin secretion at 48 h (P < 0.05). In contrast, adiponectin secretion was not affected. High glucose PD fluids (4.25%) specifically inhibited leptin secretion vs 1.5% glucose, buffer-matched solutions (P < 0.05). However, differences in leptin secretion due to pH and type of buffer remained significant. In further experiments, the pH of test media were extensively varied without the presence of dialysates. Leptin secretion was shown to increase in a parallel to pH, whereas large changes in pH did not affect adiponectin secretion. The pH-neutral PD solutions specifically induce leptin, but not adiponectin secretion from 3T3-L1 adipocytes. PD-Bic produced a greater leptin stimulation than PD-Bal, but this difference was attributable to pH per se, rather than the type of buffer.

[PMID: 11979056]
Leptin, primarily secreted by adipocytes, is a peripheral hormonal signal involved in the hypothalamic integration of energy homeostasis. We report that plasma leptin levels fluctuated in a pulsatile fashion in gonad-intact adult female and male rats. Whereas in male rats leptin was secreted in the form of low-amplitude, high-frequency pulses, in female rats high-amplitude pulses were secreted at only a slightly lower frequency. Consequently, plasma leptin concentrations were higher in female than in male rats. Gonadectomy decreased leptin secretion but the sexually dimorphic leptin pulsatility pattern persisted. These results show that there is a distinct female-type and male-type leptin pulsatility pattern and each is amenable to augmentation by gonadal steroids either involving mechanisms that impart leptin pulsatility patterns directly at the level of adipocytes and/or at hypothalamic target sites.

[PMID: 11824506]
Leptin is a 16 kDa protein that exerts important effects on the regulation of food intake and energy expenditure by interacting with the leptin receptor in the brain and in many other tissues. Although leptin is produced mainly by white adipose tissue, several laboratories have shown low levels of leptin production by a growing number of tissues including the anterior pituitary gland. Many studies have implicated leptin in anterior pituitary function including the observation that homozygous mutations of the leptin receptor gene led to morbid obesity, lack of pubertal development and decreased GH and TSH secretion. In addition, leptin functions as a neuroendocrine hormone and regulates many metabolic activities. Leptin also interacts with and regulates the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal, the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid and the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axes. All of the anterior pituitary cell types express the leptin receptor. However, leptin has been localized in specific subtypes of anterior pituitary cells indicating cell type-specific production of leptin in the anterior pituitary. Subcellular localization of leptin indicates co-storage with secretory granules and implicates hypothalamic releasing hormones in leptin secretion from anterior pituitary hormone cells. Leptin signal transduction in the anterior pituitary has been shown to involve the janus protein-tyrosine kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activation of transcription (STAT) as well as suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS). These proteins are activated by tyrosine-phosphorylation in anterior pituitary cells. The various steps in pituitary leptin signal transduction remain to be elucidated.

[PMID: 17149693]
Leptin is a hormone that plays a central role in the regulation of food intake and energy expenditure. Originally discovered in mature white adipocytes, it was subsequently isolated from the gastric mucosa. This tissue contains a large number of epithelial endocrine and exocrine cells secreting leptin in the blood stream and in the gastric lumen, respectively. Light and electron microscopy have shown that adipocytes and gastric epithelial cells contain leptin along their rough endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi-granules secretory pathway. Both tissues synthesize a soluble form of the leptin receptor that is secreted bound to leptin in the blood and into the gastric juice. This soluble receptor protect leptin and enhances its half-life. Despite the similarities in the mechanisms of leptin secretion by adipocytes and gastric epithelial cells, they are in fact radically different. In gastric cells leptin follows a rapid regulated secretion pathway whereas adipocytes secrete leptin in a constitutive slow fashion. These differences can be explained by the specific roles play by leptin originating from these two different tissues. Gastric leptin is involved in the short-term regulation of digestion, including delay of gastric emptying, absorption of nutrients by the intestinal wall and secretion of gastric, intestinal and pancreatic hormones. On the other hand, leptin secreted by white adipocytes acts primarily on the hypothalamus for the long-term regulation of food intake. Therefore, the coordination of adipose and gastric leptins ensures the proper management of food processing and energy storage.

[PMID: 26732322]
Since the discovery of leptin secreted from adipocytes, specialized tissues and cells have been found that secrete the several peptides (or cytokines) that are characterized to negatively and positively regulate the metabolic process. Different types of adipokines, hepatokines, and myokines, which act as cytokines, are secreted from adipose, liver, and muscle tissue, respectively, and have been identified and examined for their physiological roles in humans and disease in animal models. Recently, various studies of these cytokines have been conducted in ruminants, including dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, and goat. Interestingly, a few cytokines from these tissues in ruminants play an important role in the post-parturition, lactation, and fattening (marbling) periods. Thus, understanding these hormones is important for improving nutritional management in dairy cows and beef cattle. However, to our knowledge, there have been no reviews of the characteristics of these cytokines in beef and dairy products in ruminants. In particular, lipid and glucose metabolism in adipose tissue, liver tissue, and muscle tissue are very important for energy storage, production, and synthesis, which are regulated by these cytokines in ruminant production. In this review, we summarize the physiological roles of adipokines, hepatokines, and myokines in ruminants. This discussion provides a foundation for understanding the role of cytokines in animal production of ruminants.

[PMID: 23016759]
Leptin, an adipose-secreted hormone, links metabolism and immunity. Our aim was to determine whether leptin affects the alloimmune response. We used an allogeneic skin transplant model as a means to analyze the allograft immune response in Lep(ob/ob) and wild-type mice. Leptin deficiency results in an increased frequency of Treg and Th2 cells and a prolonged graft survival. These effects of leptin deficiency indicate the importance of leptin and obesity in modulating the allograft immune responses. Our data suggest a possible explanation for the increased susceptibility of hyperleptinemic obese patients to acute and chronic graft rejection.

[PMID: 24975960]
Leptin, the adipocyte-secreted hormone that regulates weight, is known to link lipid metabolism with inflammation in various cell types. However, its role in human sebocytes has not yet been investigated. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of leptin in human sebaceous gland biology. Expression of the long form of the leptin receptor (Ob-Rb) was detected by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunochemistry. Lipid analysis was by high-performance thin-layer chromatography, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and time-of-flight mass spectrometer mass detection. Lipid bodies were visualized by BODIPY staining using fluorescent microscopy and measured by flow cytometry. Interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 mRNA levels were assessed by real-time qRT-PCR and their release was evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and 5-lipooxygenase (LOX) protein expression and phosphorylation of p65 and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-3 were determined by Western blot analysis. Expression of Ob-Rb was detected in human sebaceous glands and in cultured human SZ95 sebocytes. The treatment of SZ95 sebocytes with leptin led to enlarged intracellular lipid bodies, increased ratios of unsaturated/saturated fatty acids and decreased vitamin E levels. Further supporting a proinflammatory role, leptin induced COX-2 and 5-LOX expression in SZ95 sebocytes and augmented the production of IL-6 and IL-8 cytokines. On leptin treatment, the STAT-3 and nuclear factor-κB pathways were activated, indicating that these known leptin signalling pathways are active in human sebocytes. Our findings suggest that leptin signalling may be involved in the proinflammatory regulation of sebaceous lipid metabolism and the induction of inflammatory enzymes and cytokines.

[PMID: 21371463]
Leptin, a circulating hormone secreted mainly from adipose tissues, possesses protective effects on many cell types. Serum leptin concentration increases in patients with chronic renal failure and those undergoing maintenance dialysis. Gentamicin, a widely used antibiotic for the treatment of bacterial infection, can cause nephrotoxicity. In the present study, we intended to investigate the influence of leptin on apoptotic pathways and its mechanism in rat renal tubular cells treated with gentamicin. By using Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide double staining, we found that leptin expressed a dose-dependent protective effect against gentamicin-induced apoptosis in rat renal tubular cells (NRK-52E) within 24h. Pretreatment of the cells with 50 or 100 ng/ml of leptin induced Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L), increased the phosphorylation of Bad, and decreased the cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9 in gentamicin-treated NRK-52E cells. Leptin also suppressed the activation of the transcription factor NF-κB and upregulated Akt activation in gentamicin-treated NRK-52E cells. We found that leptin activated the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) signaling pathway as demonstrated by the suppression of the anti-apoptotic effect of leptin by wortmannin. The treatment of wortmannin suppressed the leptin-induced phospho-Akt, Bcl-2, phospho-Bad as well as Bcl-x(L), and recovered the leptin-reduced cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9. Based on our results, we suggested that leptin can attenuate gentamicin-induced apoptotic injury in rat renal tubular cells through PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.

[PMID: 23503941]
Do the adipocytokines, leptin and adiponectin affect the granulosa cell expression of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) and its receptor (AMHR-II)? Leptin suppresses AMH mRNA levels in human luteinized granulosa cells through the JAK2/STAT3 pathway, while adiponectin has no such effect. AMH is one of the most reliable markers of ovarian reserve. Serum AMH levels decline with obesity. Obesity is associated with elevated leptin and reduced adiponectin levels. This prospective study included 60 infertile women undergoing fresh IVF and ICSI cycles utilizing autologous oocytes at Montefiore's Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Health between July 2010 and April 2012. Follicular fluid was collected from small (SFs; <14 mm) and large follicles (LFs; ≥14 mm) from 38 participants. Total RNA was extracted separately from mural and cumulus granulosa cells and mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. In an additional group of participants (N = 22), primary cumulus and mural granulosa cells (pooled SFs and LFs) were cultured in media alone or with addition of either leptin (N = 7), adiponectin (N = 8) or JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor + leptin (N = 7), and AMH and AMHR-II mRNA levels measured. Levels of AMH, leptin and adiponectin protein were measured in follicular fluid. AMH and AMHR-II mRNA and follicular fluid AMH protein levels were inversely correlated with age. AMH mRNA expression was six times higher in cumulus compared with mural granulosa cells in SFs (P< 0.05) and eight times higher in cumulus compared with mural granulosa cells in LFs (P < 0.001). In follicular fluid, leptin protein level positively correlated (r = 0.7, P = 0.03), while adiponectin protein level inversely correlated (r = -0.46, P = 0.02) with BMI. Leptin treatment suppressed AMH and AMHR-II mRNA in both cumulus and mural granulosa cells (all P < 0.05). In the presence of JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor, leptin treatment did not alter AMH but continued to suppress AMHR-II mRNA in cumulus cells (P = 0.02). Adiponectin treatment did not alter AMH or AMHR-II mRNA levels. This study included a luteinized granulosa cell model as these cells were collected from women who were hyperstimulated with gonadotrophins. The results obtained may not fully extrapolate to non-luteinized granulosa cells. Leptin may program abnormal AMH signaling, thereby resulting in ovarian dysfunction. This study opens a new perspective for understanding the low ovarian reserve seen in obese women and provides new insights into potential mechanisms that explain the lower AMH seen in obese women. Whether our findings explain the worse response to ovulation induction observed in obese women needs to be further elucidated.