[PMID: 16006996]
Genetic variations in drug metabolizing enzymes and targets are established determinants of adverse drug reactions and interactions, but less is known about the role of genetic polymorphisms in membrane transport proteins. MRP1 (ABCC1) is one of 13 polytopic membrane proteins that comprise the 'C' subfamily of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily of transport proteins. MRP1 and related ABCC family members, including MRP2, 3, 4 and 5 (ABCC2, 3, 4 and 5), each have a distinctive pattern of tissue expression and substrate specificity. Together, these five transporters play important roles in the disposition and elimination of drugs and other organic anions, and in maintenance of blood-tissue barriers, as confirmed by enhanced chemosensitivity of respective knockout mice. Moreover, Mrp2 (Abcc2) deficient animals display mild conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, corresponding to a human condition known as Dubin-Johnson syndrome (DJS). Naturally occurring mutations in MRP/ABCC-related drug transporters have been reported, some of which are non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms. The consequences of the resulting amino acid changes can sometimes be predicted from in vitro site-directed mutagenesis studies or from knowledge of mutations of analogous (conserved) residues in ABCC proteins that cause DJS, Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (ABCC6), cystic fibrosis (CFTR/ABCC7) or persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (SUR1/ABCC8). Continual updating of databases of sequence variants and haplotype analysis, together with in vitro biochemical validation assays and pharmacological studies in knockout animals, should make it possible to determine how genetic variation in the MRP-related transporters contributes to the range of responses to drugs and chemicals observed in different human populations.

[PMID: 21799180]
Although the prognostic value of the ATP-binding cassette, subfamily C (ABCC) transporters in childhood neuroblastoma is usually attributed to their role in cytotoxic drug efflux, certain observations have suggested that these multidrug transporters might contribute to the malignant phenotype independent of cytotoxic drug efflux. A v-myc myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived (MYCN)-driven transgenic mouse neuroblastoma model was crossed with an Abcc1-deficient mouse strain (658 hMYCN(1/-), 205 hMYCN(+/1) mice) or, alternatively, treated with the ABCC1 inhibitor, Reversan (n = 20). ABCC genes were suppressed using short interfering RNA or overexpressed by stable transfection in neuroblastoma cell lines BE(2)-C, SH-EP, and SH-SY5Y, which were then assessed for wound closure ability, clonogenic capacity, morphological differentiation, and cell growth. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to examine the clinical significance of ABCC family gene expression in a large prospectively accrued cohort of patients (n = 209) with primary neuroblastomas. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox regression were used to test for associations with event-free and overall survival. Except where noted, all statistical tests were two-sided. Inhibition of ABCC1 statistically significantly inhibited neuroblastoma development in hMYCN transgenic mice (mean age for palpable tumor: treated mice, 47.2 days; control mice, 41.9 days; hazard ratio [HR] = 9.3, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.65 to 32; P < .001). Suppression of ABCC1 in vitro inhibited wound closure (P < .001) and clonogenicity (P = .006); suppression of ABCC4 enhanced morphological differentiation (P < .001) and inhibited cell growth (P < .001). Analysis of 209 neuroblastoma patient tumors revealed that, in contrast with ABCC1 and ABCC4, low rather than high ABCC3 expression was associated with reduced event-free survival (HR of recurrence or death = 2.4, 95% CI = 1.4 to 4.2; P = .001), with 23 of 53 patients with low ABCC3 expression experiencing recurrence or death compared with 31 of 155 patients with high ABCC3. Moreover, overexpression of ABCC3 in vitro inhibited neuroblastoma cell migration (P < .001) and clonogenicity (P = .03). The combined expression of ABCC1, ABCC3, and ABCC4 was associated with patients having an adverse event, such that of the 12 patients with the "poor prognosis" expression pattern, 10 experienced recurrence or death (HR of recurrence or death = 12.3, 95% CI = 6 to 27; P < .001). ABCC transporters can affect neuroblastoma biology independently of their role in chemotherapeutic drug efflux, enhancing their potential as targets for therapeutic intervention.

[PMID: 16815813]
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters constitute a large family of membrane proteins, which transport a variety of compounds through the membrane against a concentration gradient at the cost of ATP hydrolysis. Substrates of the ABC transporters include lipids, bile acids, xenobiotics, and peptides for antigen presentation. As they transport exogenous and endogenous compounds, they reduce the body load of potentially harmful substances. One by-product of such protective function is that they also eliminate various useful drugs from the body, causing drug resistance. This review is a brief summary of the structure, function, and expression of the important drug resistance-conferring members belonging to three subfamilies of the human ABC family; these are ABCB1 (MDR1/P-glycoprotein of subfamily ABCB), subfamily ABCC (MRPs), and ABCG2 (BCRP of subfamily ABCG), which are expressed in various organs. In the text, the transporter symbol that carries the subfamily name (such as ABCB1, ABCC1, etc.) is used interchangeably with the corresponding original names, such as MDR1P-glycoprotein, MRP1, etc., respectively. Both nomenclatures are maintained in the text because both are still used in the transporter literature. This helps readers relate various names that they encounter in the literature. It now appears that P-glycoprotein, MRP1, MRP2, and BCRP can explain the phenomenon of multidrug resistance in all cell lines analyzed thus far. Also discussed are the gene structure, regulation of expression, and various polymorphisms in these genes. Because genetic polymorphism is thought to underlie interindividual differences, including their response to drugs and other xenobiotics, the importance of polymorphism in these genes is also discussed.

[PMID: 15631998]
The placenta functions both as site for nutrition and protection of the fetus. Transport proteins, including members of the multidrug resistance protein (MRP)/ABCC subfamily, have been recognized to contribute to the latter function. MRP5 (ABCC5) was identified as transmembrane transport protein for cyclic nucleotides, especially 3',5'-cyclic GMP (cGMP), indicating an additional role in signal transduction and a potential role in placenta development. We therefore studied expression, localization, and function of MRP5 in placenta of different gestational ages. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction revealed expression of MRP5 in all 60 samples from pre-term and term placenta, with a decreasing mean expression with gestational age (MRP5/18S-ratio x 1000; < 32 weeks: 2.91 +/- 0.73, n = 15; 32 to 37 weeks: 2.10 +/- 0.87, n = 15; > 37 weeks: 0.46 +/- 0.08, n = 30; P < 0.01). Immunofluorescence microscopy with an anti-MRP5 antibody indicated localization of MRP5 preferentially in the basal membrane of syncytiotrophoblasts and in and around fetal vessels. ATP-dependent [(3)H]cGMP transport as evidence for MRP5 function could be demonstrated in isolated basal membrane vesicles. Moreover, the influence of cellular differentiation on MRP5 expression was studied in isolated trophoblasts, revealing an increase of the MRP5 expression in parallel with the hCG production (MRP5/18S-ratio x 1000 was 2.4 +/- 0.5 at day 5 of culture and 1.45 +/- 0.5 at day 0 of culture, n = 3 preparations, significant difference with P < 0.05). In conclusion, MRP5 expression depends on gestational age and varies throughout the differentiation process. In view of the important role of cGMP for cellular differentiation, MRP5 may play a role in placental development in context with a specific need for cellular cGMP export.

[PMID: 19118502]
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily is one of the largest evolutionarily conserved families of proteins. ABC proteins play key roles in cellular detoxification of endobiotics and xenobiotics. Overexpression of certain ABC proteins, among them the multidrug resistance associated protein (MRP), contributes to drug resistance in organisms ranging from human neoplastic cells to parasitic protozoa. In the present study, the Plasmodium berghei mrp gene (pbmrp) was partially characterized and the predicted protein was classified using bioinformatics in order to explore its putative involvement in drug resistance. The pbmrp gene from the P. berghei drug sensitive, N clone, was sequenced using a PCR strategy. Classification and domain organization of pbMRP were determined with bioinformatics. The Plasmodium spp. MRPs were aligned and analysed to study their conserved motifs and organization. Gene copy number and organization were determined via Southern blot analysis in both N clone and the chloroquine selected line, RC. Chromosomal Southern blots and RNase protection assays were employed to determine the chromosomal location and expression levels of pbmrp in blood stages. The pbmrp gene is a single copy, intronless gene with a predicted open reading frame spanning 5820 nucleotides. Bioinformatic analyses show that this protein has distinctive features characteristic of the ABCC sub-family. Multiple sequence alignments reveal a high degree of conservation in the nucleotide binding and transmembrane domains within the MRPs from the Plasmodium spp. analysed. Expression of pbmrp was detected in asexual blood stages. Gene organization, copy number and mRNA expression was similar in both lines studied. A chromosomal translocation was observed in the chloroquine selected RC line, from chromosome 13/14 to chromosome 8, when compared to the drug sensitive N clone. In this study, the pbmrp gene was sequenced and classified as a member of the ABCC sub-family. Multiple sequence alignments reveal that this gene is homologous to the Plasmodium y. yoelii and Plasmodium knowlesi mrp, and the Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum mrp2 genes. There were no differences in gene organization, copy number, or mRNA expression between N clone and the RC line, but a chromosomal translocation of pbmrp from chromosome 13/14 to chromosome 8 was detected in RC.

[PMID: 16357150]
Delivery of therapeutic agents to the brain and its neoplasms depends on the presence of membrane transport proteins in the blood-brain barrier and in the target cells. The cellular and subcellular localization of these membrane transporters determines the drug accessibility to the brain and its tumors. We therefore analyzed the expression and localization of six members of the multidrug resistance protein family of ATP-dependent efflux pumps (ABCC1-ABCC6, formerly MRP1-MRP6) and of six organic anion uptake transporters (OATP1A2, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OATP1C1, OATP2B1, and OATP4A1) in 61 human glioma specimens of different histologic subtypes. Real-time PCRs indicated expressions of ABCC1, ABCC3, ABCC4, and ABCC5. In addition, we detected expressions of the OATP uptake transporter genes SLCO1A2, SLCO1C1, SLCO2B1, and SLCO4A1. At the protein level, however, only OATP1A2 and OATP2B1 were detectable by immunofluorescence microscopy in the luminal membrane of endothelial cells forming the blood-brain barrier and the blood-tumor barrier, but not in the glioma cells. ABCC4 and ABCC5 proteins were the major ABCC subfamily members in gliomas, localized both at the luminal side of the endothelial cells and in the glioma cells of astrocytic tumors and in the astrocytic portions of oligoastrocytomas. These results indicate that expression of ABCC4 and ABCC5 is associated with an astrocytic phenotype, in accordance with their expression in astrocytes and with the higher chemoresistance of astrocytic tumors as compared with oligodendrogliomas. Our data provide a basis for the assessment of the role of uptake transporters and efflux pumps in the accessibility of human gliomas for chemotherapeutic agents.

[PMID: 18535159]
The constituents of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) include HIV-1 protease inhibitors (HPIs) and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs). Endothelial cell (EC) barriers, especially the blood-brain-barrier (BBB) suppresses the entry of HAART drugs to subendothelial HIV-1 reservoirs. The ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter family members, multidrug resistant-1 (MDR-1) and multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRPs) can efflux both HPIs and NRTIs from intracellular compartments. Using brain derived ECs from non-human sources, previous studies suggested a dominant role for MDR-1 in HAART efflux from the BBB. However, due to species variations in ABC-transporter expression, drug-efflux functions using human brain ECs need to be investigated. Furthermore, roles of ABC-transporters in drug-efflux from systemic EC barriers need to be studied. We monitored the expression of ABC-transporters in primary human ECs obtained from brain (HBMVECs), aorta (HAECs), pulmonary-artery (HPAECs), dermal-microvessel (HDMVECs) and umbilical vein (HUVECs). Gene expression for MDR-1 and MRPs (MRP-1 to MRP-5) were analyzed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Drug efflux functions were determined by calcein retention assays. Intracellular accumulation of both 3H-saquinavir (an HPI) and 3H-zidovudine (an NRTI) were also monitored in HAECs and HBMVECs. Both assays were carried out in presence of verapamil (20-60 microM) or MK-571 (12.5-50 microM) inhibitors of MDR-1 and MRPs, respectively in presence of verapamil or MK-571. The HBMVECs expressed higher levels of MRPs than MDR-1 and only MK-571 significantly (P<0.01) suppressed calcein efflux from these cells. However, both HAECs and HPAECs showed MDR-1 and MRP expression and calcein efflux was inhibited by both verapamil and MK-571. Both inhibitors suppressed 3H-saqubinavir efflux from HAECs, but only MK-571 suppressed saquinavir efflux from HBMVECs. In both ECs, 3H-zidovudine efflux was only suppressed by MK-571. Thus, primary human ECs, especially brain derived ECs, predominantly express MRPs and their specific inhibition may enhance HAART efficacy in subendothelial HIV-1 reservoirs.

[PMID: 20712617]
The ABCC subfamily of the ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters, which were formerly known as multidrug resistance-related proteins (MRPs), consists of closely related members found in all eukaryotic organisms. Although more than a decade of intensive research has elapsed since the first MRP protein was functionally characterised in Arabidopsis thaliana, knowledge of this particular transporter family is still limited in plants. Although ABCC proteins were originally defined as vacuolar pumps of glutathione-S (GS) conjugates, evidence, as well as speculation, on their endogenous functions inside the cell ranges from detoxification and heavy metal sequestration, to chlorophyll catabolite transport and ion channel regulation. The characterisation of knockout mutants in Arabidopsis has been pivotal for elucidation of different roles of ABCC transporters. However, a functional annotation for the majority of these transport proteins is still lacking, even in this model plant. On the one hand, this problem seems to be caused by functional redundancy between family members, which might lead to physiological complementation by a highly homologous gene in the mutant lines. On the other hand, there is growing evidence that the functional diversity of ABCC genes in Arabidopsis and other plants is far greater than previously assumed. For example, analysis of microarray expression data supports involvement of ABCC transporters in the response to biotic stress: particular changes in ABCC transcript levels are found, which are pathogen-specific and evoke distinct signalling cascades. Current knowledge about plant ABCC transporters indicates that novel and unexpected functions and substrates of these proteins are still waiting to be elucidated.

[PMID: 18691054]
Human contains 49 ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter genes and the multidrug resistance associated proteins (MRP1/ABCC1, MRP2/ABCC2, MRP3/ABCC3, MRP4/ABCC4, MRP5/ABCC5, MRP6/ABCC6, MRP7/ABCC10, MRP8/ABCC11 and MRP9/ABCC12) belong to the ABCC family which contains 13 members. ABCC7 is cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; ABCC8 and ABCC9 are the sulfonylurea receptors which constitute the ATP-sensing subunits of a complex potassium channel. MRP10/ABCC13 is clearly a pseudo-gene which encodes a truncated protein that is highly expressed in fetal human liver with the highest similarity to MRP2/ABCC2 but without transporting activity. These transporters are localized to the apical and/or basolateral membrane of the hepatocytes, enterocytes, renal proximal tubule cells and endothelial cells of the blood-brain barrier. MRP/ABCC members transport a structurally diverse array of important endogenous substances and xenobiotics and their metabolites (in particular conjugates) with different substrate specificity and transport kinetics. The human MRP/ABCC transporters except MRP9/ABCC12 are all able to transport organic anions, such as drugs conjugated to glutathione, sulphate or glucuronate. In addition, selected MRP/ABCC members may transport a variety of endogenous compounds, such as leukotriene C(4) (LTC(4) by MRP1/ABCC1), bilirubin glucuronides (MRP2/ABCC2, and MRP3/ABCC3), prostaglandins E1 and E2 (MRP4/ABCC4), cGMP (MRP4/ABCC4, MRP5/ABCC5, and MRP8/ABCC11), and several glucuronosyl-, or sulfatidyl steroids. In vitro, the MRP/ABCC transporters can collectively confer resistance to natural product anticancer drugs and their conjugated metabolites, platinum compounds, folate antimetabolites, nucleoside and nucleotide analogs, arsenical and antimonial oxyanions, peptide-based agents, and in concert with alterations in phase II conjugating or biosynthetic enzymes, classical alkylating agents, alkylating agents. Several MRP/ABCC members (MRPs 1-3) are associated with tumor resistance which is often caused by an increased efflux and decreased intracellular accumulation of natural product anticancer drugs and other anticancer agents. Drug targeting of these transporters to overcome MRP/ABCC-mediated multidrug resistance may play a role in cancer chemotherapy. Most MRP/ABCC transporters are subject to inhibition by a variety of compounds. Based on currently available preclinical and limited clinical data, it can be expected that modulation of MRP members may represent a useful approach in the management of anticancer and antimicrobial drug resistance and possibly of inflammatory diseases and other diseases. A better understanding of their substrates and inhibitors has important implications in development of drugs for treatment of cancer and inflammation.

[PMID: 26191068]
The ABCC multidrug resistance associated proteins (ABCC-MRP), a subclass of ABC transporters are involved in multiple physiological processes that include cellular homeostasis, metal detoxification, and transport of glutathione-conjugates. Although they are well-studied in humans, yeast, and Arabidopsis, limited efforts have been made to address their possible role in crop like wheat. In the present work, 18 wheat ABCC-MRP proteins were identified that showed the uniform distribution with sub-families from rice and Arabidopsis. Organ-specific quantitative expression analysis of wheat ABCC genes indicated significantly higher accumulation in roots (TaABCC2, TaABCC3, and TaABCC11 and TaABCC12), stem (TaABCC1), leaves (TaABCC16 and TaABCC17), flag leaf (TaABCC14 and TaABCC15), and seeds (TaABCC6, TaABCC8, TaABCC12, TaABCC13, and TaABCC17) implicating their role in the respective tissues. Differential transcript expression patterns were observed for TaABCC genes during grain maturation speculating their role during seed development. Hormone treatment experiments indicated that some of the ABCC genes could be transcriptionally regulated during seed development. In the presence of Cd or hydrogen peroxide, distinct molecular expression of wheat ABCC genes was observed in the wheat seedlings, suggesting their possible role during heavy metal generated oxidative stress. Functional characterization of the wheat transporter, TaABCC13 a homolog of maize LPA1 confirms its role in glutathione-mediated detoxification pathway and is able to utilize adenine biosynthetic intermediates as a substrate. This is the first comprehensive inventory of wheat ABCC-MRP gene subfamily.

[PMID: 12499391]
Drug transporters are an important part of the defense of cells against cytotoxic agents. One major group of transporters is known as multidrug resistance associated proteins (MRP; ABCC gene family). The MRPs belong to the ATP binding cassette transporter superfamily. One family member, ABCC4 (also known as MRP4) functions as a cellular efflux pump for anti-HIV drugs, such as 9-(2-phoshoenylmethoxyethyl) adenine and azido-thymidine-monophosphate, an antiviral nucleotide, ganciclovir-monophosphate, and anti-cancer agents such as thiopurines. We isolated a ABCC4 cDNA encoding a non-functional protein, owing to an insertion, and subsequently determined the ABCC4 gene structure. This analysis revealed that the insertion was attributed to two additional exons that would be predicted to produce premature termination codons (PTC) in ABCC4. The highly similar mouse Abcc4 gene also contained these exons, which were remarkable because their size and sequence identity were much higher than the overall similarity between these genes. Further, a comparison of human, monkey and rodent ABCC4 genes revealed that these same PTC-producing exons were also highly conserved in evolution. As all the ABCC4 mRNA containing these PTC exons might produce nonsense mRNA, we further tested the hypothesis that these mRNAs were targets of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Protein synthesis inhibition selectively stabilized PTC containing ABCC4 transcripts in human, monkey and rodent cell lines. Moreover, the amount of PTC-containing ABCC4 transcripts was critically dependent upon protein synthesis, as removal of the inhibitor dramatically decreased expression, which correlated with the resumption of protein synthesis. These are the first studies to indicate that the highly conserved PTC exons of the ABCC4 gene may dictate its expression.

[PMID: 18668432]
1. The adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding cassette (ABC) transporters form one of the largest protein families encoded in the human genome, and more than 48 genes encoding human ABC transporters have been identified and sequenced. It has been reported that mutations of ABC protein genes are causative in several genetic disorders in humans. 2. Many human ABC transporters are involved in membrane transport of drugs, xenobiotics, endogenous substances or ions, thereby exhibiting a wide spectrum of biological functions. According to the new nomenclature of human ABC transporter genes, the 'ABCC' gene sub-family comprises three classes involving multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRPs), sulfonylurea receptors (SURs), and a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). 3. Molecular cloning studies have identified a total of ten members of the human MRP class including ABCC11, ABCC12, and ABCC13 (pseudo-gene) that have recently been characterized. 4. This review addresses the historical background and discovery of the ATP-driven xenobiotic export pumps (GS-X pumps) encoded by MRP genes, biological functions of ABC transporters belonging to the MRP class, and regulation of gene expression of MRPs by oxidative stress.

[PMID: 18484914]
Biliary excretion is a major elimination route of many drugs and their metabolites. Hepatobiliary elimination is a vectorial process involving uptake transporters in the basolateral hepatocyte membrane, possibly Phase I and Phase II metabolizing enzymes, and ATP-dependent efflux pumps in the apical hepatocyte membrane. Because many drugs and their metabolites are anions, this review focuses on transporters involved in their hepatocellular uptake (members of the organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) family) and biliary elimination (apical conjugate efflux pump ABCC2/MRP2). The molecular and functional characteristics of the human OATP and ABCC/MRP transporters are presented, including a detailed overview of endogenous and drug substrates. Examples illustrate the interplay of transporters with Phase II conjugating enzymes. Model systems to study the vectorial transport of organic anions are also discussed. OATP uptake transporters, conjugating enzymes, and ABCC2/MRP2 work in concert to enable the hepatobiliary elimination of anionic drugs and their metabolites. It is increasingly important to understand how genetic variants of these transporters and enzymes influence the interindividual variability of drug elimination.

[PMID: 20360301]
The identification of the transport proteins responsible for the uptake and the efflux of nucleosides and their metabolites enables the characterization of their vectorial transport and a better understanding of their absorption, distribution, and elimination. Human concentrative nucleoside transporters (hCNTs/SLC28A) are known to mediate the transport of natural nucleosides and some nucleoside analogs into cells in a sodium-dependent and unidirectional manner. On the other hand, several human multidrug resistance proteins [human ATP-binding cassette transporter, subfamily C (ABCC)] cause resistance against nucleoside analogs and mediate transport of phosphorylated nucleoside derivatives out of the cells in an ATP-dependent manner. For the integrated analysis of uptake and efflux of these compounds, we established a double-transfected Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) II cell line stably expressing the human uptake transporter hCNT3 in the apical membrane and the human efflux pump ABCC4 in the basolateral membrane. The direction of transport was from the apical to the basolateral compartment, which is in line with the unidirectional transport and the localization of both recombinant proteins in the MDCKII cells. Recombinant hCNT3 mediated the transport of several known nucleoside substrates, and we identified 5-azacytidine as a new substrate for hCNT3. It is of interest that coexpression of both transporters was confirmed in pancreatic adenocarcinomas, which represent an important clinical indication for the therapeutic use of nucleoside analogs. Thus, our results establish a novel cell system for studies on the vectorial transport of nucleosides and their analogs from the apical to the basolateral compartment. The results contribute to a better understanding of the cellular transport characteristics of nucleoside drugs.

[PMID: 21740521]
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are a superfamily of membrane proteins that are best known for their ability to transport a wide variety of exogenous and endogenous substances across membranes against a concentration gradient via ATP hydrolysis. There are seven subfamilies of human ABC transporters, one of the largest being the 'C' subfamily (gene symbol ABCC). Nine ABCC subfamily members, the so-called multidrug resistance proteins (MRPs) 1-9, have been implicated in mediating multidrug resistance in tumor cells to varying degrees as the efflux extrude chemotherapeutic compounds (or their metabolites) from malignant cells. Some of the MRPs are also known to either influence drug disposition in normal tissues or modulate the elimination of drugs (or their metabolites) via hepatobiliary or renal excretory pathways. In addition, the cellular efflux of physiologically important organic anions such as leukotriene C(4) and cAMP is mediated by one or more of the MRPs. Finally, mutations in several MRPs are associated with human genetic disorders. In this minireview, the current biochemical and physiological knowledge of MRP1-MRP9 in cancer chemotherapy and human genetic disease is summarized. The mutations in MRP2/ABCC2 leading to conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Dubin-Johnson syndrome) and in MRP6/ABCC6 leading to the connective tissue disorder Pseudoxanthoma elasticum are also discussed.

[PMID: 11483364]
Several years ago, we initiated a long-term project of cloning new human ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters and linking them to various disease phenotypes. As one of the results of this project, we present two new members of the human ABCC subfamily, ABCC11 and ABCC12. These two new human ABC transporters were fully characterized and mapped to the human chromosome 16q12. With the addition of these two genes, the complete human ABCC subfamily has 12 identified members (ABCC1-12), nine from the multidrug resistance-like subgroup, two from the sulfonylurea receptor subgroup, and the CFTR gene. Phylogenetic analysis determined that ABCC11 and ABCC12 are derived by duplication, and are most closely related to the ABCC5 gene. Genetic variation in some ABCC subfamily members is associated with human inherited diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CFTR/ABCC7), Dubin-Johnson syndrome (ABCC2), pseudoxanthoma elasticum (ABCC6) and familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (ABCC8). Since ABCC11 and ABCC12 were mapped to a region harboring gene(s) for paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis, the two genes represent positional candidates for this disorder.