[PMID: 22666487]
The p53 transcription factor and tumor suppressor is regulated primarily by the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which ubiquitinates p53 to target it for proteasomal degradation. Aside from its ubiquitin ligase function, Mdm2 has been believed to be capable of suppressing p53's transcriptional activity by binding with and masking the transactivation domain of p53. The ability of Mdm2 to restrain p53 activity by binding alone, without ubiquitination, was challenged by a 2007 study using a knockin mouse harboring a single cysteine-to-alanine point mutation (C462A) in Mdm2's RING domain. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts with this mutation, which abrogates Mdm2's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity without affecting its ability to bind with p53, were unable to suppress p53 activity. In this study, we utilized the Mdm2(C462A) mouse model to characterize in further detail the role of Mdm2's RING domain in the control of p53. Here, we show in vivo that the Mdm2(C462A) protein not only fails to suppress p53, but compared to the complete absence of Mdm2, Mdm2(C462A) actually enhances p53 transcriptional activity toward p53 target genes p21/CDKN1A, MDM2, BAX, NOXA, and 14-3-3σ. In addition, we found that Mdm2(C462A) facilitates the interaction between p53 and the acetyltransferase CBP/p300, and it fails to heterodimerize with its homolog and sister regulator of p53, Mdmx, suggesting that a fully intact RING domain is required for Mdm2's inhibition of the p300-p53 interaction and for its interaction with Mdmx. These findings help us to better understand the complex regulation of the Mdm2-p53 pathway and have important implications for chemotherapeutic agents targeting Mdm2, as they suggest that inhibition of Mdm2's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity may be sufficient for increasing p53 activity in vivo, without the need to block Mdm2-p53 binding.

[PMID: 16082221]
The p53 tumor suppressor protein has a major role in protecting genome integrity. Under normal circumstances Mdmx and Mdm2 control the activity of p53. Both proteins inhibit the transcriptional regulation by p53, while Mdm2 also functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase to target both p53 and Mdmx for proteasomal degradation. HAUSP counteracts the destabilizing effect of Mdm2 by direct deubiquitination of p53. Subsequently, HAUSP was shown to deubiquitinate Mdm2 and Mdmx, thereby stabilizing these proteins. The ATM protein kinase is a key regulator of the p53 pathway in response to double strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. ATM fine-tunes p53's response to DNA damage by directly phosphorylating it, by regulating additional post-translational modifications of this protein, and by affecting two p53 regulators: Mdm2 and Mdmx. ATM directly and indirectly induces Mdm2 and Mdmx phosphorylation, resulting in decreased activity and stability of these proteins. We recently provided a mechanism for the reduced stability of Mdm2 and Mdmx by showing that ATM-dependent phosphorylation lowers their affinity for the deubiquitinating enzyme HAUSP. Altogether, the emerging picture portrays an elaborate, but fine-tuned, ATM-mediated control of p53 activation and stabilization following DNA damage. Further insight into the mechanism by which ATM switches the interactions between HAUSP, Mdmx, Mdm2 and p53, to favor p53 activation may offer new tools for therapeutic intervention in the p53 pathway for cancer treatment.

[PMID: 22819825]
Murine double minute (MDM2) is an E3 ligase that promotes ubiquitination and degradation of tumor suppressor protein 53 (p53). MDM2-mediated regulation of p53 has been investigated as a classical tumorigenesis pathway. Here, we describe TRIAD1 as a novel modulator of the p53-MDM2 axis that induces p53 activation by inhibiting its regulation by MDM2. Ablation of TRIAD1 attenuates p53 levels activity upon DNA damage, whereas ectopic expression of TRIAD1 promotes p53 stability by inhibiting MDM2-mediated ubiquitination/degradation. Moreover, TRIAD1 binds to the C-terminus of p53 to promote its dissociation from MDM2. These results implicate TRIAD1 as a novel regulatory factor of p53-MDM2.

[PMID: 23150437]
p53 levels and activity are controlled in large part through regulated ubiquitination and subsequent destruction by the 26S proteasome. Monoubiquitination of p53 is mediated primarily by the RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2 and impacts p53 activity through modulation of p53 localization and transcription activities. Recently, several E4 ubiquitin ligases (E4s) have been identified which serve to extend these monoubiquitin chains. The ubiquitin ligase activity of these factors toward p53, and their contribution to p53 degradation, can be studied using a variety of in vitro and in vivo methods and reagents which will be described in this chapter. These methods include in vivo ubiquitination of p53 using HA-ubiquitin or his-ubiquitin; the in vitro E3 ubiquitin ligase assay, in which ubiquitin reaction components (URC) are incubated with a purified E3 or E4 ligase; a one-step E4 assay, in which URC are incubated with a substrate, E3, and E4; and a two-step E4 assay in which p53 is monoubiquitinated in an E3 reaction, and subsequently purified and incubated with an E4. Finally, we will describe an in vitro degradation assay in which ubiquitinated p53 is incubated with purified 26S proteasomes. Together, these assays can be used to provide insight into the biochemical nature of p53 ubiquitination and degradation.

[PMID: 11948425]
The Mdm2 proto-oncogene is amplified and over-expressed in a variety of tumors. One of the major functions of Mdm2 described to date is its ability to modulate the levels and activity of the tumor suppressor protein p53. Mdm2 binds to the N-terminus of p53 and, through its action as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, targets p53 for rapid proteasomal degradation. Mdm2 can also bind to other cellular proteins such as hNumb, E2F1, Rb and Akt; however, the biological significance of these interactions is less clear. To gain insight into the function of Mdm2 in vivo, we have generated a transgenic Drosophila strain bearing the mouse Mdm2 gene. Ectopic expression of Mdm2, using the UAS/GAL4 system, causes eye and wing phenotypes in the fly. Analysis of wing imaginal discs from third instar larvae showed that expression of Mdm2 induces apoptosis. Crosses did not reveal genetic interactions between Mdm2 and the Drosophila homolog of E2F, Numb and Akt. These transgenic flies may provide a unique experimental model for exploring the molecular interactions of Mdm2 in a developmental context.

[PMID: 12832479]
MDM2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets p53 for proteasomal degradation. Recent studies have shown, however, that the ring-finger domain (RFD) of MDM2, where the ubiquitin E3 ligase activity resides, is necessary but not sufficient for p53 ubiquitination, suggesting that an additional activity of MDM2 might be required. To test this possibility, we generated a series of MDM2/MDMX chimeric proteins to assess the contribution of each domain of MDM2 to the ubiquitination process. MDMX is a close structural homolog of MDM2 that nevertheless lacks the E3 ligase activity in vivo. We demonstrate here that MDMX gains self-ubiquitination activity and becomes extremely unstable upon introduction of the MDM2 RFD, indicating that the RFD is essential for self-ubiquitination. This MDMX chimeric protein, however, is unable to ubiquitinate p53 in vivo despite its E3 ligase activity and binding to p53, separating the self-ubiquitination activity of MDM2 from its ability to ubiquitinate p53. Significantly, fusion of the central acidic domain (AD) of MDM2 to the MDMX chimeric protein renders the protein fully capable of ubiquitinating p53, and p53 ubiquitination is associated with p53 degradation and nuclear export. Moreover, the AD mini protein expressed in trans can functionally rescue the AD-lacking MDM2 mutant, further supporting a critical role for the AD in MDM2-mediated p53 ubiquitination.

[PMID: 21075307]
Cancer cells neutralize p53 by deletion, mutation, proteasomal degradation, or sequestration to achieve a pathologic survival advantage. Targeting the E3 ubiquitin ligase HDM2 can lead to a therapeutic surge in p53 levels. However, the efficacy of HDM2 inhibition can be compromised by overexpression of HDMX, an HDM2 homolog that binds and sequesters p53. Here, we report that a stapled p53 helix preferentially targets HDMX, blocks the formation of inhibitory p53-HDMX complexes, induces p53-dependent transcriptional upregulation, and thereby overcomes HDMX-mediated cancer resistance in vitro and in vivo. Importantly, our analysis of p53 interaction dynamics provides a blueprint for reactivating the p53 pathway in cancer by matching HDM2, HDMX, or dual inhibitors to the appropriate cellular context.

[PMID: 15632057]
p53 is a critical coordinator of a wide range of stress responses. To facilitate a rapid response to stress, p53 is produced constitutively but is negatively regulated by MDM2. MDM2 can inhibit p53 in multiple independent ways: by binding to its transcription activation domain, inhibiting p53 acetylation, promoting nuclear export, and probably most importantly by promoting proteasomal degradation of p53. The latter is achieved via MDM2's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity harbored within the MDM2 RING finger domain. We have discovered that MTBP promotes MDM2-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of p53 and also MDM2 stabilization in an MDM2 RING finger-dependent manner. Moreover, using small interfering RNA to down-regulate endogenous MTBP in unstressed cells, we have found that MTBP significantly contributes to MDM2-mediated regulation of p53 levels and activity. However, following exposure of cells to UV, but not gamma-irradiation, MTBP is destabilized as part of the coordinated cellular response. Our findings suggest that MTBP differentially regulates the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of MDM2 towards two of its most critical targets (itself and p53) and in doing so significantly contributes to MDM2-dependent p53 homeostasis in unstressed cells.

[PMID: 19934289]
p53 is inactivated in many human malignancies through missense mutations or overexpression of the human homologue of Mdm2 (Hdm2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates p53, thereby promoting its proteasomal degradation. The cis-imidazoline nutlin-3 can disrupt the p53-Hdm2 interaction and activate p53, inducing apoptosis in vitro in many malignancies, including multiple myeloma (MM). We hypothesized that suppression of Hdm2-mediated p53 ubiquitination may augment sequelae of p53 accumulation caused by proteasomal inhibition. We compared the response of MM cells versus several epithelial cancer models to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in combination with nutlin-3. The combination of sublethal concentrations of bortezomib plus nutlin-3 induced additive cytotoxicity against bortezomib-sensitive MM cell lines. Importantly, however, in breast, prostate, colon, and thyroid (papillary, follicular, anaplastic, and medullary) carcinoma cell lines, this combination triggered synergistic cytotoxicity, and increased expression of p53, p21, Hdm2, Bax, Noxa, PUMA, and cleavage of caspase-3 and poly ADP ribose polymerase. Coculture with bone marrow stromal cells attenuated MM cell sensitivity to nutlin-3 monotherapy and was associated with evidence of suppression of p53 activity in MM cells, whereas combined bortezomib-nutlin-3 treatment maintained cytotoxicity even in the presence of bone marrow stromal cells. This differential response of MM versus epithelial carcinomas to combination of nutlin-3 with bortezomib sheds new light on the role of p53 in bortezomib-induced apoptosis. Concurrent Hdm2 inhibition with bortezomib may extend the spectrum of bortezomib applications to malignancies with currently limited sensitivity to single-agent bortezomib or, in the future, to MM patients with decreased clinical responsiveness to bortezomib-based therapy.

[PMID: 18235222]
Mdm2 has been thought to regulate the tumor suppressor p53 in two ways: by masking p53's access to transcriptional machinery, and by ubiquitinating p53, targeting it for proteasomal degradation. This dogma was recently challenged by data generated from knockin mice in which Mdm2's RING E3 ubiquitin ligase activity was abrogated by a single point mutation. The RING mutant Mdm2 is fully capable of binding with p53, yet cannot suppress p53 activity, suggesting that Mdm2 cannot block p53 by binding alone, without ubiquitination. Data from the RING knockin mice also revealed that endogenous Mdm2 does not, as previously thought, regulate its own stability by self-ubiquitination. In this review, we will discuss these findings and their relevance to the field, including potential reasons for the discrepancies between previous data and that generated by our knockin mice, as well as the feasibility of targeting Mdm2's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in cancer. We will also discuss additional research questions that may be addressed using our mouse model.

[PMID: 24174547]
The HDM2-p53 loop is crucial for monitoring p53 level and human pathologies. Therefore, identification of novel molecules involved in this regulatory loop is necessary for understanding the dynamic regulation of p53 and treatment of human diseases. Here, we characterized that the ribosomal protein L6 binds to and suppresses the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of HDM2, and subsequently attenuates HDM2-mediated p53 polyubiquitination and degradation. The enhanced p53 activity further slows down cell cycle progression and leads to cell growth inhibition. Conversely, the level of p53 is dramatically decreased upon the depletion of RPL6, indicating that RPL6 is essential for p53 stabilization. We also found that RPL6 translocalizes from the nucleolus to nucleoplasm under ribosomal stress, which facilitates its binding with HDM2. The interaction of RPL6 and HDM2 drives HDM2-mediated RPL6 polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Longer treatment of actinomycin D increases RPL6 ubiquitination and destabilizes RPL6, and thereby putatively attenuates p53 response until the level of L6 subsides. Therefore, RPL6 and HDM2 form an autoregulatory feedback loop to monitor the level of p53 in response to ribosomal stress. Together, our study identifies the crucial function of RPL6 in regulating HDM2-p53 pathway, which highlights the importance of RPL6 in human genetic diseases and cancers.

[PMID: 15013777]
Mdm2 is a RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase, which promotes ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. Acetylation of p53 regulates p53's transcriptional activity and inhibits Mdm2-mediated p53 ubiquitination and degradation. We now report that Mdm2 is also a target for acetylation. Mdm2 is acetylated in vitro by CREB-binding protein (CBP) and to a lesser extent by p300, but not by p300/CPB-associated factor. Acetylation occurs primarily within the RING finger domain of Mdm2. In vivo acetylation of Mdm2 was detected easily with CBP but not p300. Efficient in vivo acetylation required the preservation of the RING finger. An Mdm2 mutant (K466/467Q) mimicking acetylation is impaired in its ability to promote p53 ubiquitination, as well as Mdm2 autoubiquitination. Moreover, K466/467Q is defective in promoting p53 degradation in living cells. We thus suggest that acetyltransferases may modulate cellular p53 activity not only by modifying p53, but also by inactivating Mdm2.

[PMID: 19166840]
The p53 tumour suppressor protein is tightly controlled by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, mouse double minute 2 (MDM2), but maintains MDM2 expression as part of a negative feedback loop. We have identified the immunophilin, 25kDa FK506-binding protein (FKBP25), previously shown to be regulated by p53-mediated repression, as an MDM2-interacting partner. We show that FKBP25 stimulates auto-ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of MDM2, leading to the induction of p53. Depletion of FKBP25 by siRNA leads to increased levels of MDM2 and a corresponding reduction in p53 and p21 levels. These data are consistent with the idea that FKBP25 contributes to regulation of the p53-MDM2 negative feedback loop.

[PMID: 16339144]
MDM2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates the proteasomal degradation and activity of proteins involved in cell growth and apoptosis, including the tumor suppressors p53 and retinoblastoma and the transcription factor E2F1. Although the effect of several MDM2 targets on cardiomyocyte survival and hypertrophy has already been investigated, the role of MDM2 in these processes has not yet been established. We have, therefore, analyzed the effect of overexpression as well as inhibition of MDM2 on cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury and hypertrophy. Here we show that isolated cardiac myocytes overexpressing MDM2 acquired resistance to hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced cell death. Conversely, inactivation of MDM2 by a peptide inhibitor resulted in elevated p53 levels and promoted hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced apoptosis. Consistent with this, decreased expression of MDM2 in a genetic mouse model was accompanied by reduced functional recovery of the left ventricles determined with the Langendorff ex vivo model of ischemia/reperfusion. In contrast to cell survival, cell hypertrophy induced by the alpha-agonists phenylephrine or endothelin-1 was inhibited by MDM2 overexpression. Collectively, our studies indicate that MDM2 promotes survival and attenuates hypertrophy of cardiac myocytes. This differential regulation of cell growth and cell survival is unique, because most other survival factors are prohypertrophic. MDM2, therefore, might be a potential therapeutic target to down-regulate both cell death and pathologic hypertrophy during remodeling upon cardiac infarction. In addition, our data also suggest that cancer treatments with MDM2 inhibitors to reactivate p53 may have adverse cardiac side effects by promoting cardiomyocyte death.

[PMID: 23671280]
The RING domain E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2 is the master regulator of the tumor suppressor p53. It targets p53 for proteasomal degradation, restraining the potent activity of p53 and enabling cell survival and proliferation. Like most E3 ligases, Mdm2 can also ubiquitinate itself. How Mdm2 auto-ubiquitination may influence its substrate ubiquitin ligase activity is undefined. Here we show that auto-ubiquitination of Mdm2 is an activating event. Mdm2 that has been conjugated to polyubiquitin chains, but not to single ubiquitins, exhibits substantially enhanced activity to polyubiquitinate p53. Mechanistically, auto-ubiquitination of Mdm2 facilitates the recruitment of the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. This occurs through noncovalent interactions between the ubiquitin chains on Mdm2 and the ubiquitin binding domain on E2s. Mutations that diminish the noncovalent interactions render auto-ubiquitination unable to stimulate Mdm2 substrate E3 activity. These results suggest a model in which polyubiquitin chains on an E3 increase the local concentration of E2 enzymes and permit the processivity of substrate ubiquitination. They also support the notion that autocatalysis may be a prevalent mode for turning on the activity of latent enzymes.

[PMID: 23581014]
The regulation of p53 expression levels is critical in controlling p53 activity in normal and damaged cells. This is well illustrated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2 that targets p53 for proteasomal degradation under normal conditions and is essential for controlling p53 activity during development. MDM2 is over-expressed in human cancers and together with some other E3 ligases that have also been implicated in controlling p53 stability, which emphasises the importance of post-translational regulation of p53 expression. At the level of synthesis, TP53 mRNA levels do not change in response to stresses and it is instead its rate of translation initiation that provides the mechanism of choice for expression control. More recent work has shown that TP53 mRNA plays an important role in mediating the cellular regulation of p53 activity. We will discuss the regulation of p53 synthesis and its implications for controlling p53 activity under normal conditions and during different types of stress response.