[PMID: 25221646]
Piperlongumine is a naturally-occurring small molecule with various biological activities. Recent studies demonstrate that piperlongumine selectively kills various types of transformed cells with minimal toxicity to non-transformed cells by inducing a high level of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS generates various types of DNA lesions, including base modifications and single strand breaks. In order to examine the contribution of ROS-induced DNA damage to the cytotoxicity by piperlongumine, various DNA repair-deficient chicken DT40 cell-lines with a single DNA repair gene deletion were tested for cellular sensitivity to piperlongumine. The results showed that cell lines defective in homologous recombination (HR) display hyper-sensitivity to piperlongumine, while other cell lines with a deficiency in non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), base excision repair (BER), nucleotide excision repair (NER), Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway, or translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) polymerases, show no sensitivity to piperlongumine. The results strongly implicate that double strand breaks (DSBs) generated by piperlongumine are major cytotoxic DNA lesions. Furthermore, a deletion of 53BP1 or Ku70 in the BRCA1-deficient cell line restored cellular resistance to piperlongumine. This strongly supports the idea that piperlongumine induces DSB- mediated cell death. Interestingly, piperlongumine makes the wild type DT40 cell line hypersensitive to a PARP-inhibitor, Olaparib. The results implicate that piperlongumine inhibits HR. Further analysis with cell-based HR assay and the kinetic study of Rad51 foci formation confirmed that piperlongumine suppresses HR activity. Altogether, we revealed novel mechanisms of piperlongumine-induced cytotoxicity.

[PMID: 25120693]
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with the development of certain types of cancer. The present study aimed to investigate the association between X-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese hamster cells 2 (XRCC2) SNPs and colorectal cancer (CRC) cell sensitivity to the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 1 inhibitor olaparib (AZD2281). SNaPshot<sup>®</sup> analysis of XRCC2 SNPs was performed in five CRC cell lines. The AZD2281-sensitivities of the CRC cells were also analyzed using MTT assays. The effect of AZD2281 on XRCC2 and PARP1 expression was investigated in the five cell lines using quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analyses. Parallel investigations were performed using a cisplatin (DDP) model of DNA damage. The XRCC2 rs3218536 SNP was found to be associated with the LoVo microsatellite instability CRC cell line. The relative rate of growth inhibition was found to be lower in the LoVo cells following treatment with AZD2281 compared with the other four cell lines (P=0.002). Furthermore, the XRCC2 mRNA level in the LoVo cells was observed to be significantly higher than that in the other four cell lines (P<0.05). Similar results were found using the DDP model of DNA damage (P<0.05). The present study indicated that the XRCC2 rs3218536 polymorphism decreases the sensitivity of CRC cells to AZD2281.

[PMID: 25139258]
PARP inhibitors are mostly effective as anticancer drugs in association with DNA damaging agents. We have previously shown that the oncolytic adenovirus dl922-947 induces extensive DNA damage, therefore we hypothesized a synergistic antitumoral effect of the PARP inhibitor olaparib in association with dl922-947. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma was chosen as model since it is a particularly aggressive tumor and, because of its localized growth, it is suitable for intratumoral treatment with oncolytic viruses. Here, we show that dl922-947 infection induces PARP activation, and we confirm in vitro and in vivo that PARP inhibition increases dl922-947 replication and oncolytic activity. In vitro, the combination with olaparib exacerbates the appearance of cell death markers, such as Annexin V positivity, caspase 3 cleavage, cytochrome C release and propidium iodide permeability. In vivo, we also observed a better viral distribution upon PARP inhibition. Changes in CD31 levels suggest a direct effect of olaparib on tumor vascularization and on the viral distribution within the tumor mass. The observation that PARP inhibition enhances the effects of dl922-947 is highly promising not only for the treatment of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma but, in general, for the treatment of other tumors that could benefit from the use of oncolytic viruses.

[PMID: 25417706]
The E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme Ubc13 and the E3 ubiquitin ligases Rad18 and Rnf8 promote homologous recombination (HR)-mediated double-strand break (DSB) repair by enhancing polymerization of the Rad51 recombinase at γ-ray-induced DSB sites. To analyze functional interactions between the three enzymes, we created RAD18(-/-), RNF8(-/-), RAD18(-/-)/RNF8(-/-) and UBC13(-/-)clones in chicken DT40 cells. To assess the capability of HR, we measured the cellular sensitivity to camptothecin (topoisomerase I poison) and olaparib (poly(ADP ribose)polymerase inhibitor) because these chemotherapeutic agents induce DSBs during DNA replication, which are repaired exclusively by HR. RAD18(-/-), RNF8(-/-) and RAD18(-/-)/RNF8(-/-) clones showed very similar levels of hypersensitivity, indicating that Rad18 and Rnf8 operate in the same pathway in the promotion of HR. Although these three mutants show less prominent defects in the formation of Rad51 foci than UBC13(-/-)cells, they are more sensitive to camptothecin and olaparib than UBC13(-/-)cells. Thus, Rad18 and Rnf8 promote HR-dependent repair in a manner distinct from Ubc13. Remarkably, deletion of Ku70, a protein essential for nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) significantly restored tolerance of RAD18(-/-) and RNF8(-/-) cells to camptothecin and olaparib without affecting Rad51 focus formation. Thus, in cellular tolerance to the chemotherapeutic agents, the two enzymes collaboratively promote DSB repair by HR by suppressing the toxic effect of NHEJ on HR rather than enhancing Rad51 focus formation. In contrast, following exposure to γ-rays, RAD18(-/-), RNF8(-/-), RAD18(-/-)/RNF8(-/-) and UBC13(-/-)cells showed close correlation between cellular survival and Rad51 focus formation at DSB sites. In summary, the current study reveals that Rad18 and Rnf8 facilitate HR by two distinct mechanisms: suppression of the toxic effect of NHEJ on HR during DNA replication and the promotion of Rad51 focus formation at radiotherapy-induced DSB sites.

[PMID: 25127709]
Tumors with BRCA germline mutations are defective in repairing DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) through homologous recombination (HR) pathways, making them sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPi). However, BRCA germline mutations are rare in prostate cancer limiting the ability to therapeutically target these pathways. This study investigates whether histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACi), reported to modulate DSB repair pathways in sporadic cancers, can downregulate DSB repair pathways and sensitize prostate cancer cells to PARPi. Prostate cancer cells cotreated with the HDAC inhibitor, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and the PARPi, olaparib, demonstrated a synergistic decrease in cell viability compared with single-agent treatment (combination index < 0.9), whereas normal prostatic cells did not. Similarly, clonogenicity was significantly decreased after cotreatment. Flow cytometric cell-cycle analysis and Annexin-V staining revealed significant apoptosis upon treatment with SAHA+olaparib. This coincided with increased DNA damage observed by immunofluorescence microscopy analysis of γH2AX foci, a marker of DSBs. In addition, immunoblot analysis showed a significant and persistent increase in nuclear γH2AX levels. Both SAHA and olaparib downregulated the expression of HR-related proteins, BRCA1 and RAD51, whereas SAHA + olaparib had an additive effect on RAD51. Silencing RAD51 sensitized prostate cancer cells to SAHA and olaparib alone. Collectively, cotreatment with HDACi and PARPi downregulated HR-related protein expression and concomitantly increased DNA damage, resulting in prostate cancer cell death. These findings provide a strong rationale for supporting the use of combined HDAC and PARP inhibition in treating advanced prostate cancer.

[PMID: 25275045]
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) consists of the cluster of differentiation 33 (CD33) antibody linked to calicheamicin. The binding of GO to the CD33 antigen on leukemic cells results in internalization and subsequent release of calicheamicin, thereby inducing DNA strand breaks. We hypothesized that the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor olaparib might inhibit DNA repair initiated by GO-induced DNA strand breaks, thereby increasing cytotoxicity. The human myeloid leukemia cell line HL-60 and a GO-resistant variant (HL/GO20) were used. The 50% growth-inhibitory concentrations (IC50) were 24 ng/ml for HL-60 cells and 550 ng/ml for GO-resistant variant HL/GO20 cells. HL/GO20 cells were also refractory to GO-induced apoptosis. CD33 positivity was reduced in HL/GO20 cells. Olaparib-alone did not inhibit the cell growth and did not induce apoptosis in either HL-60 cells or HL/GO20 cells at concentrations of up to 10 μM. When cells were treated with different concentrations of GO in the presence of 10 μM olaparib, the IC50 of GO for HL-60 cells was 13 ng/ml. The combination index was 0.86, indicating synergistic cytotoxicity of GO and olaparib in combination. Such a combination was ineffective for HL/GO20 cells. GO and olaparib exerted synergistic cytotoxicity in CD33-positive myeloid leukemia cells in vitro.

[PMID: 25302833]
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the main cause of cancer-related death worldwide and new therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. In this study, we have characterized a panel of NSC lung cancer cell lines for the expression of coiled-coil-domain containing 6 (CCDC6), a tumor suppressor gene involved in apoptosis and DNA damage response. We show that low CCDC6 protein levels are associated with a weak response to DNA damage and a low number of Rad51 positive foci. Moreover, CCDC6 deficient lung cancer cells show defects in DNA repair via homologous recombination. In accordance with its role in the DNA damage response, CCDC6 attenuation confers resistance to cisplatinum, the current treatment of choice for NSCLC, but sensitizes the cells to olaparib, a small molecule inhibitor of the repair enzymes PARP1/2. Remarkably, the combination of the two drugs is more effective than each agent individually, as demonstrated by a combination index <1. Finally, CCDC6 is expressed at low levels in about 30% of the NSCL tumors we analyzed by TMA immunostaining. The weak CCDC6 protein staining is significatively correlated with the presence of lymph node metastasis (p ≤ 0.02) and negatively correlated to the disease free survival (p ≤ 0.01) and the overall survival (p ≤ 0.05). Collectively, the data indicate that CCDC6 levels provide valuable insight for OS. CCDC6 could represent a predictive biomarker of resistance to conventional single mode therapy and yield insight on tumor sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in NSCLC.

[PMID: 25144364]
Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) have been recognized as playing a major role in various aspects of breast cancer biology. To identify specific biomarkers of BCSCs, we have performed comparative proteomics of BCSC-enriched and mature cancer cell populations from the human breast cancer cell line (BCL), BrCA-MZ-01. ALDEFLUOR assay was used to sort BCSC-enriched (ALDH+) and mature cancer (ALDH-) cell populations. Total proteins were extracted from both fractions and subjected to 2-Dimensional Difference In-Gel Electrophoresis (2-D DIGE). Differentially-expressed spots were excised and proteins were gel-extracted, digested and identified using MALDI-TOF MS. 2-D DIGE identified poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) as overexpressed in ALDH+ cells from BrCA-MZ-01. This observation was confirmed by western blot and extended to four additional human BCLs. ALDH+ cells from BRCA1-mutated HCC1937, which had the highest level of PARP1 overexpression, displayed resistance to olaparib, a specific PARP1 inhibitor. An unbiased proteomic approach identified PARP1 as upregulated in ALDH+, BCSC-enriched cells from various human BCLs, which may contribute to clinical resistance to PARP inhibitors.

[PMID: 25531448]
Resistance to apoptosis is a paramount issue in the treatment of Glioblastoma (GBM). We show that targeting PARP by the small molecule inhibitors, Olaparib (AZD-2281) or PJ34, reduces proliferation and lowers the apoptotic threshold of GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. The sensitizing effects of PARP inhibition on TRAIL-mediated apoptosis and potential toxicity were analyzed using viability assays and flow cytometry in established GBM cell lines, low-passage neurospheres and astrocytes in vitro. Molecular analyses included western blots and gene silencing. In vivo, effects on tumor growth were examined in a murine subcutaneous xenograft model. The combination treatment of PARP inhibitors and TRAIL led to an increased cell death with activation of caspases and inhibition of formation of neurospheres when compared to single-agent treatment. Mechanistically, pharmacological PARP inhibition elicited a nuclear stress response with up-regulation of down-stream DNA-stress response proteins, e.g., CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homology protein (CHOP). Furthermore, Olaparib and PJ34 increased protein levels of DR5 in a concentration and time-dependent manner. In turn, siRNA-mediated suppression of DR5 mitigated the effects of TRAIL/PARP inhibitor-mediated apoptosis. In addition, suppression of PARP-1 levels enhanced TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in malignant glioma cells. Treatment of human astrocytes with the combination of TRAIL/PARP inhibitors did not cause toxicity. Finally, the combination treatment of TRAIL and PJ34 significantly reduced tumor growth in vivo when compared to treatment with each agent alone. PARP inhibition represents a promising avenue to overcome apoptotic resistance in GBM.

[PMID: 25218906]
Olaparib is a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor and cediranib is an anti-angiogenic agent with activity against VEGF receptor (VEGFR) 1, VEGFR2, and VEGFR3. Both oral agents have antitumour activity in women with recurrent ovarian cancer, and their combination was active and had manageable toxicities in a phase 1 trial. We investigated whether this combination could improve progression-free survival (PFS) compared with olaparib monotherapy in women with recurrent platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer. In our randomised, open-label, phase 2 study, we recruited women (aged ≥18 years) who had measurable platinum-sensitive, relapsed, high-grade serous or endometrioid ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer, or those with deleterious germline BRCA1/2 mutations from nine participating US academic medical centres. We randomly allocated participants (1:1) according to permuted blocks, stratified by germline BRCA status and previous anti-angiogenic therapy, to receive olaparib capsules 400 mg twice daily or the combination at the recommended phase 2 dose of cediranib 30 mg daily and olaparib capsules 200 mg twice daily. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival analysed in the intention-to-treat population. The phase 2 trial is no longer accruing patients. An interim analysis was conducted in November, 2013, after 50% of expected events had occurred and efficacy results were unmasked. The primary analysis was performed on March 31, 2014, after 47 events (66% of those expected). The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01116648. Between Oct 26, 2011, and June 3, 2013, we randomly allocated 46 women to receive olaparib alone and 44 to receive the combination of olaparib and cediranib. Median PFS was 17·7 months (95% CI 14·7-not reached) for the women treated with cediranib plus olaparib compared with 9·0 months (95% CI 5·7-16·5) for those treated with olaparib monotherapy (hazard ratio 0·42, 95% CI 0·23-0·76; p=0·005). Grade 3 and 4 adverse events were more common with combination therapy than with monotherapy, including fatigue (12 patients in the cediranib plus olaparib group vs five patients in the olaparib monotherapy group), diarrhoea (ten vs none), and hypertension (18 vs none). Cediranib plus olaparib seems to improve PFS in women with recurrent platinum-sensitive high-grade serous or endometrioid ovarian cancer, and warrants study in a phase 3 trial. The side-effect profile suggests such investigations should include assessments of quality of life and patient-reported outcomes to understand the effects of a continuing oral regimen with that of intermittent chemotherapy. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act grant from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (3 U01 CA062490-16S2); Intramural Program of the Center for Cancer Research; and the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, NIH.

[PMID: 25481791]
The poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor olaparib has shown antitumour activity in patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent, high-grade serous ovarian cancer with or without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and tolerability of olaparib in combination with chemotherapy, followed by olaparib maintenance monotherapy, versus chemotherapy alone in patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent, high-grade serous ovarian cancer. In this randomised, open-label, phase 2 study, adult patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent, high-grade serous ovarian cancer who had received up to three previous courses of platinum-based chemotherapy and who were progression free for at least 6 months before randomisation received either olaparib (200 mg capsules twice daily, administered orally on days 1-10 of each 21-day cycle) plus paclitaxel (175 mg/m(2), administered intravenously on day 1) and carboplatin (area under the curve [AUC] 4 mg/mL per min, according to the Calvert formula, administered intravenously on day 1), then olaparib monotherapy (400 mg capsules twice daily, given continuously) until progression (the olaparib plus chemotherapy group), or paclitaxel (175 mg/m(2) on day 1) and carboplatin (AUC 6 mg/mL per min on day 1) then no further treatment (the chemotherapy alone group). Randomisation was done by an interactive voice response system, stratified by number of previous platinum-containing regimens received and time to disease progression after the previous platinum regimen. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1, analysed by intention to treat. Prespecified exploratory analyses included efficacy by BRCA mutation status, assessed retrospectively. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01081951, and has been completed. Between Feb 12 and July 30, 2010, 173 patients at 43 investigational sites in 12 countries were enrolled into the study, of whom 162 were eligible and were randomly assigned to the two treatment groups (81 to the olaparib plus chemotherapy group and 81 to the chemotherapy alone group). Of these randomised patients, 156 were treated in the combination phase (81 in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group and 75 in the chemotherapy alone group) and 121 continued to the maintenance or no further treatment phase (66 in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group and 55 in the chemotherapy alone group). BRCA mutation status was known for 107 patients (either at baseline or determined retrospectively): 41 (38%) of 107 had a BRCA mutation (20 in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group and 21 in the chemotherapy alone group). Progression-free survival was significantly longer in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group (median 12.2 months [95% CI 9.7-15.0]) than in the chemotherapy alone group (median 9.6 months [95% CI 9.1-9.7) (HR 0.51 [95% CI 0.34-0.77]; p=0.0012), especially in patients with BRCA mutations (HR 0.21 [0.08-0.55]; p=0.0015). In the combination phase, adverse events that were reported at least 10% more frequently with olaparib plus chemotherapy than with chemotherapy alone were alopecia (60 [74%] of 81 vs 44 [59%] of 75), nausea (56 [69%] vs 43 [57%]), neutropenia (40 [49%] vs 29 [39%]), diarrhoea (34 [42%] vs 20 [27%]), headache (27 [33%] vs seven [9%]), peripheral neuropathy (25 [31%] vs 14 [19%]), and dyspepsia (21 [26%] vs 9 [12%]); most were of mild-to-moderate intensity. The most common grade 3 or higher adverse events during the combination phase were neutropenia (in 35 [43%] of 81 patients in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group vs 26 [35%] of 75 in the chemotherapy alone group) and anaemia (seven [9%] vs five [7%]). Serious adverse events were reported in 12 (15%) of 81 patients in the olaparib plus chemotherapy group and 16 of 75 (21%) patients in the chemotherapy alone group. Olaparib plus paclitaxel and carboplatin followed by maintenance monotherapy significantly improved progression-free survival versus paclitaxel plus carboplatin alone, with the greatest clinical benefit in BRCA-mutated patients, and had an acceptable and manageable tolerability profile. AstraZeneca.

[PMID: 25128455]
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have shown promising results in Breast Cancer (BRCA) deficient breast cancer, but not in molecularly unselected patient populations. Two lines of research in this field are needed: the identification of novel subsets of patients that could potentially benefit from PARP inhibitors and the discovery of suitable targeted therapies for combination strategies. We tested PARP inhibition, alone or combined with the anti-HER2 antibody trastuzumab on HER2+ breast cancer. We used two PARP inhibitors in clinical development, olaparib and rucaparib, as well as genetic downmodulation of PARP-1 for in vitro studies. DNA damage was studied by the formation of γH2AX foci and comet assay. Finally, the in vivo anti-tumour effect of olaparib and trastuzumab was examined in nude mice subcutaneously implanted with BT474 cells. In a panel of four HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines, both olaparib and rucaparib significantly decreased cell growth and enhanced anti-tumour effects of trastuzumab. Cells exposed to olaparib and trastuzumab had greater DNA damage than cells exposed to each agent alone. Mechanistic exploratory assays showed that trastuzumab downmodulated the homologous recombination protein proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Combination treatment in the BT474 xenograft model resulted in enhanced growth inhibition, reduced tumour cell proliferation, and increased DNA damage and apoptosis. Taken together, our results show that PARP inhibition has antitumour effects and increases trastuzumab activity in HER2 overexpressing breast cancer. These findings make this novel combination a promising strategy for clinical development.

[PMID: 25526472]
X-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese hamster cells 2 (XRCC2) and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) both play important roles in homologous recombination DNA repair. According to the theory of synthetic lethality, XRCC2-deficient cells are more sensitive to PARP1 inhibitors compared to XRCC2-expressing cells. We investigated XRCC2 expression and function in colorectal cancer (CRC), and the characteristics of sensitivity to PARP1 inhibitor in CRC cells with different XRCC2 levels. We enrolled 153 patients with CRC who had undergone surgery in this study. XRCC2 expression was assessed using immunohistochemistry. Stable CRC SW480 cell lines with low or high XRCC2 expression were constructed. Following treatment with the PARP1 inhibitor olaparib, the viability of cells with different XRCC2 levels was determined; cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were analyzed using flow cytometry. B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) protein expression was measured by Western blotting. The positive rates of XRCC2 in primary CRC tissue were significantly higher than that in the matched adjacent noncancerous tissue, and XRCC2 expression status in primary CRC was related to tumor site, Dukes' stage, and tumor-nodes-metastasis (TNM) stage. XRCC2 overexpression inhibited CRC cell apoptosis and promoted proliferation by enriching cells in the G0/G1 phase. Moreover, olaparib suppressed proliferation, and olaparib sensitivity in CRC cells with high XRCC2 expression was greater. High XRCC2 expression promotes CRC cell proliferation and enriches cells in the G0/G1 phase but inhibits apoptosis. High XRCC2 expression cells are more sensitive to olaparib, which inhibits their viability.

[PMID: 25483710]
Olaparib (AZD-2281, Ku-0059436) is an orally bioavailable and well-tolerated poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor currently under investigation in patients with solid tumors. To study the clinical potential of olaparib as a single-agent for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, we analyzed the in vitro sensitivity of AML cell lines and primary blasts. Clinically achievable concentrations of olaparib were able to induce cell death in the majority of primary AML case samples (88%) and tested cell lines. At these concentrations, olaparib preferentially killed leukemic blasts sparing normal lymphocytes derived from the same patient and did not substantially affect the viability of normal bone marrow and CD34-enriched peripheral blood cells obtained from healthy donors. Most primary AML analyzed were characterized by low BRCA1 mRNA level and undetectable protein expression that likely contributed to explain their sensitivity to olaparib. Noteworthy, while PARP1 over-expression was detected in blasts not responsive to olaparib, phosphorylation of the histone H2AFX (γH2AX) was associated with drug sensitivity. As to genetic features of tested cases the highest sensitivity was shown by a patient carrying a 11q23 deletion. The high sensitivity of AML blasts and the identification of biomarkers potentially able to predict response and/or resistance may foster further investigation of olaparib monotherapy for AML patients unfit to conventional chemotherapy.

[PMID: 25366685]
Olaparib is an oral poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor with activity in germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) -associated breast and ovarian cancers. We evaluated the efficacy and safety of olaparib in a spectrum of BRCA1/2-associated cancers. This multicenter phase II study enrolled individuals with a germline BRCA1/2 mutation and recurrent cancer. Eligibility included ovarian cancer resistant to prior platinum; breast cancer with ≥ three chemotherapy regimens for metastatic disease; pancreatic cancer with prior gemcitabine treatment; or prostate cancer with progression on hormonal and one systemic therapy. Olaparib was administered at 400 mg twice per day. The primary efficacy end point was tumor response rate. A total of 298 patients received treatment and were evaluable. The tumor response rate was 26.2% (78 of 298; 95% CI, 21.3 to 31.6) overall and 31.1% (60 of 193; 95% CI, 24.6 to 38.1), 12.9% (eight of 62; 95% CI, 5.7 to 23.9), 21.7% (five of 23; 95% CI, 7.5 to 43.7), and 50.0% (four of eight; 95% CI, 15.7 to 84.3) in ovarian, breast, pancreatic, and prostate cancers, respectively. Stable disease ≥ 8 weeks was observed in 42% of patients (95% CI, 36.0 to 47.4), including 40% (95% CI, 33.4 to 47.7), 47% (95% CI, 34.0 to 59.9), 35% (95% CI, 16.4 to 57.3), and 25% (95% CI, 3.2 to 65.1) of those with ovarian, breast, pancreatic, or prostate cancer, respectively. The most common adverse events (AEs) were fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. Grade ≥ 3 AEs were reported for 54% of patients; anemia was the most common (17%). Responses to olaparib were observed across different tumor types associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. Olaparib warrants further investigation in confirmatory studies.

[PMID: 25374341]
Preclinical studies have documented antitumor activity of PARP inhibition both in vitro and in vivo, against Ewing sarcoma cells. This study aimed to translate that observation into a clinical trial to assess the efficacy and tolerability of olaparib, a PARP inhibitor, in patients with advanced Ewing sarcoma (EWS) progressing after prior chemotherapy. In this nonrandomized phase II trial, adult participants with radiographically measureable metastatic EWS received olaparib tablets, 400 mg orally twice daily, until disease progression or drug intolerance. Tumor measurements were determined by CT or MRI at 6 and 12 weeks after starting olaparib administration, and then every 8 weeks thereafter. Tumor response determinations were made according to RECIST 1.1, and adverse event determinations were made according to CTCAE, version 4.0. A total of 22 participants were planned to be enrolled using a conventional 2-step phase II study design. If no objective responses were observed after 12 participants had been followed for at least 3 months, further accrual would be stopped. 12 participants were enrolled, and all were evaluable. There were no objective responses (PR/CR), 4 SD (duration 10.9, 11.4, 11.9, and 17.9 wks), and 8 PD as best response. Of the SD, 2 had minor responses (-9% and -11.7% by RECIST 1.1). The median time to disease progression was 5.7 weeks. Further enrollment was therefore discontinued. No significant or unexpected toxicities were observed with olaparib, with only a single case each of grade 3 anemia and grade 3 thrombocytopenia observed. This study is the first report of a prospective phase II trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a PARP inhibitor in patients with advanced Ewing sarcoma after failure of standard chemotherapy. Olaparib administration was safe and well tolerated when administered to this small heavily pre-treated cohort at the 400 mg BID dose, although the median duration of dosing was for only 5.7 weeks. No significant responses or durable disease control was seen, and the short average interval to disease progression underscores the aggressiveness of this disease. Other studies to combine cytotoxic chemotherapy with PARP inhibition in EWS are actively ongoing. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01583543.