[PMID: 19250647]
The role of Groucho/transducin-like Enhancer of split (Gro/TLE) family members as corepressors of transcription is well documented. TLX1 is a homeodomain transcription factor involved in splenogenesis and neuron formation, and its aberrant expression gives rise to T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We demonstrate by glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays, in vivo biotinylation tagging and confocal laser microscopy that TLX1 interacts with TLE1 via an Eh1-like motif. Paradoxically, we found that this motif is essential for optimal transcriptional activation of two TLX1 target genes, Aldh1a1 and Fhl1. Using a well characterized target of the Hairy/Enhancer of split 1 (HES1).TLE1 repressor complex, the ASCL1 gene, we show that TLX1 counteraction of ASCL1 repression by HES1 in SK-N-BE(2) neuroblastoma cells is associated with dismissal of TLE1 from the ASCL1 promoter and requires the Eh1-like motif for maximal effect. Collectively, these results indicate that TLX1-mediated target gene activation can occur in part via derepression strategies involving Gro/TLE corepressors.

[PMID: 18254933]
The Drosophila Groucho (Gro) protein was the founding member of the family of transcriptional co-repressor proteins that now includes the transducin-like enhancer of split (TLE) and Grorelated gene (Grg) proteins in vertebrates. Gro family proteins do not bind DNA directly, but are recruited by a diverse profile of transcription factors, including members of the Hes, Runx, Nkx, LEF1/Tcf, Pax, Six and c-Myc families. The primary structure of Gro proteins includes five identifiable regions, of which the most highly conserved are the amino-terminal glutamine-rich Q domain and the carboxy-terminal WD-repeat domain. The Q domain contains two coiled-coil motifs that facilitate oligomerization into tetramers and binding to some transcription factors. The WD domain folds to form a beta-propeller, which mediates protein-protein interactions. Many transcription factors interact with the WD domain via a short peptide motif that falls into either of two classes: WRPW and related tetrapeptides; and the 'eh1' motif (FxIxxIL). Gro family proteins are broadly expressed during development and in the adult. They have essential functions in many developmental pathways (including Notch and Wnt signaling) and are implicated in the pathogenesis of some cancers. The molecular mechanisms through which Gro proteins act to repress transcription are not yet well understood. It is becoming clear that Gro proteins have different modes of action in vivo dependent on biological context and these include direct and indirect modification of chromatin structure at target genes.

[PMID: 21666599]
The caudal homeobox (cdx) gene family is critical for specification of caudal body formation and erythropoiesis. In zebrafish, cdx4 expression is controlled by the Wnt pathway, but the molecular mechanism of this regulation is not fully understood. Here, we provide evidence that Tcf3 suppresses cdx4 expression through direct binding to multiple sites in the cdx4 gene regulatory region. Tcf3 requires corepressor molecules such as Groucho (Gro)/TLE and HDAC1 for activity. Using zebrafish embryos and cultured mammalian cells, we show that the transcription factor E4f1 derepresses cdx4 by dissociating corepressor proteins from Tcf3 without inhibiting its binding to cis-regulatory sites in the DNA. Further, the E3 ubiquitin ligase Lnx2b, acting as a scaffold protein irrespective of its enzymatic activity, counteracts the effects of E4f1. We propose that the modulation of Tcf3 repressor function by E4f1 assures precise and robust regulation of cdx4 expression in the caudal domain of the embryo.

[PMID: 22319573]
Groucho (Gro) is a Drosophila corepressor required by numerous DNA-binding repressors, many of which are distributed in gradients and provide positional information during development. Gro contains well-conserved domains at its N- and C-termini, and a poorly conserved central region that includes the GP, CcN, and SP domains. All lethal point mutations in gro map to the conserved regions, leading to speculation that the unconserved central domains are dispensable. However, our sequence analysis suggests that the central domains are disordered leading us to suspect that the lack of lethal mutations in this region reflects a lack of order rather than an absence of essential functions. In support of this conclusion, genomic rescue experiments with Gro deletion variants demonstrate that the GP and CcN domains are required for viability. Misexpression assays using these same deletion variants show that the SP domain prevents unrestrained and promiscuous repression by Gro, while the GP and CcN domains are indispensable for repression. Deletion of the GP domain leads to loss of nuclear import, while deletion of the CcN domain leads to complete loss of repression. Changes in Gro activity levels reset the threshold concentrations at which graded repressors silence target gene expression. We conclude that co-regulators such as Gro are not simply permissive components of the repression machinery, but cooperate with graded DNA-binding factors in setting borders of gene expression. We suspect that disorder in the Gro central domains may provide the flexibility that allows this region to mediate multiple interactions required for repression.

[PMID: 17624551]
The Groucho/Tle family of corepressor proteins has important roles in development and in adult tissue in both Protostomes and Deuterostomes. In Drosophila, a single member of this family has been identified. Unlike in Protostomes, most Deutrostomes contain more than two full-length Tle genes. In this study, I analyse the genomic organization and phylogenetic relationship between the long and short forms of the Groucho/Tle family members in Chordata. The genomic location and sequence similarities suggest that Aes/Grg5 and Tle6/Grg6 arose from duplication of the Tle2 gene; each evolved independently and acquired new functions as negative regulators of the other Tle proteins. Based on these data, a model for Groucho/Tle gene evolution is proposed.

[PMID: 16508633]
In this minireview, we briefly revisit the Drosophila Notch and epidermal growth factor receptor pathways, and relate to the relationship between them. We then mainly focus on the involvement of Groucho (Gro)/TLE, a global developmental corepressor, in these pathways. In particular, we discuss Gro/TLE's role at the junction between these two signal transduction cascades.

[PMID: 15861397]
The proteins termed TLE in humans, Grg in mice and Groucho in Drosophila constitute a family of transcriptional corepressors. In mammalians there are five different genes encoding an even larger number of proteins. Interactions between these TLE/Grg proteins and an array of transcription factors has been described. But is there any specificity? This review tries to make a case for a non-redundant function of individual TLE/Grg proteins. The specificity may be brought about by a tightly controlled temporo-spatial expression pattern, post-translational modifications, and subtle structural differences leading to distinct preferences for interacting transcription factors. A confirmation of this concept will ultimately need to come from genetic experiments.

[PMID: 17643306]
Groucho proteins are abundant and broadly expressed nuclear factors that lack intrinsic DNA-binding activity but can interact with a variety of DNA-binding proteins. The recruitment of Groucho to specific gene regulatory sequences results in transcriptional repression. In both invertebrates and vertebrates, Groucho family members act as important regulators of several signaling mechanisms, including the Notch, Wingless/Wnt and Dpp/BMP/TGF-beta signaling pathways. Recent studies of embryonic development in several species point to an important role for Groucho in the regulation of multiple patterning and differentiation events. Moreover, a deregulated expression of human Groucho family members is correlated with several neoplastic conditions. Here we focus on the functions of Groucho proteins during body patterning and their implication in tumorigenesis.

[PMID: 22305159]
Drosophila Groucho (Gro) is the founding member of a family of metazoan corepressors. Gro mediates repression through interactions with a myriad of DNA-binding repressor proteins to direct the silencing of genes involved in many developmental processes, including neurogenesis and patterning of the main body axis, as well as receptor tyrosine kinase/Ras/MAPK, Notch, Wingless (Wg)/Wnt, and Decapentaplegic (Dpp) signaling. Gro mediates repression by multiple molecular mechanisms, depending on the regulatory context. Because Gro is a broadly expressed nuclear factor, whereas its repressor partners display restricted temporal and spatial distribution, it was presumed that this corepressor played permissive rather than instructive roles in development. However, a wide range of studies demonstrates that this is not the case. Gro can sense and integrate many cellular inputs to modulate the expression of variety of genes, making it a versatile corepressor with crucial instructive roles in development and signaling.

[PMID: 21429299]
Ephrin signaling is involved in various morphogenetic events, such as axon guidance, hindbrain segmentation, and angiogenesis. We conducted a yeast two-hybrid screen using the intracellular domain (ICD) of EphrinB1 to gain biochemical insightinto the function of the EphrinB1 ICD. We identified the transcriptional co-repressor xTLE1/Groucho as an EphrinB1 interacting protein. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of Xenopus embryos confirmed the co-localization of EphrinB1 and a Xenopus counterpart to TLE1, xTLE4, during various stages of development. The EphrinB1/xTLE4 interaction was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Further characterization of the interaction revealed that the carboxy-terminal PDZ binding motif of EphrinB1 and the SP domain of xTLE4 are required for binding. Additionally, phosphorylation of EphrinB1 by a constitutively activated fibroblast growth factor receptor resulted in loss of the interaction, suggesting that the interaction is modulated by tyrosine phosphorylation of the EphrinB1 ICD.

[PMID: 19101520]
Groucho is a corepressor that forms a macromolecular complex for its corepressor activity, in which HDAC1 is an essential component for the modulation of chromatin structure and transcriptional repression of target genes. Here, we show that Groucho is covalently conjugated with small ubiquitin-related modifier-1 (SUMO-1) in vitro and in vivo. SUMO conjugations of Groucho occur at four different lysine residues. Substitutions of all these residues abolished sumoylation of Groucho and inhibited its corepressor activity. In addition, Groucho corepressor activity was reduced by inhibition of SUMO-1 conjugation via Ubc9 knockdown through expression of short-hairpin RNA against Ubc9. Furthermore, interactions between Groucho and HDAC1 are enhanced by sumoylation of Groucho, which is mediated by the SUMO-interaction motif of HDAC1. Taken together, these findings indicate that Groucho sumoylation increases its corepressor activity by enhancing the recruitment of HDAC1 to Groucho corepressor complex.

[PMID: 19956621]
Transcriptional co-repressors of the Groucho/transducin-like Enhancer of split (Gro/TLE) family regulate the expression of a variety of genes and are involved in numerous developmental processes in both invertebrate and vertebrate species. More specifically, Gro/TLE1 participates in mechanisms that inhibit/delay the differentiation of cerebral cortex neural progenitor cells into neurons during mammalian forebrain development. The anti-neurogenic function of Gro/TLE1 depends on the formation of protein complexes with specific DNA-binding transcription factors that engage Gro/TLE1 through WRP(W/Y) sequences. Interaction with those transcription partners results in Gro/TLE1 recruitment to selected DNA sites and causes increased Gro/TLE1 phosphorylation. The physiological significance of the latter event, termed "cofactor-activated phosphorylation," had not been determined. Therefore, this study aimed at clarifying the role of cofactor-activated phosphorylation in the anti-neurogenic function of Gro/TLE1. A combination of site-directed mutagenesis, mass spectrometry, biochemistry, primary cell culture, and immunocytochemical assays was utilized to characterize point mutations of Ser-286, a residue that is phosphorylated in vivo and is located within the serine/proline-rich (SP) domain of Gro/TLE1. Mutation of Ser-286 to alanine or glutamic acid does not perturb the interaction of Gro/TLE1 with DNA-binding partners, including the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hes1, a prototypical anti-neurogenic WRP(W/Y) motif protein. Ser-286 mutations do not prevent the recruitment of Gro/TLE1 to DNA, but they impair cofactor-activated phosphorylation and weaken the interaction of Gro/TLE1 with chromatin. These effects are correlated with an impairment of the anti-neurogenic activity of Gro/TLE1. Similar results were obtained when mutations of Ser-289 and Ser-298, which are also located within the SP domain of Gro/TLE1, were analyzed. Based on the positive correlation between Gro/TLE1 cofactor-activated phosphorylation and ability to inhibit cortical neuron differentiation, we propose that hyperphosphorylation induced by cofactor binding plays a positive role in the regulation of Gro/TLE1 anti-neurogenic activity.

[PMID: 18721877]
Groucho/TLE proteins are global corepressors that are recruited to target promoters by different families of DNA-binding repressors. As these corepressors are widely expressed, the long-standing view had been that Groucho/TLE-mediated repression is regulated solely by the spatial and temporal distribution of partner repressors. It has recently emerged, however, that Groucho/TLE repressor activity is itself regulated, in a signal induced, context-dependent manner. Here we review the essential roles played by Groucho/TLE factors in different cell-signalling processes that illustrate different modes for regulating Groucho/TLE-mediated repression: (i) via the expression of partner repressors; (ii) by competition with coactivators and (iii) through post-translational modifications of Groucho/TLE. We also discuss how the intrinsic properties of repressors can result in differential responses to Groucho/TLE regulation.

[PMID: 20405012]
Groucho (Gro) is a Drosophila melanogaster transcriptional corepressor that directly interacts with the histone deacetylase Rpd3. Although previous studies suggest that this interaction is required for repression of Gro-responsive reporters in cultured cells, the in vivo significance of this interaction and the mechanism by which it leads to repression remain largely unexplored. In this study, we show that Gro is partially dependent on Rpd3 for repression, supporting the idea that Rpd3-mediated repression is one mode of Gro-mediated repression. We demonstrate that Gro colocalizes with Rpd3 to the chromatin of a target gene and that this is accompanied by the deacetylation of specific lysines within the N-terminal tails of histones H3 and H4. Gro overexpression leads to wing patterning defects and ectopic repression in the wing disc of transcription directed by the vestigial quadrant enhancer. These effects are reversed by the histone deacetylase inhibitors TSA and HC-Toxin and by the reduction of Rpd3 gene dosage. Furthermore, repression of the vestigial quadrant enhancer is accompanied by a Gro-mediated increase in nucleosome density, an effect that is reversed by histone deacetylase inhibitors. We propose a model in which Gro-mediated histone deacetylation results in increased nucleosome density leading to transcriptional repression.

[PMID: 18034187]
The Groucho (Gro)/transducin-like enhancer of split family of transcriptional corepressors are implicated in many signalling pathways that are important in development and disease, including those mediated by Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog. Here, we describe a genetic screen in Drosophila that yielded 50 new gro alleles, including the first protein-null allele, and has two mutations in the conserved Q oligomerization domain that have been proposed to have an essential role in corepressor activity. One of these latter mutations, encoding an amino-terminal protein truncation that lacks part of the Q domain, abolishes oligomerization in vitro and renders the protein unstable in vivo. Nevertheless, the mutation is not a null: maternal mutant embryos have intermediate segmentation phenotypes and relatively normal terminal patterning suggesting that the mutant protein retains partial corepressor activity. Our results show that homo-oligomerization of Gro is not obligatory for its action in vivo, and that Gro represses transcription through more than one molecular mechanism.

[PMID: 24086079]
Transcriptional repressors function primarily by recruiting co-repressors, which are accessory proteins that antagonize transcription by modifying chromatin structure. Although a repressor could function by recruiting just a single co-repressor, many can recruit more than one, with Drosophila Brinker (Brk) recruiting the co-repressors CtBP and Groucho (Gro), in addition to possessing a third repression domain, 3R. Previous studies indicated that Gro is sufficient for Brk to repress targets in the wing, questioning why it should need to recruit CtBP, a short-range co-repressor, when Gro is known to be able to function over longer distances. To resolve this we have used genomic engineering to generate a series of brk mutants that are unable to recruit Gro, CtBP and/or have 3R deleted. These reveal that although the recruitment of Gro is necessary and can be sufficient for Brk to make an almost morphologically wild-type fly, it is insufficient during oogenesis, where Brk must utilize CtBP and 3R to pattern the egg shell appropriately. Gro insufficiency during oogenesis can be explained by its downregulation in Brk-expressing cells through phosphorylation downstream of EGFR signaling.