[PMID: 27618925]
In 2014 the Swedish government assigned to The Public Health Agency of Sweden to conduct studies to evaluate optimal use of existing antibiotic agents. The aim is to optimize drug use and dosing regimens to improve the clinical efficacy. The present study was selected following a structured prioritizing process by independent experts. This phase IV study is a randomized, open-label, multicenter study with non-inferiority design regarding the therapeutic use of penicillin V with two parallel groups. The overall aim is to study if the total exposure with penicillin V can be reduced from 1000 mg three times daily for 10 days to 800 mg four times daily for 5 days when treating Streptococcus pyogenes (Lancefield group A) pharyngotonsillitis. Patients will be recruited from 17 primary health care centers in Sweden. Adult men and women, youth and children ≥6 years of age who consult for sore throat and is judged to have a pharyngotonsillitis, with 3-4 Centor criteria and a positive rapid test for group A streptococci, will be included in the study. The primary outcome is clinical cure 5-7 days after discontinuation of antibiotic treatment. Follow-up controls will be done by telephone after 1 and 3 months. Throat symptoms, potential relapses and complications will be monitored, as well as adverse events. Patients (n = 432) will be included during 2 years. In the era of increasing antimicrobial resistance and the shortage of new antimicrobial agents it is necessary to revisit optimal usage of old antibiotics. Old antimicrobial drugs are often associated with inadequate knowledge on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and lack of optimized dosing regimens based on randomized controlled clinical trials. If a shorter and more potent treatment regimen is shown to be equivalent with the normal 10 day regimen this can imply great advantages for both patients (adherence, adverse events, resistance) and the community (resistance, drug costs). EudraCT number 2015-001752-30 . Protocol FoHM/Tonsillit2015 date 22 June 2015, version 2. Approved by MPA of Sweden 3 July 2015, Approved by Regional Ethical Review Board in Lund, 25 June 2015.

[PMID: 11719744]
We evaluate the test characteristics and test for spectrum bias of a rapid antigen test for group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) pharyngitis among adults. Medical record and laboratory results of consecutive adult patients receiving a rapid antigen test for GABHS in the emergency department or urgent care clinic of an urban teaching hospital between August 1999 and December 1999 were analyzed. Patients were stratified according to the number of clinical features present using the following modified Centor criteria: history of fever, absence of cough, presence of pharyngeal exudate, and cervical lymphadenopathy. The sensitivity of the rapid antigen test was defined as the number of patients with positive rapid antigen test results divided by the number of patients with either positive rapid antigen test results or negative rapid antigen test results and positive throat culture results. In the study sample of 498 patient visits, the prevalence of GABHS pharyngitis was 28% (95% confidence interval [CI] 24% to 32%). The prevalence of GABHS pharyngitis increased as modified Centor scores increased: 0 or 1=14%, 2=20%, 3=43%, and 4=52%. An increased number of modified Centor criteria (0 or 1, 2, 3, 4) was associated with increased rapid antigen test sensitivity (61%, 76%, 90%, and 97%, respectively) (Mantel-Haenszel trend test; P =.001). The sensitivity of the rapid antigen test for GABHS is not a fixed value but varies with the spectrum of disease. Among adults with 3 or 4 clinical criteria for GABHS pharyngitis, further study may reveal that culture confirmation of negative rapid antigen test results are not necessary.

[PMID: 26934845]
History, clinical examination and throat culture may be inadequate to rule in or out the presence of group A streptococci (GAS) infection in patients with sore throat in a remote location. We correlated the diagnostic accuracy for guiding antibiotic prescription of clinical decision and physiological scoring systems to a rapid diagnostic point of care (POC) test result in paediatric patients presenting with sore throat. Prospective diagnostic accuracy study conducted between 30 June 2014 and 27 February 2015 in a remote Australian ED using a convenience sample. Among paediatric patients presenting with sore throat, the Centor criteria and clinical decision were documented. Simultaneously, patients without sore throat or respiratory tract infection were tested to determine the number of carriers. A throat swab on all patients was tested using a POC test (Alere TestPack +Plus Strep A with on board control), considered as reference standard to detect GAS infection. A total of 101 patients with sore throat were tested with 26 (25.7%) positive for GAS. One hundred and forty-seven patients without sore throat were tested with one positive POC test result (specificity 99%; 95% CI 96-100). Positive predictive value for clinician decision-making for a positive GAS swab (bacterial infection) was 29% (95% CI 17-43), negative predictive value 78% (95% CI 63-88). Area under ROC for the Centor score was 0.70 (95% CI 0.58-0.81). Clinician judgement and Centor score are inadequate tools for clinical decision-making for children presenting with sore throat. Adjunctive POC testing provides sufficient accuracy to guide antibiotic prescription on first presentation.

[PMID: 23613571]
Centor criteria (fever >38.5°C, swollen, tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, tonsillar exudate and absence of cough) are an algorithm to assess the probability of group A β haemolytic Streptococcus (GABHS) as the origin of sore throat, developed for adults. We wanted to evaluate the correlation between Centor criteria and presence of GABHS in children with sore throat admitted to our paediatric emergency department (PED). Retrospective cohort study. The emergency department of a large tertiary university hospital in Brussels, with over 20 000 yearly visits for children below age 16. All medical records (from 2008 to 2010) of children between ages 2 and 16, who were diagnosed with pharyngitis, tonsillitis or sore throat and having a throat swab culture for GABHS. Children with underlying chronic respiratory, cardiac, haematological or immunological diseases and children who had already received antibiotics (AB) prior to the PED consult were excluded. Only records with a full disease history were selected. Out of a total 2118 visits for sore throats, 441 met our criteria. The children were divided into two age groups, 2-5 and 5-16 years. The prevalence of GABHS was higher in the older children compared to the preschoolers (38.7 vs 27.6; p=0.01), and the overall prevalence was 32%. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of GABHS for all different Centor scores within an age group. Likelihood ratios (LR) demonstrate that none of the individual symptoms or a Centor score of ≥3 seems to be effective in ruling in or ruling out GABHS. Pooled LR (CI) for Centor ≥3 was 0.67 (CI 0.50 to 0.90) for the preschoolers and 1.37 (CI 1.04 to 1.79) for the older children. Our results confirm the ineffectiveness of Centor criteria as a predicting factor for finding GABHS in a throat swab culture in children.

[PMID: 19054454]
To determine the validity of the rapid antigen test (RAT) OSOM StrepA Genzyme for the diagnosis of acute pharyngitis caused by group A beta-haemolytic strep (GABHS). Diagnostic techniques survey. Urban primary care centre, Spain. All patients over 14 years old seen in 6 surgeries with sore throat and 2 or more Centor criteria: pharyngotonsillar exudate, tender laterocervical nodes, absence of coughing, and/or history or presence of fever. Pharyngeal swabs were taken from all the patients, one for RAT and another to send for culture in the microbiology department. A total of 182 patients were evaluable, with a mean age of 30.6 (12.1) years of which 116 were women (63.7%); 63 patients had 2 Centor criteria; 83 had 3 and 36, the 4 criteria. The culture was positive in 102 patients (56%), with GABHS showing infection in forty (22%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 21.2-22.8). Group C Streptococcus was isolated in 26 patients (14.3%). GABHS was higher among patients with four Centor criteria (38.9% vs 25.3% observed among those with 3 criteria and 7.9% with 2 criteria; P<.001). Sensitivity of RAT was 95%, with a specificity of 93%, a positive predictive value of 79.2% and a negative predictive value of 98.5%. These results show the usefulness of RAT for diagnosing streptococcal pharyngitis. Its use should be spread to all primary care practices.

[PMID: 26141740]
Excessive antibiotics use increases the risk of resistance. Previous studies have shown that the Centor score combined with Rapid Antigen Detection Test (RADT) for Group A Streptococci can reduce unnecessary antibiotic prescribing in patients with sore throat. According to the former Swedish guidelines RADT was recommended with 2-4 Centor criteria present and antibiotics were recommended if the test was positive. C- reactive protein (CRP) was not recommended for sore throats. Inappropriate use of RADT and CRP has been reported in several studies. From a larger project 16 general practitioners (GPs) who stated management of sore throats not according to the guidelines were identified. Half-hour long semi-structured interviews were conducted. The topics were the management of sore throats and the use of near-patient tests. Qualitative content analysis was used. The use of the near-patient test interplayed with the clinical assessment and the perception that all infections caused by bacteria should be treated with antibiotics. The GPs expressed a belief that the clinical picture was sufficient for diagnosis in typical cases. RADT was not believed to be relevant since it detects only one bacterium, while CRP was considered as a reliable numerical measure of bacterial infection. Inappropriate use of near-patient test can partly be understood as remnants of outdated knowledge. When new guidelines are introduced the differences between them and the former need to be discussed more explicitly.

[PMID: 27358410]
To determine whether antibiotics are prescribed appropriately for acute tonsillitis in an emergency department (ED). Cross-sectional observational study in large district general hospital in London. Patients diagnosed and coded with 'acute tonsillitis' in the ED over a 3-month period in 2015. Medical records were reviewed for Centor criteria, which is a clinical scoring system to guide antibiotic prescribing in UK general practice. Drug charts were reviewed for the specific antibiotic(s) prescribed, and throat swab (TS) cultures were recorded. 273/389 patients with tonsillitis were analysed-186 children, 87 adults. Exclusions were missing patient records (86), patients had/awaiting tonsillectomy (22), receiving antibiotics (6) and immunocompromised (2). Centor score (CS) was not recorded for any patient. Based on derived CS from documented signs/symptoms, antibiotics were prescribed inappropriately to 196/273 patients (80%; 95% CI 74% to 85%) including broad-spectrum antibiotics to 25%. These included co-amoxiclav (18%), amoxicillin (6%), azithromycin (0.5%) and ceftriaxone (0.5%). TSs were taken in 66/273(24%) patients; 10/66 were positive for group A streptococcus (GAS). However, 48/56 GAS negative patients were prescribed antibiotics. CS was not being used in the ED to guide antibiotic prescribing for acute tonsillitis. Antibiotic prescribing was based on clinical judgement. Based on derived CS (<3), 80% of patients were inappropriately prescribed antibiotics, particularly broad-spectrum antibiotics. Further studies need to assess use of CS to guide antibiotic prescription in ED. TSs were commonly performed in the ED but did not either improve diagnosis or guide antibiotic prescription.

[PMID: 27573720]
Background Inappropriate use of antibiotic treatment for pharyngitis by community pharmacists is prevalent in developing countries. Little is known about how the pharmacists identify patients with bacterial pharyngitis. Objective To ascertain the appropriateness of diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis among Thai community pharmacists according to the Centor criteria and to identify factors related to antibiotic dispensing. Setting 1040 Thai community pharmacists. Method A cross-sectional survey of community pharmacists was conducted in November 2012 to March 2013. The self-administered questionnaires were mailed to 57 % of community pharmacists in the south of Thailand (n = 1040). The survey included questions on diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis, knowledge on pharyngitis, and attitudes and control beliefs regarding antibiotic dispensing. Main outcome measure The appropriateness of diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis according to the original and modified Centor criteria and determinants of antibiotic dispensing including demographic characteristics of pharmacists, knowledge on pharyngitis, and attitudes and control beliefs on antibiotic dispensing. Results Approximately 68 % completed the questionnaires (n = 703). Compared to the pharmacists who reported not dispensing antibiotics in the hypothetical case with common cold, those reported dispensing antibiotics were more likely to consider the following conditions-presence of cough, mild sore throat and patients with age >60 years as cues for diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis (p < 0.05). The use of fewer scores of the clinical prediction rules for diagnosis was observed in antibiotic dispensers, compared to who did not do so (p < 0.005). Antibiotic dispensing was positively associated with period of dispensing experience (>5 years) [odds ratio (OR) 1.52; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.03-2.23], belief that antibiotics could shorten duration of pharyngitis (OR 1.48; 95 % CI 1.11-1.99), belief that antibiotics could prevent the complications (OR 1.44; 95 % CI 1.09-1.91) and belief that dispensing antibiotics could satisfy the patients (OR 1.31; 95 % CI 1.01-1.71). Nonetheless, antibiotic dispensing was negatively associated with knowledge about pharyngitis (OR 0.83; 95 % CI 0.75-0.93). Conclusion Pharmacists who are knowledgeable on the Centor criteria are more likely to appropriately diagnose streptococcal pharyngitis and less likely to dispense antibiotics in such case.

[PMID: 29045629]
Both non-Group A streptococcal (non-GAS) pharyngitis and Group A streptococcal (GAS) pharyngitis are commonly found in patients with sore throat. It is not known whether or not they present with similar signs and symptoms compared to patients with non-streptococcal pharyngitis. MEDLINE was searched for prospective studies that reported throat culture for both GAS and non-GAS as a reference standard, and reported at least one sign, symptom, or the Centor score. Summary estimates of sensitivity, specificity, likelihood ratios (LR+ and LR-), and diagnostic odds ratios (DOR) were calculated using a bivariate random effects model. Summary receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were created for key signs and symptoms. Eight studies met our inclusion criteria. Tonsillar exudate had the highest LR+ for both GAS and non-GAS pharyngitis (1.53 versus 1.71). The confidence intervals of sensitivity, LR+, LR-, and DOR for all signs, symptoms, and the Centor score between two groups overlapped, with the relative difference between sensitivities within 15% for arthralgia or myalgia, fever, injected throat, tonsillar enlargement, and tonsillar exudate. Larger differences in sensitivities were observed for sore throat, cervical adenopathy, and lack of a cough, although the difference for lack of a cough largely due to a single outlier. Signs and symptoms of patients with GAS and non-GAS pharyngitis are generally similar. No signs or symptoms clearly distinguish GAS from non-GAS infection. Further work is needed to determine whether Group C streptococcus is a pathogen that should be treated.

[PMID: 27493985]
Objective. A study to determine if addition of palatal petechiae to Centor criteria adds more value for clinical diagnosis of acute strep pharyngitis in children. Hypothesis. In children, Centor Criteria does not cover all the symptoms and signs of acute strep pharyngitis. We hypothesize that addition of palatal petechiae to Centor Criteria will increase the possibility of clinical diagnosis of group A streptococcal pharyngitis in children. Methods. One hundred patients with a complaint of sore throat were enrolled in the study. All the patients were examined clinically using the Centor Criteria. They were also examined for other signs and symptoms like petechial lesions over the palate, abdominal pain, and skin rash. All the patients were given rapid strep tests, and throat cultures were sent. No antibiotics were given until culture results were obtained. Results. The sample size was 100 patients. All 100 had fever, sore throat, and erythema of tonsils. Twenty of the 100 patients had tonsillar exudates, 85/100 had tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, and 86/100 had no cough. In total, 9 out of the 100 patients had positive throat cultures. We observed that petechiae over the palate, a very significant sign, is not included in the Centor Criteria. Palatal petechiae were present in 8 out of the 100 patients. Six out of these 8 with palatal petechiae had positive throat culture for strep (75%). Only 7 out of 20 with exudates had positive strep culture. Sixteen out of the 100 patients had rapid strep test positive. Those 84/100 who had negative rapid strep also had negative throat culture. Statistics. We used Fisher's exact test, comparing throat culture positive and negative versus presence of exudates and palatal hemorrhages with positive and negative throat cultures and the resultant P value <.0001. Conclusion. Our study concludes that addition of petechiae over the palate to Centor Criteria will increase the possibility of diagnosing acute group A streptococcal pharyngitis in children.

[PMID: 23783139]
Diagnosing GABHS (Group A-beta Hemolytic Streptococcus) tonsillopharyngitis by clinical scoring is a recommended approach in developed countries, but there is still much controversy for low resource settings. We aimed to assess the impact of Centor criteria with the support of practical laboratory tests. We prospectively included patients complaining sore throat (N = 282). We evaluated them in terms of Centor scoring and performed white blood cell count (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), rapid antigen detecting test, and throat culture. In GABHS cases (N = 32, 11·3%), two of the criteria were observed to be positive in more than half of the cases (N = 19, 59·3%), while 13 (40·7%) cases met three/four criteria. The specificity of having two criteria was found to be 65·5% and increased to 91·5% after including CRP and WBC. Centor criteria could be safely used to reduce unnecessary antibiotic usage for tonsillopharyngitis in developing countries.

[PMID: 28469911]
Acute sore throat is a common presentation in primary care settings. We aimed to improve our compliance with national antibiotic guidelines for sore throat symptoms to 90% in 3 months' time period. The national guidelines are based on Centor criteria. A retrospective audit of 102 patient records with sore throat symptoms presenting between 1 January to 30 December 2015 showed that over 50% were given antibiotics. Those who were prescribed antibiotics, 27% did not meet NICE criteria and 85% of patients were given immediate antibiotic prescription. Centor criteria was documented in just 2% of cases. Compliance with correct antibiotic course length was 15%. Antibiotic choice and dose was correct in 94% and 92% of cases respectively. Antibiotic frequency was correctly prescribed in 100% of patients. We introduced interventions that included oral and poster presentations to multidisciplinary team, dissemination of guidelines through internal e-mail and systemic changes to GP electronic patient record system EMIS. This involved creating an automated sore throat template and information page. On re-auditing of 71 patients, after two PDSA cycles, compliance with NICE criteria was 87% with a significant reduction in immediate prescribing (66%). Centor criteria documentation was 42%. Correct antibiotic course length was prescribed in over 30% of cases. Other antibiotic regimen parameters (choice, dose and frequency) were correct in 100% of cases. The initial results demonstrated that significant changes were needed. In particular, reducing the amount of antibiotics prescribed by increasing compliance with NICE criteria and ensuring all parameters of antibiotic prescription were correct. We showed that significant sustainable improvement is achievable through carefully devised automated systemic changes that provides critical information in readily accessible format, and does not solely rely on prescribers' knowledge and initiative. The outcome of these interventions are a decrease in immediate antibiotic prescription, significant increase in Centor criteria documentation and an increase in compliance with the correct course length of antibiotics. All these measures would contribute to reduction in antimicrobial resistance and improvement in patient care in the community. Future work must focus on improving compliance with correct antibiotic course length.

[PMID: 15231926]
Rapid antigen detection testing (RADT) is often performed for diagnosis of group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) pharyngitis among children. Among adults, the sensitivity of this test varies on the basis of disease severity (spectrum bias). A similar phenomenon may occur when this test is used in a pediatric population, which may affect the need for culture confirmation of all negative RADT results. To assess the performance of a clinical scoring system and to determine whether RADT spectrum bias is present among children who are evaluated for GABHS pharyngitis. Laboratory and clinical records for a consecutive series of pediatric patients who underwent RADT at the Marshfield Clinic between January 2002 and March 2002 were reviewed retrospectively. Patients were stratified according to the number of clinical features present by using modified Centor criteria, ie, history of fever, absence of cough, presence of pharyngeal exudates, and cervical lymphadenopathy. The sensitivity of the RADT was defined as the number of patients with positive RADT results divided by the number of patients with either positive RADT results or negative RADT results but positive throat culture results. RADT results were positive for 117 of 561 children (21%), and culture results were positive for 35 of 444 children (8%) with negative RADT results. The overall prevalence of GABHS pharyngitis was 27% (95% confidence interval: 23-31%). The prevalence of GABHS pharyngitis was 18% among patients with 0 Centor criteria, 16% among those with 1 criterion, 32% among those with 2 criteria, and 50% among those with 3 or 4 criteria. Spectrum bias was present, inasmuch as RADT sensitivity increased with Centor scores, ie, 47% sensitivity among children with 0 Centor criteria, 65% among those with 1 criterion, 82% among those with 2 criteria, and 90% among those with 3 or 4 criteria. The sensitivity of RADT for GABHS pharyngitis is not a fixed value but varies with the severity of disease. However, even among pediatric patients with > or =3 Centor criteria for GABHS pharyngitis, the sensitivity of RADT is still too low to support the use of RADT without culture confirmation of negative results.

[PMID: 28991775]
The increased use of antibiotics for acute tonsillitis is a public health problem. 80% of the antibiotic prescriptions for acute tonsillitis are done in the Primary Care practice (PCP). The inappropriate use of the antibiotic causes bacterial resistance and treatment failure. Only patients with acute tonsillitis caused by Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus (GAS) have benefit of the antibiotic treatment, which is a predict cause in 5-20%. In order to assess the antibiotic prescribing for acute tonsillitis by the doctors in the PCP in Macedonia we use the data from the national project about antibiotic prescribing for acute respiratory tract infections which was conducted in November 2014 during a period of 4 weeks as part of the E-quality program sponsored by the IPCRG. 86 general practitioners from Macedonia have participated. The group of 1768 patients, from 4 months to 88 years of age, with diagnosis of acute tonsillitis was analyzed. The antibiotic prescriptions according to the Centor score criteria were compared to the Cochran's guidelines which are translated and recommended as national guidelines. 88.8% of the patients with acute tonsillitis were treated with antibiotics, of which 52.9% with Centor score 0 to 2 were treated inappropriate. The diagnosis is mostly made based on the clinical picture and the symptoms. Only (23.6%) of the patients were treated with antibiotics (Penicillin V and cephalexin) according to the guidelines. We concluded that there is a low adherence to the national guidelines. The clinical assessment is not accurate in determining the etiology. Also, there is a high nonadherence in prescribing the first choice of antibiotics. We emphasize the need to change the general practitioners' prescription behavior according to the guidelines.

[PMID: 27439523]
The UK 5 year antimicrobial resistance strategy recognizes the role of point-of-care diagnostics to identify where antimicrobials are required, as well as to assess the appropriateness of the diagnosis and treatment. A sore throat test-and-treat service was introduced in 35 community pharmacies across two localities in England during 2014-15. Trained pharmacy staff assessed patients presenting with a sore throat using the Centor scoring system and patients meeting three or all four of the criteria were offered a throat swab test for Streptococcus pyogenes, Lancefield group A streptococci. Patients with a positive throat swab test were offered antibiotic treatment. Following screening by pharmacy staff, 149/367 (40.6%) patients were eligible for throat swab testing. Of these, only 36/149 (24.2%) were positive for group A streptococci. Antibiotics were supplied to 9.8% (n = 36/367) of all patients accessing the service. Just under half of patients that were not showing signs of a bacterial infection (60/123, 48.8%) would have gone to their general practitioner if the service had not been available. This study has shown that it is feasible to deliver a community-pharmacy-based screening and treatment service using point-of-care testing. This type of service has the potential to support the antimicrobial resistance agenda by reducing unnecessary antibiotic use and inappropriate antibiotic consumption.

[PMID: 22432746]
The European Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases established the Sore Throat Guideline Group to write an updated guideline to diagnose and treat patients with acute sore throat. In diagnosis, Centor clinical scoring system or rapid antigen test can be helpful in targeting antibiotic use. The Centor scoring system can help to identify those patients who have higher likelihood of group A streptococcal infection. In patients with high likelihood of streptococcal infections (e.g. 3-4 Centor criteria) physicians can consider the use of rapid antigen test (RAT). If RAT is performed, throat culture is not necessary after a negative RAT for the diagnosis of group A streptococci. To treat sore throat, either ibuprofen or paracetamol are recommended for relief of acute sore throat symptoms. Zinc gluconate is not recommended to be used in sore throat. There is inconsistent evidence of herbal treatments and acupuncture as treatments for sore throat. Antibiotics should not be used in patients with less severe presentation of sore throat, e.g. 0-2 Centor criteria to relieve symptoms. Modest benefits of antibiotics, which have been observed in patients with 3-4 Centor criteria, have to be weighed against side effects, the effect of antibiotics on microbiota, increased antibacterial resistance, medicalisation and costs. The prevention of suppurative complications is not a specific indication for antibiotic therapy in sore throat. If antibiotics are indicated, penicillin V, twice or three times daily for 10 days is recommended. At the present, there is no evidence enough that indicates shorter treatment length.