[PMID: 18623076]
The human mitochondrial genome consists of a multicopy, circular dsDNA molecule of 16,569 base pairs. It encodes for 13 proteins, two ribosomal genes, and 22 tRNAs that are essential in the generation of cellular ATP by oxidative phosphorylation in eukaryotic cells. Germline mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are an important cause of maternally inherited diseases, while somatic mtDNA mutations may play important roles in aging and cancer. mtDNA polymorphisms are also widely used in population and forensic genetics. Therefore, methods that allow the rapid, inexpensive and accurate sequencing of mtDNA are of great interest. One such method is the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mitochondrial Resequencing Array 2.0 (MitoChip v.2.0) (Santa Clara, CA). A direct comparison of 93 worldwide mitochondrial genomes sequenced by both the MitoChip and dideoxy terminator sequencing revealed an average call rate of 99.48% and an accuracy of > or =99.98% for the MitoChip. The good performance was achieved by using in-house software for the automated analysis of additional probes on the array that cover the most common haplotypes in the hypervariable regions (HVR). Failure to call a base was associated mostly with the presence of either a run of > or =4 C bases or a sequence variant within 12 bases up- or downstream of that base. A major drawback of the MitoChip is its inability to detect insertions/deletions and its low sensitivity and specificity in the detection of heteroplasmy. However, the vast majority of haplogroup defining polymorphism in the mtDNA phylogeny could be called unambiguously and more rapidly than with conventional sequencing.

[PMID: 29121011]
Mitochondria are essential cytoplasmic organelles that generate energy (ATP) by oxidative phosphorylation and mediate key cellular processes such as apoptosis. They are maternally inherited and in humans contain a 16,569-base-pair circular genome (mtDNA) encoding 37 genes required for oxidative phosphorylation. Mutations in mtDNA cause a range of pathologies, commonly affecting energy-demanding tissues such as muscle and brain. Because mitochondrial diseases are incurable, attention has focused on limiting the inheritance of pathogenic mtDNA by mitochondrial replacement therapy (MRT). MRT aims to avoid pathogenic mtDNA transmission between generations by maternal spindle transfer, pronuclear transfer or polar body transfer: all involve the transfer of nuclear DNA from an egg or zygote containing defective mitochondria to a corresponding egg or zygote with normal mitochondria. Here we review recent developments in animal and human models of MRT and the underlying biology. These have led to potential clinical applications; we identify challenges to their technical refinement.

[PMID: 19591276]
In humans, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a 16,569-bp double-stranded circular molecule, encoding 37 genes, and is exclusively transmitted from the mother. According to the recent findings from many studies of mitochondrial diseases caused by nuclear gene mutations, the accumulation of somatic mtDNA mutations in tissues has been expected to contribute toward age-associated mitochondrial dysfunction and a life span.

[PMID: 27814641]
The small (16,569 base pair) human mitochondrial genome plays a significant role in cell metabolism and homeostasis. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) contributes to the generation of complexes which are essential to oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). As such, mtDNA is directly integrated into mitochondrial biogenesis and signaling and regulates mitochondrial metabolism in concert with nuclear-encoded mitochondrial factors. Mitochondria are a highly dynamic, pleiomorphic network that undergoes fission and fusion events. Within this network, mtDNAs are packaged into structures called nucleoids which are actively distributed in discrete foci within the network. This sensitive organelle is frequently disrupted by insults such as oxidants and inflammatory cytokines, and undergoes genomic damage with double- and single-strand breaks that impair its function. Collectively, mtDNA is emerging as a highly sensitive indicator of cellular stress, which is directly integrated into the mitochondrial network as a contributor of a wide range of critical signaling pathways.

[PMID: 1528004]
It is now clear that molecular defects in human mitochondrial DNA play a significant role in human disease. Mitochondrial DNA mutations range from single base changes in the 16.5 kilobase-pair genome up to large deletions and rearrangements. Independently of the actual cause of a given mutation, it is possible to predict at least some of the consequences of changes in mitochondrial DNA sequence. This paper reviews our overall understanding of the mode and mechanism of mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription and how this relates to mitochondrial gene expression. This provides a background to anticipate the nature and extent of mitochondrial DNA sequence changes that might be of physiological consequence.

[PMID: 8884568]
Molecular changes in human mitochondrial DNA play a significant role in causing certain human diseases. Mitochondrial DNA mutations range from single base pair changes in the 16.5 kilobase pair genome up to large deletions and rearrangements. This report summarizes the current overall understanding of the mode and mechanism of mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription, and how this relates to mitochondrial gene expression, which is essential for cellular energy production and organelle biogenesis. Special attention is given to recent findings that bear on early steps in the process of transcription and, in turn, the consequences for initiating DNA replication.

[PMID: 16406745]
Denaturing high pressure liquid chromatography (dHPLC) is an efficient method for discovery of unknown mutations by heteroduplex analysis of PCR fragments. For comprehensive mutation scanning of the whole 16.569 bp human mitochondrial genome, we developed a set of 67 primer pairs defining overlapping PCR fragments that are well suited for heteroduplex analysis. The aim of our optimization efforts was to ensure that point mutations are detectable at every nucleotide position of each amplicon. Some GC-rich regions of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) were found to have unfavourable melting profiles in all possible amplicons, therefore requiring GC-clamps at the end of one or both oligonucleotide PCR primers. Following detection of a heteroduplex pattern by dHPLC, our primers can also be employed for DNA sequencing to identify the underlying mutation. In case of heteroplasmic mutations with a low proportion of mutant mtDNA, a fragment collector is useful to recover the heteroduplex peak, which contains mutant and wildtype DNA molecules in a 1:1 ratio.

[PMID: 24780559]
Human mitochondria harbor an essential, high copy number, 16,569 base pair, circular DNA genome that encodes 13 gene products required for electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation. Mutation of this genome can compromise cellular respiration, ultimately resulting in a variety of progressive metabolic diseases collectively known as 'mitochondrial diseases'. Mutagenesis of mtDNA and the persistence of mtDNA mutations in cells and tissues is a complex topic, involving the interplay of DNA replication, DNA damage and repair, purifying selection, organelle dynamics, mitophagy, and aging. We briefly review these general elements that affect maintenance of mtDNA, and we focus on nuclear genes encoding the mtDNA replication machinery that can perturb the genetic integrity of the mitochondrial genome.

[PMID: 10733641]
In addition to the 3 billion base pair nuclear genome, each human cell contains thousands of copies of a small, 16.5 kb circular molecule of double stranded DNA: mitochondria have their own DNA (mtDNA) which generally accounts for only 1% of the total cellular nucleic acid content. Therefore why should anyone, particularly in the field of dermatology, have an interest in this cytoplasmic organelle and its DNA? This review will address this question; there are three principle reasons: (i) mitochondria have a crucial role both in energy production and the viability of the cell and recently mitochondria have been implicated in programmed cell death (apoptosis). Although much smaller than the nuclear genome, mtDNA is equally important. MtDNA defects and the resulting mitochondrial dysfunction is an important contributor to human degenerative diseases, ageing and cancer; (ii) mtDNA is a significant target of ultraviolet radiation and current work shows that it may be useful as a candidate biomarker of cumulative exposure in skin; and (iii) there is a broad spectrum of skin manifestations that are signs of mitochondrial disorders; in addition, the frequency of skin findings in these syndromes is probably under-reported.

[PMID: 2517473]
The 16569 base pairs of the mitochondrial DNA encode with a specific genetic code 13 proteins involved in the respiratory chain complex formation. Nuclear gene products also contribute to the formation of these complexes. In the first point, the organization and expression of the mtDNA are described with the main characteristics of the enzymatic complexes as well as nuclear gene expression. New information concerned with mitochondrial DNA deletions and mutations are described particularly with respect to Kearns-Sayre Syndrome.

[PMID: 22142616]
Eukaryotic cells are characterized by their content of intracellular membrane-bound organelles, including mitochondria as well as nuclei. These two DNA-containing compartments employ two distinct strategies for storage and readout of genetic information. The diploid nuclei of human cells contain about 6 billion base pairs encoding about 25,000 protein-encoding genes, averaging 120 kB/gene, packaged in chromatin arranged as a regular nucleosomal array. In contrast, human cells contain hundreds to thousands of copies of a ca.16 kB mtDNA genome tightly packed with 13 protein-coding genes along with rRNA and tRNA genes required for their expression. The mtDNAs are dispersed throughout the mitochondrial network as histone-free nucleoids containing single copies or small clusters of genomes. This review will summarize recent advances in understanding the microscopic structure and molecular composition of mtDNA nucleoids in higher eukaryotes. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial Gene Expression.

[PMID: 28756246]
There are approximately 1500 proteins that are needed for mitochondrial structure and function, most of which are encoded in the nuclear genome (Calvo et al., 2006). Each mitochondrion has its own genome (mtDNA), which in humans encodes 13 polypeptides, 22 tRNAs and 2 rRNAs required for oxidative phosphorylation. The mitochondrial genome of humans and most vertebrates is approximately 16.5kbp, double-stranded, circular, with few non-coding bases. Thus, maintaining mtDNA stability, that is, the ability of the cell to maintain adequate levels of mtDNA template for oxidative phosphorylation is essential and can be impacted by the level of mtDNA mutation currently within the cell or mitochondrion, but also from errors made during normal mtDNA replication, defects in mitochondrial quality control mechanisms, and exacerbated by exposures to exogenous and/or endogenous genotoxic agents. In this review, we expand on the origins and consequences of mtDNA instability, the current state of research regarding the mechanisms by which mtDNA instability can be overcome by cellular and chemical interventions, and the future of research and treatments for mtDNA instability.

[PMID: 17827523]
Somatic mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are increasingly being recognized in many human cancers, but automated sequencing of 16.5 kb of DNA poses an onerous task. We have recently described an oligonucleotide microarray (MitoChip) for rapid and accurate sequencing of the entire mitochondrial genome (Zhou et al., J Mol Diagnostics, 8: 9_14, 2006), greatly facilitating the analysis of mtDNA mutations in cancer. In this report, we perform a comprehensive cataloging of somatic mutations in the mitochondrial genome of human pancreatic cancers using our novel array-based approach. MitoChip analysis was performed on DNA isolated from 15 histologically confirmed resection specimens of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. In all cases, matched nonneoplastic pancreatic tissue was obtained as germline control for mtDNA sequence. DNA was extracted from snap-frozen cryostat-embedded specimens and hybridized to the sequencing microarray after appropriate polymerase chain reaction amplification and labeling steps. The vast majority of somatic mutational analyses of mtDNA in human cancers utilize lymphocyte DNA as germline control, without excluding the potential for organ-specific polymorphisms. Therefore, we also examined a series of 15 paired samples of DNA obtained from nonneoplastic pancreata and corresponding EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines to determine whether lymphocyte DNA provides an accurate surrogate for the mtDNA sequence of pancreatic tissue. We sequenced 497,070 base pairs of mtDNA in the 15 matched samples of pancreatic cancer and nonneoplastic pancreatic tissue, and 467,269 base pairs (94.0%) were assigned by the automated genotyping software. All 15 pancreatic cancers demonstrated at least one somatic mtDNA mutation compared to the control germline DNA with a range of 1-14 alterations. Of the 71 somatic mutations observed in our series, 18 were nonsynonymous coding region alterations (i.e., resulting in an amino acid change), 22 were synonymous coding region alterations, and 31 involved noncoding mtDNA segments (including ribosomal and transfer RNAs). Overall, somatic mutations in the coding region most commonly involved the ND4, COI, and CYTB genes; of note, an A-G transition at nucleotide position 841 in the 12sRNA was observed in three independent samples. In the paired analysis of nonneoplastic pancreata and lymphoblastoid cell line DNA, 14 nucleotide discrepancies were observed out of 226,876 nucleotide sequences (a concordance rate of 99.99%), with 9 samples demonstrating a perfect match across all bases assigned. Our findings confirm that somatic mtDNA mutations are common in pancreatic cancers, and therefore, have the potential to be a clinically useful biomarker for early detection. Further, our studies confirm that lymphocyte DNA is an excellent, albeit not perfect, surrogate for nonneoplastic pancreatic tissues in terms of being utilized as a germline control. Finally, our report confirms the utility of a high-throughput array-based platform for mtDNA mutational analyses of human cancers.

[PMID: 18638794]
Human mitochondrial DNA, the 25th chromosome, is a 16 569 base pair long circular molecule, that encoders a variety of genes for the translational machinery of the mitochondrion, as well as 13 structural proteins, that are all subunits of the respiratory chain (RC). A variety of alterations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are now functionally and genetically linked to human disease, including encephalomyopathies, Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, some neurogenerative diseases and even ageing. The mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are a clinically, biochemically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders. Alterations of mtDNA include point mutations, encephalomyopathies, as well as in the other human diseases, are reviewd.

[PMID: 22120174]
Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a circular double-stranded DNA genome of ~16.5 kilobase pairs (kb) that encodes 13 catalytic proteins of the ATP-producing oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS), and the rRNAs and tRNAs required for the translation of the mtDNA transcripts. All the components needed for transcription and replication of the mtDNA are, therefore, encoded in the nuclear genome, as are the remaining components of the OXPHOS system and the mitochondrial translation machinery. Regulation of mtDNA gene expression is very important for modulating the OXPHOS capacity in response to metabolic requirements and in pathological processes. The combination of in vitro and in vivo studies has allowed the identification of the core machinery required for basal mtDNA transcription in mammals and a few proteins that regulate mtDNA transcription. Specifically, the generation of knockout mouse strains in the last several years, has been key to understanding the basis of mtDNA transcription in vivo. However, it is well accepted that many components of the transcription machinery are still unknown and little is known about mtDNA gene expression regulation under different metabolic requirements or disease processes. In this review we will focus on how the creation of knockout mouse models and the study of their phenotypes have contributed to the understanding of mitochondrial transcription in mammals. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial Gene Expression.

[PMID: 28551783]
Mitochondria individually encapsulate their own genome, unlike other cellular organelles. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a circular, double-stranded, 16,569-base paired DNA containing 37 genes: 13 proteins of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, two ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs; 12S and 16S), and 22 transfer RNAs (tRNAs). The mtDNA is more vulnerable to oxidative modifications compared to nuclear DNA because of its proximity to ROS-producing sites, limited presence of DNA damage repair systems, and continuous replication in the cell. mtDNA mutations can be inherited or sporadic. Simple mtDNA mutations are point mutations, which are frequently found in mitochondrial tRNA loci, causing mischarging of mitochondrial tRNAs or deletion, duplication, or reduction in mtDNA content. Because mtDNA has multiple copies and a specific replication mechanism in cells or tissues, it can be heterogenous, resulting in characteristic phenotypic presentations such as heteroplasmy, genetic drift, and threshold effects. Recent studies have increased the understanding of basic mitochondrial genetics, providing an insight into the correlations between mitochondrial mutations and cardiac manifestations including hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, heart failure, or sudden cardiac death with a syndromic or non-syndromic phenotype. Clinical manifestations of mitochondrial mutations, which result from structural defects, functional impairment, or both, are increasingly detected but are not clear because of the complex interplay between the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes, even in homoplasmic mitochondrial populations. Additionally, various factors such as individual susceptibility, nutritional state, and exposure to chemicals can influence phenotypic presentation, even for the same mtDNA mutation.In this chapter, we summarize our current understanding of mtDNA mutations and their role in cardiac involvement. In addition, epigenetic modifications of mtDNA are briefly discussed for future elucidation of their critical role in cardiac involvement. Finally, current strategies for dealing with mitochondrial mutations in cardiac disorders are briefly stated.