[PMID: 28696638]
Sarcoidosis is a granulomatous disease characterized by variable manifestations and course. About 50% of patients will require systemic treatment, while the remaining will present spontaneous resolution of the disease. When a systemic therapy is necessary, it is prolonged and relapse rate is high when it is discontinued. Systemic corticosteroids are the first line treatment in sarcoidosis. Because of many side effects, it is essential to consider other drugs in case of intolerance to steroids, as steroid-sparing agents, or in case of inefficiency of corticotherapy alone.

[PMID: 27817209]
Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown etiology characterized by the development of non-caseating epitheloid granulomas. The lungs are the most commonly involved organ (>90% of cases), followed by the lymph nodes, the skin, and the eyes. Areas covered: This review summarizes current pharmacotherapy options and future directions for the development of new therapies. Glucocorticoids are the first-line therapy for sarcoidosis. For patients with the most severe forms of sarcoidosis (who will need glucocorticoids for long periods) and for those intolerant or refractory, immunosuppressive drugs are used as sparing agents. The management of extrathoracic sarcoidosis must be tailored to the specific organ or organs involved; however, there is limited data from controlled trials to guide the treatment of these patients. The emergence of biological therapies has increased the therapeutic armamentarium available to treat sarcoidosis, with monoclonal anti-TNF agents being the most promising, but their use is still limited by a lack of licensing and costs. Expert commentary: The treatment of sarcoidosis is still not totally standardized. New effective therapies are urgently needed to enable the reduction or replacement of long-term therapy with glucocorticoids in patients with sarcoidosis.

[PMID: 26419478]
Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease that affects numerous organs, commonly manifesting at the lungs and skin. While corticosteroids remain the first line of treatment, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors have been investigated as one potential steroid sparing treatment for sarcoidosis. TNF-α is one of many components involved in the formation of granulomas in sarcoidosis. While there have been larger scale studies of biologic TNF-α inhibition in systemic sarcoidosis, studies in cutaneous disease are limited. Paradoxically, in some patients treated with biologic TNF-α inhibitors for other diseases, treatment can induce the development of sarcoidosis. In the light of this complexity, we discuss the role of TNF-α in granuloma formation, the therapeutic role of TNF-α inhibition and immunologic abnormalities following treatment with these TNF-α inhibitors including drug-specific alterations involving interferon-γ, lymphotoxin-α, TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2) and T-regulatory cells.

[PMID: 16536004]
Sarcoidosis is still a mysterious disease since we don't know exactly what is the cause. Interestingly some patients get cured without any treatment. There is still a controversy about the indications of treatment in sarcoidosis. This article is an update on pharmacologic treatment in sarcoidosis. Corticosteroids are still the first-line treatment, but alternative therapy with anti-TNF agents, like pentoxifylline, thalidomide and anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies become more interesting, especially in refractory sarcoidosis.

[PMID: 10719453]
Neurosarcoidosis is an uncommon but severe, sometimes life threatening, manifestation of sarcoidosis. Signs of neurological involvement usually are seen in patients known to have active disease. Strictly neurological forms are seen in less than 10% of cases. Neuropsychic manifestations are the most common clinical signs, independent of corticosteroid therapy or neuroendocrine involvement, epileptic seizures, and signs related to hypocephalia. Diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis is confirmed on the basis of clinical arguments and laboratory findings favoring neurosarcoidosis. Key investigations include angiotensin converting enzyme assay in cerebrospinal fluid, and brain stem magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium injection. Nerve biopsies may be needed in certain cases. Corticosteroid therapy is given as first line treatment with a satisfactory effect in most cases. Immunosuppressors may be added in case of failure.

[PMID: 17081481]
The presence of granulomas in the liver raises consideration of a wide differential diagnosis, but in most Western series, sarcoidosis accounts for a majority of cases. This review will focus specifically on the diagnosis of and therapy for hepatic sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease of unknown etiology. Hepatic involvement of sarcoidosis was described in 11.5% of 736 patients enrolled in the ACCESS study. However, presence alone of granulomas in an organ in sarcoidosis does not dictate treatment. The decision to treat should be based on symptoms and severity of disease. Although hepatic involvement usually is asymptomatic, a minority of patients progress to chronic cholestatic disease, portal hypertension, and cirrhosis that may require liver transplantation. Treatment of hepatic sarcoidosis should be reserved for patients who manifest this spectrum of disease. Glucocorticoid treatment is first-line therapy for hepatic sarcoidosis, improving symptoms and abnormal laboratory values but generally having no effect on progression of disease. In addition to glucocorticoids, immunomodulators such as azathioprine, methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, and infliximab have been used with some positive effects on symptoms, liver enzyme abnormalities, and hepatomegaly, but none has been shown to prevent progression of disease. Ultimately, in cases of overt liver failure, liver transplantation is the definitive treatment. Overall, treatment for hepatic sarcoidosis is targeted toward alleviation of symptoms but has no curative potential at this time. Focus should be on discovering the etiology of the disease to target therapy at prevention, not cure.

[PMID: 27421131]
Sarcoidosis is a rare multiorgan granulomatous disease of unknown etiology, mostly affecting young adults, with predilection for hilar lymph nodes and the lung. Despite clinical and histologic similarities between sarcoidosis and tuberculosis, the role of M. tuberculosis in the etiopathogenesis of sarcoidosis is still not clear. Over recent years numerous studies identifying peripheral blood T-cell response to various mycobacterial antigens were published. In parallel, there is no direct evidence for the role of alive M. tuberculosis in the development of sarcoidosis, as evidenced by negative culture in these patients. Exclusion of active tuberculosis as the granulomatous disease of known cause, still remain the important step in diagnostic work-up in sarcoidosis. Development of bronchoscopic techniques significantly reduced the number of surgical procedures. Combination of a few biopsy techniques: transbronchial needle aspiration, endobronchial biopsy and transbronchial lung biopsy, can achieve the optimum diagnostic yield. Because of the large percentage of spontaneous remission in sarcoidosis, the decision of treatment should be taken with caution. Corticosteroids still remain first-line therapy in sarcoidosis. Methotrexate is the most commonly used second-line drug. TNFα-antagonists are the therapeutic option in refractory sarcoidosis. In this article we summarise the present knowledge about the most common localization of sarcoidosis - pulmonary sarcoidosis, with special emphasis on the current etiologic hypothesis, possibility of diagnosis and treatment.

[PMID: 26204816]
About half of patients with sarcoidosis will need systemic therapy for their disease. Oral glucocorticoids are the standard first-line treatment for sarcoidosis. With time, patients might develop substantial morbidity from long-term use of high doses of these drugs. We propose a step-wise approach to the management of pulmonary disease in sarcoidosis and provide details about how and when to use alternatives to glucocorticoids. The antimetabolites, such as methotrexate, azathioprine, leflunomide, and mycophenolate, are often used as alternatives to steroids. For patients who cannot be treated with low-dose glucocorticoids and an antimetabolite, anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) monoclonal antibodies have been shown to control disease. Unfortunately, anti-TNF drugs are associated with substantial toxic effects and in some cases are ineffective. The next step in treatment includes new strategies such as rituximab. A new regimen combining four antibiotics (levofloxacin, ethambutol, azithromycin, and rifamycin) has shown some promise in preliminary studies; however, the mechanism of action is unknown. Non-inflammatory effects of sarcoidosis, such as pulmonary hypertension and bronchiectasis, might also contribute to an increase in pulmonary symptoms. In those cases, alternative treatment strategies have to be considered.

[PMID: 10598414]
There are no guidelines regarding the treatment of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Generally, oral corticosteroids are considered the first-line treatment for symptomatic patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis. We report here two Japanese cases with pulmonary sarcoidosis who demonstrated sequential evolution from radiographic stage I to III within five years. Although these two cases had no symptoms, persistent, progressive pulmonary involvements were observed on chest X-ray. Considering the effectiveness of corticosteroids on patients with radiographic type II or III sarcoidosis reported by the British Thoracic Society, corticosteroid therapy might be a choice even in asymptomatic cases, if they demonstrate developing pulmonary involvement.

[PMID: 28056473]
Sarcoidosis represents a non-caseating, granulomatous disorder of unknown aetiology whose clinical manifestation is heterogeneous and frequently multisystemic. The portion of patients needing systemic treatment varies: though many patients may undergo spontaneous remission, organ-threatening courses demand systemic therapy. Corticosteroids are the first-line treatment option; however, disease´s progression and/or major corticosteroid side effects may require second- and third-line therapeutics. A current stepwise therapeutic algorithm to sarcoidosis that characterizes additive and alternative therapeutic agents is given in the following review.

[PMID: 28474323]
The prevalence of cardiac sarcoidosis has exponentially increased over the past decade, primarily due to increased awareness and diagnostic modalities for the disease entity. Despite an expanding patient cohort, the optimal management of cardiac sarcoidosis remains yet to be established with a significant lack of prospective trials to support current practice. Corticosteroids remain first-line treatment of this disorder, and we recommend that immunosuppressive therapy should be initiated in all patients diagnosed with cardiac sarcoidosis. Additional pharmacotherapy may be necessary based on disease manifestations and response to treatment. The use of nuclear imaging with <sup>18</sup>fluorodeoxyglucose (<sup>18</sup>FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) to guide treatment has become more common, but lacks rigorous data from larger cohorts. Whether an improvement in inflammatory burden as assessed by <sup>18</sup>FDG-PET is correlated with clinical outcomes is as yet unproven. Device therapy with implantable-cardioverter defibrillators should be considered in all cardiac sarcoidosis patients for either primary or secondary prevention of ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac death.

[PMID: 23884295]
None of the medications used in clinical practice to treat sarcoidosis have been approved by the regulatory authorities. Understanding how to use disease-modifying antisarcoid drugs, however, is essential for physicians treating patients with sarcoidosis. This review summarizes the recent studies of medications used for sarcoidosis with a focus on nonsteroidal therapies. Studies from 2006 to 2013 were considered for review to update clinicians on the most relevant literature published over the last few years. Several recently published pieces of evidence have helped expand our ability to more appropriately sequence second-line and third-line therapies for sarcoidosis. For instance, methotrexate and azathioprine may be useful and well tolerated medications as second-line treatment. Mycophenolate mofetil might have a role in neurosarcoidosis. TNF-α blockers and other biologics seem to be well tolerated medications for the most severely affected patients. Corticosteroids remain the first-line therapy for sarcoidosis as many patients never require treatment or only necessitate a short treatment duration. Second-line and third-line therapies described in this article should be used in patients with progressive or refractory disease or when life-threatening complications are evident at the time of presentation.

[PMID: 23880702]
Although glucocorticosteroids are considered the first-line treatment in sarcoidosis, refractory cases require alternatives, such as methotrexate (MTX). The aim of this study was to develop, on behalf of the World Association of Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatous Disorders (WASOG), multinational evidence-based recommendations for the use of MTX in sarcoidosis for routine clinical practice. A systematic literature search was conducted and combined with the opinions of sarcoidosis experts worldwide to formulate the recommendations. An online survey concerning 10 clinical questions was sent through the WASOG newsletter to sarcoidosis experts. Agreement about the recommendations amongst the world's leading sarcoidologists was evaluated. A total of 237 articles were identified, 43 of which were included. Randomized controlled trial evidence supporting the use of MTX in sarcoidosis was limited. Forty-five per cent (113 of 250) of the sarcoidosis experts contacted completed the survey (Europe 55%, North America 26% and Asia 12%). Ten recommendations were formulated concerning the indications for use, starting dose, folic acid, work-up, contraindications, monitoring, administration options in case of adverse gastrointestinal effects, hepatotoxicity, long-term safety and use during pregnancy and breast feeding. Ten multinational evidence-based recommendations for the use of MTX in sarcoidosis were developed, which are supported by the world's foremost sarcoidosis experts.

[PMID: 24753153]
Granulomas in sarcoidosis express high levels of 1α-hydroxylase, an enzyme that catalyzes the hydroxylation of 25-OH vitamin D to its active form, 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D. Overproduction of 1α-hydroxylase is held responsible for the development of hypercalcemia in sarcoidosis patients. Corticosteroids are used as first-line treatment in organ-threatening sarcoidosis. In this light, osteoporosis prevention with calcium and vitamin D (CAD) supplementation is often warranted. However, sarcoidosis patients are at risk for hypercalcemia, and CAD supplementation affects the calcium metabolism. We studied calcium and vitamin D disorders in a large cohort of sarcoidosis patients and investigated if CAD supplementation is safe. Retrospectively, data of 301 sarcoidosis patients from July 1986 to June 2009 were analyzed for serum calcium, 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25-(OH)D), 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25(OH)2 D), and use of CAD supplementation. Disease activity of sarcoidosis was compared with serum levels of vitamin D. Hypercalcemia occurred in 8%. A significant negative correlation was found between 25-(OH)D and disease activity of sarcoidosis measured by somatostatin receptor scintigraphy. In our study, 5 of the 104 CAD-supplemented patients developed hypercalcemia, but CAD supplementation was not the cause of hypercalcemia. Patients without CAD supplementation were at higher risk for developing hypercalcemia. During CAD supplementation, no hypercalcemia developed as a result of supplementation. Hypovitaminosis D seems to be related with more disease activity of sarcoidosis and, therefore, could be a potential risk factor for disease activity of sarcoidosis. Thus, vitamin D-deficient sarcoidosis patients should be supplemented.

[PMID: 29137908]
Prednisone is used as first-line therapy for pulmonary sarcoidosis. What dosing strategy has the best balance between effect and side-effects is largely unknown. We analyzed change in forced vital capacity (FVC) and weight during different prednisone doses used in daily practice for treatment naïve pulmonary sarcoidosis patients. Multilevel models were used to describe FVC and weight change over time. Correlations were calculated using linear regression models. Fifty-four patients were included. FVC changed over time (p < 0.001), with an average increase of 9.6% predicted (95% CI: 7.2 to 12.1) at 12 months. Weight changed significantly over time (p < 0.001), with an average increase of 4.3 kg (95% CI: 3.0 to 5.6) at 12 months. Although FVC and weight changed significantly over time, there was little correlation between prednisone dose and FVC change, while weight increase correlated significantly with cumulative prednisone dose at 24 months. In patients treated with a high cumulative prednisone dose, baseline FVC was on average lower (p = 0.001) compared to low dose treated patients, while no significant differences were observed in need for second/third-line therapy or number of exacerbations. A strategy leading to a low cumulative dose at 12 months was defined by rapid dose tapering to 10 mg/day within 3.5 months. These results suggest that prednisone therapy aimed at improving or preserving FVC in newly- treated pulmonary sarcoidosis can often be reduced in dose, using a treatment regimen that is characterized by early dose tapering.

[PMID: 23538719]
Steroids remain the first-choice therapeutic in sarcoidosis; however, long-term use is associated with toxicity. Evidence defining the best second-line therapeutic is currently lacking. The aim of this study was to compare the effect of methotrexate and azathioprine on prednisone tapering, pulmonary function, and side effects in the second-line treatment of sarcoidosis. An international retrospective cohort study was performed, reviewing all patients with sarcoidosis who started methotrexate or azathioprine until 2 years after initiation or discontinuation. A linear mixed model with FEV1, vital capacity (VC), diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and prednisone dose changes over time as end points was used. Side effects were compared with χ2 tests. Two hundred patients were included, of whom 145 received methotrexate and 55 azathioprine. Prednisone daily dose decreased a mean of 6.32 mg/y (P < .0001) while on therapy, with a similar steroid-sparing capacity for methotrexate and azathioprine. Of all patients completing 1 year of therapy, 70% had a reduction in daily prednisone dose of at least 10 mg. FEV1 showed a mean increase of 52 mL/y (P = .006) and VC of 95 mL/y (P = .001) in both treatment groups. DLCO % predicted increased, with a mean of 1.23%/y (P = .018). There were more patients with infections in the azathioprine group (34.6% vs 18.1%, P = .01), but no differences regarding other side effects. This retrospective study comparing the effect of second-line therapy in sarcoidosis shows that both methotrexate and azathioprine have significant steroid-sparing potency, a similar positive effect on lung function, and comparable side effects, except for a higher infection rate in the azathioprine group.