[PMID: 25773457]
Cortisol is frequently assayed as a stress-responsive biomarker which changes over the course of minutes to meet the demands of a person's social context. Salivary cortisol is often used as a noninvasive sampling method that possesses important health implications. A critical barrier to psychobiological research that involves salivary cortisol is a time delay of days to months before cortisol results are obtained via immunoassay, long after the person is no longer proximate to the social context in which they provided the sample. The present study was designed to address this critical barrier through creation of a lateral flow test (LFT) cortisol device capable of measuring salivary cortisol within minutes of sample collection. The LFT is frequently used within commercial point-of-care settings to obtain rapid answers to the presence/absence of a biomarker. The present study extends the LFT into the research domain by presenting performance characteristics of a quantitative LFT that measures salivary cortisol within 20 minutes of sample collection. Saliva samples from 29 adults (15 men) were obtained in the morning and afternoon by using Passive Drool and then the Super·SAL Extra Collection Device (hereafter Super·SAL) and later assayed with LFT and a commercially available enzyme immunoassay. Results indicate the LFT correlated well with these collection methods (R = 0.872 with Super · SAL, R = 0.739 with Passive Drool, P < 0.0001) and at comparable levels to correspondence of Super · SAL with Passive Drool (R = 0.798, P < 0.0001) which were measured with the same assay. These results open an exciting new possibility to integrate this technologic advance into stress research, including knowing and potentially changing the person's social context in a time-sensitive manner. Methodological improvements such as this have the possibility of refining conceptual models of stress reactivity and regulation.

[PMID: 23969030]
Depression is common among lung cancer patients. Increasing evidence has suggested that hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and pro-inflammatory cytokines may play a key role in the pathophysiology of depression as well as cancer. This pilot study investigated the efficacy of sputum interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and salivary cortisol as new markers to support the diagnosis of depression in lung cancer patients. The diurnal rhythms of sputum IL-6, sputum TNF-α and salivary cortisol were measured in lung cancer patients with and without depression as well as depressed controls and healthy controls. The area under the diurnal variation curves (AUC) over the 24h time course and relative diurnal variation (VAR) were calculated. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed. Patients with co-morbid depression and lung cancer showed highest level of sputum IL-6 AUC, sputum TNF-α AUC and lowest level of cortisol VAR (P<0.001). As a biomarker for depression, salivary cortisol VAR demonstrated an optimal cutoff point at 77.8% (AUC=0.94; 95% CI, 0.85-0.98), which is associated with a sensitivity of 82.1% and a specificity of 96.0%. Sputum IL-6 AUC demonstrated a sensitivity of 74.4% and a specificity of 92.0% (AUC=0.81; 95% CI, 0.69-0.90). These findings suggested that higher 24h overall levels of sputum IL-6, TNF-α and flattened diurnal salivary cortisol slopes were associated with depression in lung cancer patients. Sputum IL-6 AUC and salivary cortisol VAR performed best as biomarkers in the diagnosis of depression in lung cancer patients.

[PMID: 23971022]
The symptoms of atopic dermatitis (AD) are often aggravated by stress, and AD can also lead to psychological stress due to social isolation and discrimination. The salivary cortisol level reflects psychological stress, and it is a good index to assess chronic stress. In this study, we measured the salivary cortisol levels in patients with AD (n = 30) and compared them with those of healthy control subjects (n = 42). AD patients were also evaluated for general disease severity using the Scoring Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD) index. The serum levels of TARC, total IgE, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and peripheral blood eosinophil counts were measured by laboratory tests. The Skindex-16 was used as a skin disease-specific, quality of life measure, instrument. The results showed that the saliva cortisol level was significantly higher in AD patients compared to healthy subjects (P < 0.01). The salivary cortisol level was significantly correlated with the SCORAD index (r = 0.42, P < 0.05) while the serum TARC and LDH levels were positively correlated with the SCORAD index. However, no statistically significant correlations were observed between the salivary cortisol level and Skindex-16. These results suggest that the saliva cortisol level is therefore a useful biomarker to evaluate the stress in AD patients.

[PMID: 27014891]
To investigate the influence of occupational stress on salivary cortisol concentration in employees. In September 2014, occupational stress evaluation was performed for 186 employees in a solar photovoltaic company, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to measure the salivary cortisol concentration. The salivary cortisol concentration showed no significant differences between groups with different demographic features(P>0.05). The group with a high score of job control had a significantly lower salivary cortisol concentration than that with a low score(74.62±15.34 μg/L vs 79.95±12.99 μg/L, P<0.05). The groups with high scores of job danger and job responsibility and burden had significantly higher salivary cortisol concentrations than those with low scores(80.29±9.45 μg/L vs 75.60±16.41, P<0.05; 80.94±10.87 μg/L vs 74.05±16.35 μg/L, P<0.05). The salivary cortisol concentration was positively correlated with the scores of job danger and job responsibility and burden(r=0.176 and 0.252, P<0.05) and negatively correlated with the score of job control(r=-0.208, P<0.05). Salivary cortisol concentration is positively correlated with occupational stress and increases with the increasing degree of occupational stress, and can be used as an objective biomarker for the identification and evaluation of occupational stress.

[PMID: 30488082]
Cushing's syndrome is defined as chronic excess free cortisol in circulation. According to recent studies, midnight salivary cortisol is an accurate and non-stress method for screening and diagnosing Cushing's syndrome. However, there is limited data on midnight salivary cortisol for diagnosing Cushing's syndrome in the Chinese population. Among 61 suspected Chinese patients, 48 patients were confirmed to have Cushing's syndrome. We evaluated the midnight salivary cortisol, midnight serum cortisol and 24-hour urine free cortisol excretion for diagnosis. Midnight salivary cortisol was collected from 21 healthy volunteers for control purposes. In the patient group, mean urine free cortisol excretion and midnight salivary cortisol levels were 296.50 ± 47.99 µg/day and 10.18 ± 1.29 ng/mL, respectively. Among the control group and normal participants, mean midnight salivary cortisol level was 0.53 ± 0.13 ng/mL and 0.50 ± 0.12 ng/mL, respectively. The cut-off value for midnight salivary cortisol was 1.7 ng/mL for diagnosing Cushing's syndrome, with a sensitivity of 98% and specificity of 100%. The diagnostic performance of midnight salivary cortisol (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.99) was superior to that of urine free cortisol (AUC = 0.89). Our study confirmed the good diagnostic performance of midnight salivary cortisol for diagnosing Cushing's syndrome in a Chinese population. Correlation between midnight salivary cortisol and either urine free cortisol or midnight serum cortisol was good. Midnight salivary cortisol is a convenient and precise tool for diagnosing Cushing's syndrome and can be the screening test of choice for Chinese populations.

[PMID: 30408721]
Stress activates the central nervous, the autonomic nervous, and the endocrine system. This study aimed to (1) test the usability of salivary cortisone in a standardized psychosocial stressor, (2) create a comprehensive profile of hormonal responses to determine laboratory parameters with high discriminatory power, and (3) analyze their association with psychometric and autonomic stress measures. Healthy young men (18-35 years) completed either the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) (n = 33) or a Placebo-TSST (n = 34). Blood and saliva were collected at 14 time points along with state-anxiety (STAI) and heart rate. Serum steroids (cortisol*, cortisone*, dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate, androstenedione*, progesterone*, 17-hydroxyprogesterone*, testosterone, estradiol*, aldosterone*), salivary cortisol* and cortisone*, copeptin*, adrenocorticoptropic hormone*, corticosteroid-binding globulin, and salivary alpha-amylase* were analyzed. We used mixed-design ANOVAs to test group differences, receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analyses to assess the discriminatory power of each measure, and Spearman correlation analyses to probe the association between measures. The largest area under the ROC curve was observed in salivary cortisone at 20 min after the end of the TSST (AUC = 0.909 ± 0.044, p < 0.0001). Significant time-by-group interactions were found in the parameters marked with * above, indicating stress-induced increases. The peak response of salivary cortisone was significantly associated with those of STAI (rho = 0.477, p = 0.016) and heart rate (rho = 0.699, p < 0.0001) in the TSST group. Our study found salivary cortisone to be a stress biomarker with high discriminatory power and significant correlations with subjective and autonomic stress measures. Our results can inform future stress studies of sampling time for different laboratory parameters.

[PMID: 28375882]
A resurgence of interest in salivary biomarkers has generated evidence for their value in assessing adrenal function. The advantages of salivary measurements include only free hormone is detected, samples can be collected during normal daily routines and stress-induced cortisol release is less likely to occur than during venepuncture. We review the use of salivary biomarkers to diagnose and monitor patients for conditions of cortisol excess and deficiency and discuss the value of measuring salivary cortisone versus salivary cortisol. Developments in laboratory techniques have enabled the measurement of salivary hormones with a high level of sensitivity and specificity. In states of altered cortisol binding, salivary biomarkers are more accurate measures of adrenal reserve than serum cortisol. Salivary cortisone is a superior marker of serum cortisol compared with salivary cortisol, specifically when serum cortisol is low and during hydrocortisone therapy when contamination of saliva may result in misleading salivary cortisol concentrations. Salivary cortisol and cortisone can be used to assess cortisol excess, deficiency and hydrocortisone replacement, with salivary cortisone having the advantage of detection when serum cortisol levels are low and there is no interference from oral hydrocortisone.

[PMID: 22812714]
The utility of measuring salivary cortisol has become increasingly appreciated since the early 1980s. Salivary cortisol is a measure of active free cortisol and follows the diurnal rhythm of serum or plasma cortisol. The saliva sample may be collected by drooling or through the use of absorbent swabs which are placed into the mouth until saturated. Salivary cortisol is therefore convenient for patients and research participants to collect noninvasively on an outpatient basis. Several assay techniques have been used to measure salivary cortisol, including radioimmunoassay and more recently liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The analytical sensitivity varies between these assay methods, as does the potential for cross-reactivity with other steroids. The interpretation of salivary cortisol levels relies on rigorous standardization of sampling equipment, sampling protocols and assay technology with establishment of a local reference range. Clinically, the commonest use for salivary cortisol is measuring late-night salivary cortisol as a screening test for Cushing's syndrome. Several studies have shown diagnostic sensitivities and specificities of over 90%, which compares very favourably with other screening tests for Cushing's syndrome such as the 24-h urinary-free cortisol and the 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test. There are emerging roles for the use of salivary cortisol in diagnosing adrenal insufficiency, particularly in conditions associated with low cortisol-binding globulin levels, and in the monitoring of glucocorticoid replacement. Finally, salivary cortisol has been used extensively as a biomarker of stress in a research setting, especially in studies examining psychological stress with repeated measurements.

[PMID: 29455296]
Balneotherapy and spa therapy are well-known practices, even though limited evidence has been produced about their biological effects. This systematic review primarily aims at assessing if balneotherapy, mud/peloid therapy, and spa therapy may influence cortisol levels. Secondarily, it aims at understanding if these interventions may improve stress resilience. PubMed/Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Library were searched for relevant articles in English or Italian about studies involving healthy and sub-healthy subjects or patients with a diagnosed disease about effects of balneotherapy, mud/peloid therapy, and spa therapy on serum and salivary cortisol levels. Fifteen studies involving 684 subjects were included. Five studies investigated biological effects of balneotherapy alone. Two of them reported significant changes of cortisol levels in healthy participants. The other three studies reported no significant variations in patients with rheumatic conditions. No studies investigated biological effects of mud/peloid therapy alone. Ten studies investigated biological effects of spa therapy with or without included mud/peloid therapy, and in all but two studies, significant variations of cortisol levels were reported. Our main findings suggest that balneotherapy may have the potential to influence cortisol levels in healthy subjects, in such a way as to improve stress resilience. Spa therapy with or without included mud/peloid therapy demonstrated the same potential to influence cortisol levels also in sub-healthy subjects and in patients with a diagnosed disease. Therefore, balneotherapy and spa therapy may be considered as useful interventions for the management of stress conditions. Further investigation is needed because of limited available data.

[PMID: 21838298]
Cortisol is a classical biomarker for the stress levels of human beings. We fabricated highly sensitive bioluminescent probes for salivary cortisol. The following strategies were contrived in the molecular design. Gaussia princeps luciferase (GLuc) was dissected into two fragments, between which an N-terminal-extended ligand binding domain of glucocorticoid receptor (GR HLBD), named Simgr4, was inserted. First, this unique single-chain probe was then situated downstream of a glucocorticoid response element (GRE) promoter in a reporter-gene system for constructing two ON-OFF switches for cortisol. Second, a circularly permutated (CP) variant of Simgr4 was formulated. The reporter-gene system exerted an improved signal-to-background (S/B) ratio of 8.5 to cortisol. Furthermore, a circularly permutated (CP) variant of Simgr4 exerted a 10× enhanced detection limit to cortisol and a long dynamic range from 10(-9) to 10(-6) M cortisol, covering all of the normal clinical ranges of serum, urine, and saliva. This optimized probe successfully determined daily fluctuations of salivary cortisol and the correlations with those by ELISA. This study is the first to investigate the contribution of the HLBD of a nuclear receptor and multiple ON-OFF switches for molecular probes and salivary cortisols.

[PMID: 27686043]
Salivary cortisol is considered to be a safe and noninvasive measure of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis functioning, and is a commonly measured biomarker of the human stress response in pediatric research. However, cortisol is highly variable and sensitive to a wide range of factors, creating a challenge for reliable salivary cortisol collection in the community setting. Furthermore, the acceptability of salivary cortisol collection in community samples of children is largely unknown. The purpose of this integrative review was to investigate current evidence on the acceptability and feasibility of salivary cortisol collection in community samples of children. In an analysis framed by the Theory of Planned Behavior, data extracted from 31 studies revealed six categories of psychosocial influences on acceptability and feasibility: uncertainty and misconceptions, cultural and ethnic values, family rules and values, difficulty following protocols and procedures, burden of multiple samples, and child refusal or resistance. Further research is required to fully understand the factors that influence acceptability and feasibility of salivary cortisol collection in community samples of children. Understanding individual, family, and community perceptions of biobehavioral research will lead to more culturally sensitive and feasible community-based research methods. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 20685855]
Salivary cortisol measurement is used as a practical surrogate for serum free cortisol. However, parotid tissue harbors 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-HSD2) activity converting cortisol to cortisone. This study was designed to assess the impact of parotid 11β-HSD2 activity on the measurement of salivary cortisol. PATIENTS, DESIGN, AND OUTCOME MEASURES: Study participants with changes in circulating corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) (±oral contraceptive, functionally CBG null) and controls were studied during adrenal stimulation by ACTH and postoral and iv hydrocortisone administration. Simultaneous serum and saliva samples were collected for the measurement of total serum cortisol (SerF) by immunoassay, and unbound cortisol and cortisone in serum (FreeF and FreeE) and saliva (SalF and SalE) by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. ACTH stimulation increased SerF, FreeF, SalF, SalE, but not FreeE in all individuals. SerF significantly decreased after stopping oral contraceptive administration, but FreeF, SalF and SalE remained unchanged. In the hydrocortisone administration study, individual FreeF and SalE curves were nearly identical and SalE closely reflected FreeF in all participants, irrespective of CBG changes. The highest correlation in all (n = 537) matched serum-saliva samples was between SalE and FreeF (r = 0.95, P < 0.0001), and there was no evidence of 11β-HSD2 saturation. Salivary cortisol is a useful surrogate for circulating free cortisol, but its concentration is determined both by serum free cortisol and parotid metabolism to cortisone. We have shown that salivary cortisone closely reflects free serum cortisol after adrenal stimulation and hydrocortisone administration and is unaffected by CBG changes. Salivary cortisone has potential as a useful surrogate for serum free cortisol in research and clinical assessment, and further research in states of chronic glucocorticoid excess is now needed.

[PMID: 23332247]
Psychological stress has been suggested to result in hormonal effects (e.g. changes in cortisol pattern) that may change food selection in unhealthy ways. This study examines whether children's dietary pattern is indeed related to salivary cortisol levels. In 323 children (5-10 years old) participating in the Belgian ChiBS study, salivary cortisol samples, a biomarker for stress, was sampled when waking up, 30 and 60 min after wake up and in the evening on two consecutive weekdays. Data on the children's dietary pattern (frequency of sweet foods, fatty foods, snacks, fruit and vegetables) was collected with a food frequency questionnaire. Multilevel time modelling was used with adjustments for sex, age, body mass index, parental education and wake up time. Higher overall cortisol levels and a large cortisol awakening response (CAR) were associated with more frequent consumption of sweet foods. A steeper diurnal cortisol decline was associated with a higher sweet, fatty and snack food consumption frequency. No associations with fruit and vegetables consumption were found. High cortisol levels were linked to an unhealthier dietary pattern (more fatty food, snacks and especially sweet food). This supports the theory of cortisol-induced comfort food preference and strengthens the stress-diet relation.

[PMID: 29747642]
The aim of this study was to evaluate salivary alpha-amylase (sAA), considered a non-invasive biomarker for sympathetic nervous system (SNS) activity, and salivary cortisol as possible pain-induced stress biomarker, in horses with acute abdominal disease. Therefore, a prospective observational study was performed in which both biomarkers were analyzed in a group of horses with acute abdomen syndrome, and compared with a group of healthy control horses by an unpaired Student's t-test. In addition, the possible relationship between both biomarkers, the score in Equine Acute Abdominal Pain scales version 1 (EAAPS-1 scale), Heart Rate (HR) and Respiratory Rate (RR), plasma lactate, the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) score and serum amyloid A (SAA) concentration was assessed by a Spearman correlation test. A total of 30 horses were included in the study, 19 with acute abdominal disease diagnosed as large colon displacements, simple impactions of the pelvic flexure, spasmodic colics and enteritis and 11 healthy ones. sAA activity (24.5 median-fold, P <  0.0001) and salivary cortisol (1.7 median-fold, P <  0.01) were significantly higher in horses with acute abdomen than in healthy horses. sAA activity was significantly correlated with EAAPS-1 scale (r = 0.78, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.38-0.89, P < 0.001) and SIRS score (r = 0.49, 95% CI 0.03-0.78, P < 0.05). Neither sAA nor salivary cortisol correlated with HR, RR, plasma lactate and SAA. Although this study should be considered as preliminary one, alpha-amylase measurements in saliva could be a biomarker of pain-induced stress in horses with acute abdominal disease.

[PMID: 19095358]
Salivary cortisol is frequently used as a biomarker of psychological stress. However, psychobiological mechanisms, which trigger the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPAA) can only indirectly be assessed by salivary cortisol measures. The different instances that control HPAA reactivity (hippocampus, hypothalamus, pituitary, adrenals) and their respective modulators, receptors, or binding proteins, may all affect salivary cortisol measures. Thus, a linear relationship with measures of plasma ACTH and cortisol in blood or urine does not necessarily exist. This is particularly true under response conditions. The present paper addresses several psychological and biological variables, which may account for such dissociations, and aims to help researchers to rate the validity and psychobiological significance of salivary cortisol as an HPAA biomarker of stress in their experiments.

[PMID: 23017499]
Salivary cortisol is commonly used as a clinical biomarker of endocrine status and also as a marker of psychosocial stress. Annexin-A1 (AnxA1) is an anti-inflammatory protein whose expression is modulated by glucocorticoids. Our principal objectives were to (i) detect the presence of and (ii) measure AnxA1 protein in whole human saliva and to (iii) investigate whether salivary cortisol and AnxA1 are correlated in healthy humans. A total of 37 healthy participants (male and female) were used in the study. Saliva was collected using salivette tubes. Salivary cortisol and AnxA1 protein were sampled at between 3 and 6 time points over 24h and measured for cortisol and AnxA1 protein using specific ELISA's. The presence of salivary AnxA1 protein was confirmed by Western blotting. AnxA1 protein is detectable in whole human saliva, as detected by Western blot analysis and ELISA. A diurnal rhythm was evident in both salivary cortisol (P<0.01) and AnxA1 (P<0.01) and was defined as a significant difference in time 0 (waking) samples compared to 'bed' (2300 h) samples. AnxA1 protein did not exhibit an awakening response (P>0.05), whereas salivary cortisol was significantly elevated between time 0 and 30 min post waking (P<0.001). AnxA1 protein correlates positively with salivary cortisol, indicating that cortisol is most likely a regulator of AnxA1 in human saliva.