[PMID: 24886455]
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a common condition (prevalence of 4%) where the median nerve is compressed within the carpal tunnel resulting in numbness, tingling, and pain in the hand. Current non-surgical treatment options (oral medication, corticosteroid injections, splinting, exercise, and mobilization) show limited effects, especially in the long-term. Carpal tunnel release (CTR) surgery is effective in 70 to 75% of patients, but is relatively invasive and can be accompanied by complications. In an observational study, mechanical traction proved to be effective in up to 70% of patients directly after treatment and in 60% after two years follow-up. This randomized controlled trial (RCT) will examine the effectiveness of mechanical traction compared to care as usual in CTS. Patients diagnosed with CTS will be recruited from an outpatient neurology clinic and randomly assigned to the intervention group (mechanical traction) or the control group (care as usual). Participants in the intervention group will receive 12 treatments with mechanical traction during six consecutive weeks. Primary outcome is symptom severity and functional status, which are measured with the Boston Carpel Tunnel Questionnaire (BCTQ). Secondary outcomes are quality of life (WHOQOL-BREF), health related resource utilization, and absenteeism from work. Outcomes will be assessed at baseline, and at 3, 6, and 12 months after inclusion. Linear mixed effect models will be used to determine the change from baseline at 12 months on the BCTQ, WHOQOL-BREF, absenteeism from work and health related resource utilization. The baseline measurement, change from baseline at three and six months, as well as duration of symptoms until inclusion, age, gender, and co-morbidity will be included as covariates The Pearson's correlation coefficient will be generated to assess the correlation between depression and anxiety and treatment outcome. Since current non-surgical treatment options are not effective long-term and CTR is relatively invasive, there is a need for an effective and non-invasive treatment option. Mechanical traction is a safe treatment option that may provide a good alternative for the usual care. Considering the prevalence of CTS, the study is of great clinical value to a large patient population. Clinical Trials NL44692.008.13 (registered on 19 September 2013).

[PMID: 31762916]
This study aims to evaluate the advantages of ultrasound in the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome by comparing it with electroneuromyography (ENMG). We conducted a cross-sectional study over a period of 6 months. All patients underwent ultrasound with measurement of the surface of the median nerve at the entrance of the carpal tunnel and electroneuromyographic examination of both wrists. The sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound was compared to those of ENMG. The average age of patients was 49.6 years with a clear female predominance (98%). The majority of patients were housewives. Paresthesias were the most common reason for consultation in 86%. Bilateral clinical manifestation occurred in 78% of cases. ENMG showed pathological result in 89 wrists (89%). Ultrasound was abnormal in 63 wrists (63%) with a median surface area of the median nerve of 11 mm<sup>2</sup>. This study highlights an ultrasound sensitivity of 70%, a specificity of 100% with a positive predictive value (PPV) of 100% and a negative predictive value (VPN) of 29.7%. It was concluded that ultrasound has sensitivity only to carpel tunnel with severe involvement on ENMG.

[PMID: 19454094]
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a neuropathy caused by compression of the median nerve within the carpal tunnel. However, the severity of symptoms and signs does not often correlate well with the extent of nerve damage. We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the following clinical questions: What are the effects of drug treatments, non-drug treatments, surgical treatments, and postoperative treatments for carpal tunnel syndrome? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library and other important databases up to December 2006 (Clinical Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). We found 54 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of evidence for interventions. In this systematic review we present information relating to the effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: acupuncture; diuretics; carpal tunnel release surgery (open, and endoscopic); internal neurolysis; local and systemic corticosteroids; massage therapy; nerve and tendon gliding exercises; non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; pyridoxine; therapeutic ultrasound; and wrist splints.

[PMID: 7085815]
The carpal tunnel, a narrow space closed distally by the anterior annular ligament of the wrist, and containing flexor tendons and the median nerve, is the most frequent site of tunnel syndromes, compression in the canal leading to medium nerve lesion. The carpal tunnel syndrome usually affects women aged between 40 and 60 years, and presents typically as parasthesia of the fingers, mainly at night, in the regions served by the median nerve, sometimes associated with hypoesthesia and difficulty in movements. Motor disorders, particularly affecting the thumb, occur during the advanced stages. Electrical tests may confirm diagnosis and enable assessment of severity. More than half the cases are idiopathic in nature, presenting as hypertrophy of the annular ligament and fibrous thickening in the canal, but other forms may be observed including those due to wrist injuries, anatomical anomalies, rheumatic affections, or tumours. Associated disorders may be Dupuytren's disease, cubital nerve compression in Guyon's canal, or nodular tendinitis leading to a trigger finger. Surgical treatment is simple and should be employed when medical measures fail. The nerve should therefore be liberated if parasthesia persists after two or three local corticoid infiltrations. After a wide exploratory incision, the nerve is freed along the total length of the canal and up to the distal extremity of the forearm. Results are excellent, 98 p. cent of patients being relieved of their pain. Persistent motor disorders require surgical intervention before amyotrophy and muscle weakness develops.

[PMID: 2307889]
Sensory conduction of the median nerve at the carpal tunnel for eight consecutive 1 cm segments of the nerve was evaluated in 217 hands of 153 of our patients with carpal tunnel syndrome. Impairment was found to be highly focal and often confined to a single 1 cm segment of the nerve. The section of the nerve at or just distal to the distal margin of the carpal tunnel was affected most frequently, the section within the tunnel was affected less often, and the section proximal to the tunnel at the level of the mid-carpal and radio-carpal joints was affected least. The greatest contrast between frequencies of slowing at adjacent segments occurred at the proximal and distal margins of the carpal tunnel. The distribution of the nerve impairment was similar between the sexes; however, among the men the segment affected most frequently was located 1 cm distal to the segment affected most frequently among the women. The general pattern of slowing which we found does not substantiate some commonly-held opinions about the aetiology of carpal tunnel syndrome.

[PMID: 3627450]
Motor axons supplying lumbrical muscles are less severely affected than axons supplying thenar muscles in the carpal tunnel syndrome; sometimes lumbrical motor fibers are less affected than digit 2 sensory fibers. This pattern is consistent with compression of both the anterior and posterior aspects of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel because nerve fibers responsible for thenar, lumbrical, and digit 2 functions lie in an anterior-posterior gradient within the distal median nerve. Recognition of lumbrical sparing supports the electrodiagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome when the distal latency to thenar muscles or the palm-to-wrist mixed median nerve conduction velocity is normal.

[PMID: 19800329]
Electrical stimulation (ES) of injured peripheral nerves accelerates axonal regeneration in laboratory animals. However, clinical applicability of this intervention has never been investigated in human subjects. The aim of this pilot study was to determine the effect of ES on axonal regeneration after surgery in patients with median nerve compression in the carpal tunnel causing marked motor axonal loss. A randomized control trial was conducted to provide proof of principle for ES-induced acceleration of axon regeneration in human patients. Carpel tunnel release surgery (CTRS) was performed and in the stimulation group of patients, stainless steel electrode wires placed alongside the median nerve proximal to the surgical decompression site for immediate 1 h 20 Hz bipolar ES. Subjects were followed for a year at regular intervals. Axonal regeneration was quantified using motor unit number estimation (MUNE) and sensory and motor nerve conduction studies. Purdue Pegboard Test, Semmes Weinstein Monofilaments, and Levine's Self-Assessment Questionnaire were used to assess functional recovery. The stimulation group had significant axonal regeneration 6-8 months after the CTRS when the MUNE increased to 290+/-140 (mean+/-SD) motor units (MU) from 150+/-62 MU at baseline (p<0.05). In comparison, MUNE did not significantly improve in the control group (p>0.2). Terminal motor latency significantly accelerated in the stimulation group but not the control group (p>0.1). Sensory nerve conduction values significantly improved in the stimulation group earlier than the controls. Other outcome measures showed a significant improvement in both patient groups. We conclude that brief low frequency ES accelerates axonal regeneration and target reinnervation in humans.

[PMID: 17985535]
The declining capacity for injured peripheral nerves to regenerate their axons with time and distance is accounted for, at least in part, by the chronic axotomy of the neurons and Schwann cell denervation prior to target reinnervation. A largely unrecognized site of delay is the surgical suture site where, in rats, 4 weeks is required for all neurons to regenerate their axons across the site. Low frequency stimulation for just 1 h after surgery accelerates this axon crossing in association with upregulation of neurotrophic factors in the neurons. We translated these findings to human patients by examining the number of reinnervated motor units in the median nerve-innervated thenar muscles before and after carpel tunnel release surgery in a randomized controlled trial. Motor unit number estimates (MUNE) in patients with moderate and severe carpal tunnel syndrome were significantly lower than normal. This number increased significantly by 6-8 months after surgery and reached normal values by 12 months in contrast to a non-significant increase in the control unstimulated group. Tests including the Purdue Pegboard Test verified the more rapid functional recovery after stimulation. The data indicate a feasible strategy to promote axonal regeneration in humans that has the potential to improve functional outcomes, especially in combination with strategies to sustain the regenerative capacity of neurons and the support of Schwann cells over distance and time.

[PMID: 26721028]
Carpel tunnel syndrome is a common compression neuropathy of the median nerve causing pain, numbness and functional dysfunction of the hand. Among the available treatments, surgical release of the nerve is the most effective and acceptable treatment option. The aim of this study was to see the outcomes of surgical release of carpel tunnel using open technique. This descriptive case series was conducted at the Department of neurosurgery, Ayub Teaching Hospital Abbottabad from April 2013 to March 2014. One hundred consecutive patients with carpel tunnel syndrome were included who underwent open carpel tunnel release surgery. They were followed up at 1, 3 and 6 months. Residual pain, numbness and functional improvement of the hand were the main outcome measures. Out of 100 patients, 19 were males. The age ranged from 32 to 50 years with a mean of 39.29±3.99 years. The duration of symptoms was from 5 to 24 months. In the entire series patient functional outcome and satisfaction was 82% at 1 month, 94% at 3 months and 97% at 6 months. 18% patient had residual pain at 1 month post-operative follow-up, 6% at 3 months and 3% at 6 month follow-up. Open carpel tunnel release surgery is an effective procedure for compression neuropathy of the median nerve. It should be offered to all patients with moderate to severe pain and functional disability related to carpel tunnel syndrome.

[PMID: 32459879]
The most common etiology of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is idiopathic. However, secondary causes of CTS should be considered when symptoms are unilateral, or electrodiagnostic studies are discrepant with the clinical presentation. Imaging of the carpal tunnel should be performed when secondary causes of CTS are suspected. An ultrasound evaluation of the carpal tunnel can assess for pathologic changes of the median nerve, detect secondary causes of CTS, and aid in surgical planning.

[PMID: 11111843]
The sympathetic skin response (SSR) is an evoked change in electrical skin potential and is an index of the function of sympathetic pathways. We studied the SSR evoked by electrical stimulation of the median nerve and recording from the contralateral hands in 30 patients with carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) without clinical autonomic signs and compared the results to the SSR in 30 normal controls. The SSR was absent in the affected hands in seven (23%) patients. In the other carpal tunnel syndrome patients (77%), a significant reduction in the SSR area was seen in the records from the affected hands. Subclinical sympathetic nerve fibre involvement occurs in the affected median nerves in CTS.

[PMID: 16487634]
Sympathetic vasomotor fibres carried by the median nerve and ulnar nerve innervate their respective sensory territories. The sympathetic vasomotor fibres of the median nerve were evaluated in patients with carpal tunnel syndrome and in healthy volunteers using continuous wave Doppler ultrasonography. The pulsatility index of the radialis indicis artery and the radial palmar digital artery of the little finger were measured at baseline and after stimulation. The maximal increase in the pulsatility index of each artery was measured. This was significantly lower for the radialis indicis artery in the CTS group than in the healthy controls. However, there was no significant difference in the maximal increase in pulsatility index of the radial palmar digital artery of the little finger between both groups. Sympathetic vasomotor fibres of the median nerve are affected in carpal tunnel syndrome. Continuous wave Doppler ultrasonography is easy to use and should be investigated further as a possible diagnostic tool for the confirmation of carpal tunnel syndrome.

[PMID: 23727345]
To provide a quantitative analysis of ultrasonographic measurements and possible pathophysiology of carpal tunnel syndrome by comparing cross-sectional areas of the median nerve, carpal tunnel, and nerve/tunnel index and the difference in ultrasonographic findings between affected and nonaffected hands and between sexes. Blinded comparison study. Secondary referral and training hospital of institutional practice. Patients (N=51; 42 women, 9 men) with suspected carpal tunnel syndrome who underwent sonography within 1 week after the electrodiagnostic study. Not applicable. Electrodiagnostic and ultrasonographic studies were conducted on both upper extremities. Cross-sectional areas of the median nerve and carpal tunnel were measured at 2 separate levels; proximal and distal cross-sectional areas of the carpal tunnel were each measured at the scaphoid-pisiform and trapezium-hamate levels, respectively. Comparison between normative (n=24) and abnormal hands (n=78) revealed the following: the mean proximal cross-sectional areas of the median nerve, carpal tunnel, and nerve/tunnel index of electrodiagnostically normative hands were 10.941mm(2), 192.43mm(2), and 5.635%, respectively, whereas those of abnormal hands were 13.74mm(2), 208.87mm(2), and 6.693%, respectively, showing statistically significant differences for all (P<.05). Distal measurements of the cross-sectional area of the median nerve, carpal tunnel, and nerve/tunnel index were 10.088mm(2), 150.4mm(2), and 6.762%, respectively, in normative hands, and 11.178mm(2), 149.6mm(2), and 7.493%, respectively, in abnormal hands, showing no statistically significant differences (P>.05). In women, proximal cross-sectional areas of the median nerve and nerve/tunnel index of abnormal hands showed statistically significant differences, but no ultrasonographic measurement with a statistically significant difference was observed in men. Compared with nonaffected hands, the proximal cross-sectional areas of the median nerve and carpal tunnel were greater, but the distal ultrasonographic measurements were not in affected hands. Ultrasonographic findings of carpal tunnel syndrome were different according to sex.

[PMID: 29766936]
Carpal tunnel syndrome refers to a constellation of symptoms resulting from compression of the median nerve at the wrist. The characteristic symptoms include pain and numbness in the hands. To identify the risk factors responsible for carpal tunnel syndrome, to identify the symptom severity as well as functional status of patients with carpal tunnel syndrome, and to determine the relationship between symptom severity and functional status among patients with carpal tunnel syndrome. A non-experimental descriptive study was conducted. A semi-structured questionnaire was administered to assess the risk factors. Standardized questionnaires included the symptom severity scale (SSS) and functional status scale (FSS). The risk factors assessed were the female gender (64%), premorbidities (75%), diabetes mellitus (53%), hypertension (25%), dyslipidemia (24%), osteoarthritis (8%), and impaired thyroid functions (10%). Fifty-one patients were overweight and 8 were obese. There was an association between symptom severity and presence of any of the premorbidities (χ<sup>2</sup> = 5.80; P < 0.05). There was also an association between symptom severity and diabetes mellitus (χ<sup>2</sup> = 13.62; P < 0.05). A positive correlation was also noted between the symptom severity and the functional status of patients with carpal tunnel syndrome (r = 0.705; P = 0.00). Prompt recognition, timely management, and avoidance of risk factors responsible for the manifestations of carpal tunnel syndrome have practical implications in the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome.

[PMID: 29430500]
Carpel tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a condition in which median nerve compression results in paresthesias and pain in the wrist and hand. We are going to report a rare case of topiramate-induced neuropathy which clinically resembles CTS. Discontinuation of topiramate resulted in spontaneous resolution of numbness, paresthesia and pain in a few days. High clinical suspicion is advised in patients who are on topiramate and present with signs of compressive neuropathy. <b>Level of evidence:</b> V.

[PMID: 28334999]
Carpal tunnel syndrome is the most common entrapment neuropathy, affecting the median nerve at the wrist. Acupuncture is a minimally-invasive and conservative therapeutic option, and while rooted in a complex practice ritual, acupuncture overlaps significantly with many conventional peripherally-focused neuromodulatory therapies. However, the neurophysiological mechanisms by which acupuncture impacts accepted subjective/psychological and objective/physiological outcomes are not well understood. Eligible patients (n = 80, 65 female, age: 49.3 ± 8.6 years) were enrolled and randomized into three intervention arms: (i) verum electro-acupuncture 'local' to the more affected hand; (ii) verum electro-acupuncture at 'distal' body sites, near the ankle contralesional to the more affected hand; and (iii) local sham electro-acupuncture using non-penetrating placebo needles. Acupuncture therapy was provided for 16 sessions over 8 weeks. Boston Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Questionnaire assessed pain and paraesthesia symptoms at baseline, following therapy and at 3-month follow-up. Nerve conduction studies assessing median nerve sensory latency and brain imaging data were acquired at baseline and following therapy. Functional magnetic resonance imaging assessed somatotopy in the primary somatosensory cortex using vibrotactile stimulation over three digits (2, 3 and 5). While all three acupuncture interventions reduced symptom severity, verum (local and distal) acupuncture was superior to sham in producing improvements in neurophysiological outcomes, both local to the wrist (i.e. median sensory nerve conduction latency) and in the brain (i.e. digit 2/3 cortical separation distance). Moreover, greater improvement in second/third interdigit cortical separation distance following verum acupuncture predicted sustained improvements in symptom severity at 3-month follow-up. We further explored potential differential mechanisms of local versus distal acupuncture using diffusion tensor imaging of white matter microstructure adjacent to the primary somatosensory cortex. Compared to healthy adults (n = 34, 28 female, 49.7 ± 9.9 years old), patients with carpal tunnel syndrome demonstrated increased fractional anisotropy in several regions and, for these regions we found that improvement in median nerve latency was associated with reduction of fractional anisotropy near (i) contralesional hand area following verum, but not sham, acupuncture; (ii) ipsilesional hand area following local, but not distal or sham, acupuncture; and (iii) ipsilesional leg area following distal, but not local or sham, acupuncture. As these primary somatosensory cortex subregions are distinctly targeted by local versus distal acupuncture electrostimulation, acupuncture at local versus distal sites may improve median nerve function at the wrist by somatotopically distinct neuroplasticity in the primary somatosensory cortex following therapy. Our study further suggests that improvements in primary somatosensory cortex somatotopy can predict long-term clinical outcomes for carpal tunnel syndrome.

[PMID: 497808]
Palmar stimulation was used to assess median nerve conduction across the carpal tunnel in 61 control patients and 105 patients with the carpal tunnel syndrome. With serial stimulation from midpalm to distal forearm the sensory axons normally showed a predictable latency change of 0.16 to 0.21 ms/cm as the stimulus site was moved proximally in 1 cm increments. In 47 (52 per cent) of 91 affected nerves tested serially, there was a sharply localized latency increase across a 1 cm segment, most commonly 2 to 4 cm distally to the origin of the transverse carpal ligament. In these hands, the focal latency change across the affected 1 cm segment (mean +/- SD: 0.80 +/- 0.22 ms/cm) averaged more than four times that of the adjoining distal (0.19 +/- 0.09 ms/cm) or proximal 1 cm segments (0.19 +/- 0.08 ms/cm). In the remaining 44 (48 per cent) hands, the latency increase was distributed more evenly across the carpal tunnel. Unlike the sensory axons the motor axons were difficult to test serially because of the recurrent course of the thenar nerve, which may be contained in a separate tunnel. The wrist-to-palm latency was significantly greater in the patients with carpal tunnel syndromes than in the controls for sensory (2.18 +/- 0.48 ms v 1.41 +/- 0.18 ms) and motor axons (2.79 +/- 0.93 ms v 1.50 +/- 0.21 ms). Consequently, there was considerable difference between the carpal tunnel syndromes and controls in SNCV (38.5 +/- 7.5 m/s v 57.3 +/- 6.9 m/s), and MNCV (28.2 +/- 4.5 m/s v 49.0 +/- 5.7 m/s). In the remaining distal segment, however, there was only a small difference between the two groups in sensory (1.48 +/- 0.28 ms v 1.41 +/- 0.22 ms) and motor latency (2.15 +/- 0.34 ms v 2.10 +/- 0.31 ms). The exclusion of the relatively normal distal latency made it possible to demonstrate mild slowing across the carpal tunnel in 36 (21 per cent) sensory and 40 (23 per cent) motor axons of 172 affected nerves when the conventional terminal latencies were normal. Sensory or motor conduction abnormalities were found in all but 13 (8 per cent) hands. Without palmar stimulation, however, an additional 32 (19 per cent) hands would have been regarded as normal.