[PMID: 33568427]
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most lethal malignancy and lacks effective treatment. We aimed to understand molecular mechanisms of the intertwined interactions between tumour stromal components in metastasis and to provide a new paradigm for PDAC therapy. Two unselected cohorts of 154 and 20 patients with PDAC were subjected to correlation between interleukin (IL)-33 and CXCL3 levels and survivals. Unbiased expression profiling, and genetic and pharmacological gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches were employed to identify molecular signalling in tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) and myofibroblastic cancer-associated fibroblasts (myoCAFs). The role of the IL-33-ST2-CXCL3-CXCR2 axis in PDAC metastasis was evaluated in three clinically relevant mouse PDAC models. IL-33 was specifically elevated in human PDACs and positively correlated with tumour inflammation in human patients with PDAC. CXCL3 was highly upregulated in IL-33-stimulated macrophages that were the primary source of CXCL3. CXCL3 was correlated with poor survival in human patients with PDAC. Mechanistically, activation of the IL-33-ST2-MYC pathway attributed to high CXCL3 production. The highest level of CXCL3 was found in PDAC relative to other cancer types and its receptor CXCR2 was almost exclusively expressed in CAFs. Activation of CXCR2 by CXCL3 induced a CAF-to-myoCAF transition and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was uniquely upregulated by the CXCL3-CXCR2 signalling. Type III collagen was identified as the CXCL3-CXCR2-targeted adhesive molecule responsible for myoCAF-driven PDAC metastasis. Our work provides novel mechanistic insights into understanding PDAC metastasis by the TAM-CAF interaction and targeting each of these signalling components would provide an attractive and new paradigm for treating pancreatic cancer.

[PMID: 29730267]
Although M2-like tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) have been considered as a vital therapeutic target in cancer therapy due to their role in promoting tumor progression and metastasis, very few compounds have been identified to inhibit M2-like polarization of TAMs. Here, we showed that Imatinib significantly prevented macrophage M2-like polarization induced by IL-13 or IL-4 in vitro, as illustrated by reduced expression of cell surface marker CD206 and M2-like genes, including Arg1, Mgl2, Mrc1, CDH1, and CCL2. Further, the migration of lung cancer cells promoted by the conditioned medium from M2-like macrophages could be restrained by Imatinib. Mechanistically, Imatinib inhibited STAT6 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, resulting in the macrophage M2-like polarization arrest. Furthermore, Imatinib reduced the number of metastasis of Lewis lung cancer without affecting tumor growth. Both in tumor and lung tissues, the percentage of M2-like macrophages decreased after the administration of Imatinib for one week. Taken together, these data suggest that Imatinib is able to inhibit macrophage M2-like polarization, which plays a vital role in Imatinib suppressed metastasis of Lewis lung cancer.

[PMID: 34060821]
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) play a crucial part in cancer evolution. Dynamic imaging of TAMs is of great significance for treatment outcome evaluation and precision tumor therapy. Currently, most fluorescence nanoprobes tend to accumulate in the liver and are difficult to metabolize, which leads to strong background signals and inadequate imaging quality of TAMs nearby the liver such as pancreatic cancer. Herein, we aim to develop metabolizable dextran-indocyanine green (DN-ICG) nanoprobes in the second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1 000-1 700 nm) for dynamic imaging of TAMs in pancreatic cancer. Compared to free ICG, the NIR-II fluorescence intensity of DN-ICG nanoprobes increased by 279% with significantly improved stability. We demonstrated that DN-ICG nanoprobes could specifically target TAMs through the interaction of dextran with specific ICAM-3-grabbing nonintegrin related 1 (SIGN-R1), which were highly expressed in TAMs. Subsequently, DN-ICG nanoprobes gradually metabolized in the liver yet remained in pancreatic tumor stroma in mouse models, achieving a high signal-to-background ratio (SBR = 7) in deep tissue (∼0.5 cm) NIR-II imaging of TAMs. Moreover, DN-ICG nanoprobes could detect dynamic changes of TAMs induced by low-dose radiotherapy and zoledronic acid. Therefore, the highly biocompatible and biodegradable DN-ICG nanoprobes harbor great potential for precision therapy in pancreatic cancer.

[PMID: 34006822]
Endocrine therapy is the standard treatment for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer, but tumors eventually develop resistance. However, endocrine therapy resistance mechanisms mediated through interactions between breast cancer cells and tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are still unclear. Here, we characterized sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) overexpression drives the highly glycolytic phenotype of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells where enhanced lactic acid secretion promotes M2-like TAM polarization via the hypoxia-inducible factor-1α/signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 pathway. In turn, M2-like TAMs activate breast cancer cells through EGFR/PI3K/Akt signaling, providing feedback to upregulate SGLT1 and promote tamoxifen resistance and accelerate tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Higher expression of SGLT1 and CD163<sup>+</sup> TAMs was associated with endocrine-resistant ER-positive breast cancers. Our study identifies a novel vicious cycle of metabolic reprogramming, M2-like TAM polarization, and endocrine therapy resistance, which involves SGLT1, proposing SGLT1 as a therapeutic target to overcome endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer.

[PMID: 32708142]
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) represent the most abundant innate immune cells in tumors. TAMs, exhibiting anti-inflammatory phenotype, are key players in cancer progression, metastasis and resistance to therapy. A high TAM infiltration is generally associated with poor prognosis, but macrophages are highly plastic cells that can adopt either proinflammatory/antitumor or anti-inflammatory/protumor features in response to tumor microenvironment stimuli. In the context of cancer therapy, many anticancer therapeutics, apart from their direct effect on tumor cells, display different effects on TAM activation status and density. In this review, we aim to evaluate the indirect effects of anticancer therapies in the modulation of TAM phenotypes and pro/antitumor activity.

[PMID: 28341752]
Cancer therapy has developed around the concept of killing, or stopping the growth of, the cancer cells. Molecularly targeted therapy is the modern expression of this paradigm. Increasingly, however, the realization that the cancer has co-opted the normal cells of the stroma for its own survival has led to the concept that the tumor microenvironment (TME) could be targeted for effective therapy. In this review, we outline the importance of tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), a major component of the TME, in the response of tumors to cancer therapy. We discuss the normal role of macrophages in wound healing, the major phenotypes of TAMs, and their role in blunting the efficacy of cancer treatment by radiation and anticancer drugs, both by promoting tumor angiogenesis and by suppressing antitumor immunity. Finally, we review the many preclinical studies that have shown that the response of tumors to irradiation and anticancer drugs can be improved, sometimes markedly so, by depleting TAMs from tumors or by suppressing their polarization from an M1 to an M2 phenotype. The data clearly support the validity of clinical testing of combining targeting TAMs with conventional therapy. <i>Clin Cancer Res; 23(13); 3241-50. ©2017 AACR</i>.

[PMID: 34276698]
Inflammation is a fundamental physiological response orchestrated by innate immune cells to restore tissue homeostasis. Specialized pro-resolving mediators (SPMs) are involved in active resolution of inflammation but when inflammation is incomplete, chronic inflammation creates a favorable environment that fuels carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Conventional cancer therapy also strengthens cancer-related inflammation by inducing massive tumor cell death that activate surrounding immune-infiltrating cells such as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). Macrophages are key actors of both inflammation and its active resolution due to their plastic phenotype. In line with this high plasticity, macrophages can be hijacked by cancer cells to support tumor progression and immune escape, or therapy resistance. Impaired resolution of cancer-associated inflammation supported by TAMs may thus reinforces tumor progression. From this perspective, recent evidence suggests that stimulating macrophage's pro-resolving functions using SPMs can promote inflammation resolution in cancer and improve anticancer treatments. Thus, TAMs' re-education toward an antitumor phenotype by using SPMs opens a new line of attack in cancer treatment. Here, we review SPMs' anticancer capacities with special attention regarding their effects on TAMs. We further discuss how this new therapeutic approach could be envisioned in cancer therapy.

[PMID: 32445205]
Tumorigenesis is not only determined by the intrinsic properties of cancer cells but also by their interactions with components of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are among the most abundant immune cells in the TME. During initial stages of tumor development, macrophages can either directly promote antitumor responses by killing tumor cells or indirectly recruit and activate other immune cells. As genetic changes occur within the tumor or T helper 2 (T<sub>H</sub> 2) cells begin to dominate the TME, TAMs begin to exhibit an immunosuppressive protumor phenotype that promotes tumor progression, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. Thus, targeting TAMs has emerged as a strategy for cancer therapy. To date, TAM targeting strategies have focused on macrophage depletion and inhibition of their recruitment into the TME. However, these strategies have shown limited therapeutic efficacy, although trials are still underway with combination therapies. The fact that macrophages have the potential for antitumor activity has moved the TAM targeting field toward the development of TAM-reprogramming strategies to support this antitumor immune response. Here, we discuss the various roles of TAMs in cancer therapy and their immunosuppressive properties, as well as implications for emerging checkpoint inhibitor-based immunotherapies. We review state-of-the-art TAM-targeting strategies, focusing on current ones at the preclinical and clinical trial stages that aim to reprogram TAMs as an oncological therapy.

[PMID: 25620672]
Macrophages are one of the principal host cell populations in solid tumors. They are capable, due to their plasticity, of acquiring phenotypes that either combat (M1 type) or promote (M2 type) neoplastic growth. These cells, known as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), play complex but pivotal roles in the outcome of photodynamic therapy (PDT) of malignant lesions. Among the various parenchymal and stromal cell populations found in tumors, TAMs have been shown to have the greatest capacity for the uptake of systemically administered photosensitizers. Both the tumor-localizing property of photosensitizers and their tumor-localized fluorescence could be partly attributed to the activity of TAMs. Since resident TAMs with accumulated high photosensitizer content will sustain high degrees of PDT damage, this population (predominantly M2 in most tumors) is selectively destroyed, and during the ensuing inflammatory reaction is replaced with newly invading macrophages of M1 phenotype. These macrophages are sentinels responding to DAMP signals from PDT-treated tumor cells and in turn are mobilized to generate a variety of inflammatory/immune mediators and opsonins. They have a critical role in contributing to the therapeutic effect of PDT by mediating disposal of killed cancer cells and by processing/presenting tumor antigens to T lymphocytes. However, TAMs accumulating in the later post-PDT phase can acquire the M2 (healing) phenotype, and could have a role in tumor recurrence by releasing factors that promote angiogenesis and the survival/proliferation of remaining cancer cells. Various therapeutic strategies modulating TAM activity in the PDT response have potential for clinical use for improving PDT-mediated tumor control.

[PMID: 34469109]
The complete regression of residual tumors after photothermal therapy (PTT) depends on the activation and recognition of the immune system. However, the inevitable local inflammation after PTT in residual tumor recruits abundant abnormal immune cells, especially the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) which further promote immune escape and survival of the remaining tumor cells, resulting in the tumor recurrence and progression. To solve this problem, herein we explored biomimetic nanoparticles carrying repolarization agent of TAMs to remodel the post-PTT inflammatory microenvironment. The polydopamine nanoparticles were used simultaneously as photothermal transduction agents to ablate tumor cells and the delivery vehicles for TMP195 which can repolarize the M2-like TAMs into an antitumor phenotype. In addition, a biomimetic decoration of macrophage membrane coating was designed to endow nanoparticles the ability to actively target the tumor site after PTT mediated by inflammation-mediated chemotaxis. In the breast tumor model, these biomimetic nanoparticles with immune-modulating ability significantly elevated the levels of M1-like TAMs, ultimately resulting in a tumor-elimination rate of 60%, increased from 10% after PTT. This synergistic treatment strategy of PTT and TAMs repolarization provides a promising approach to address the deteriorated tumor microenvironment after PTT and proposes a more effective way for combinational treatment option in clinic.

[PMID: 29436395]
Eliciting effective antitumor immune responses in patients who fail checkpoint inhibitor therapy is a critical challenge in cancer immunotherapy, and in such patients, tumor-associated myeloid cells and macrophages (TAMs) are promising therapeutic targets. We demonstrate in an autochthonous, poorly immunogenic mouse model of melanoma that combination therapy with an agonistic anti-CD40 mAb and CSF-1R inhibitor potently suppressed tumor growth. Microwell assays to measure multiplex protein secretion by single cells identified that untreated tumors have distinct TAM subpopulations secreting MMP9 or cosecreting CCL17/22, characteristic of an M2-like state. Combination therapy reduced the frequency of these subsets, while simultaneously inducing a separate polyfunctional inflammatory TAM subset cosecreting TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12. Tumor suppression by this combined therapy was partially dependent on T cells, and on TNF-α and IFN-γ. Together, this study demonstrates the potential for targeting TAMs to convert a "cold" into an "inflamed" tumor microenvironment capable of eliciting protective T cell responses.

[PMID: 34515617]
Melanoma is one of the most common malignant tumors. The anti-PD-1 antibody is used for the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Treatment success is only 35-40% and a range of immune-related adverse reactions can occur. Combination of anti-PD1 antibody therapy with other oncology therapies has been attempted. Herein, we assessed whether chlorogenic acid liposomes modified with sialic acid (CA-SAL) combined with anti-PD1 antibody treatment was efficacious as immunotherapy for melanoma. CA-SAL liposomes were prepared and characterized. In a mouse model of B16F10 tumor, mice were treated with an anti-PD1 antibody, CA-SAL, or combination of CA-SAL + anti-PD1 antibody, and compared with no treatment controls. The tumor inhibition rate, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) phenotype, T-cell activity, and safety were investigated. We observed a significant decrease in the proportion of M2-TAMs and CD4<sup>+</sup>Fop3<sup>+</sup> T cells, while there was a significant increase in the proportion of M1-TAMs and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, and in the activity of T cells, and thus in the tumor inhibition rate. No significant toxicity was observed in major organs. CA-SAL and anti-PD1 Ab combination therapy presented synergistic anti-tumor activity, which enhanced the efficacy of the PD-1 checkpoint blocker in a mouse model of melanoma. In summary, combination immunotherapy of CA-SAL and anti-PD1 Ab has broad prospects in improving the therapeutic effect of melanoma, and may provide a new strategy for clinical treatment.

[PMID: 29691294]
<b>Purpose:</b> Cancer stem-like cells (CSC) contribute to the progression and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) resistance of prostate cancer. As CSCs depend on their specific niche, including tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), elucidating the network between CSCs and TAMs may help to effectively inhibit the progression and ADT resistance of prostate cancer.<b>Experimental Design:</b> The underlying intracellular mechanism that sustains the stem-like characteristics of CSCs in prostate cancer was assessed via RNA sequencing, co-immunoprecipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and other assays. A coculture system and cytokine antibody arrays were used to examine the interaction network between CSCs and TAMs. In addition, an orthotopic prostate cancer model was established to evaluate the <i>in vivo</i> effects of the combined targeting of CSCs and their interaction with TAMs on ADT resistance.<b>Results:</b> Autophagy-related gene 7 (ATG7) facilitated the transcription of OCT4 via β-catenin, which binds to the OCT4 promoter, promoting CSC characteristics in prostate cancer, including self-renewal, tumor initiation, and drug resistance. In addition, CSCs remodeled their specific niche by educating monocytes/macrophages toward TAMs, and the CSC-educated TAMs reciprocally promoted the stem-like properties of CSCs, progression and ADT resistance of prostate cancer via IL6/STAT3. Furthermore, the combined targeting of CSCs and their interaction with TAMs by inhibiting ATG7/OCT4 and IL6 receptor effectively ameliorated ADT resistance in an orthotopic prostate cancer model.<b>Conclusions:</b> Targeting CSCs and their niche may prove to be a more powerful strategy than targeting CSCs alone, providing a rational approach to ameliorating ADT resistance in prostate cancer. <i>Clin Cancer Res; 24(18); 4612-26. ©2018 AACR</i>.

[PMID: 33050070]
In the last decade, it has been well-established that tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells fuel not only the process of carcinogenesis through cancer-related inflammation mechanisms, but also tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis. In particular, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are the most abundant leucocyte subset in many cancers and play a major role in the creation of a protective niche for tumor cells. Their ability to generate an immune-suppressive environment is crucial to escape the immune system and to allow the tumor to proliferate and metastasize to distant sites. Conventional therapies, including chemotherapy and radiotherapy, are often not able to limit cancer growth due to the presence of pro-tumoral TAMs; these are also responsible for the failure of novel immunotherapies based on immune-checkpoint inhibition. Several novel therapeutic strategies have been implemented to deplete TAMs; however, more recent approaches aim to use TAMs themselves as weapons to fight cancer. Exploiting their functional plasticity, the reprogramming of TAMs aims to convert immunosuppressive and pro-tumoral macrophages into immunostimulatory and anti-tumor cytotoxic effector cells. This shift eventually leads to the reconstitution of a reactive immune landscape able to destroy the tumor. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge on strategies able to reprogram TAMs with single as well as combination therapies.

[PMID: 31704343]
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) is a promising therapeutic target for cancer immunotherapy, while TAMs targeting therapy using nano-sized drug delivery system (NDDS) is a great challenge. To overcome these drawbacks, a novel erythrocyte-cancer cell hybrid membrane camouflaged pH-responsive copolymer micelle (dextran-grafted-poly (histidine) copolymer) was prepared to target deliver a selective CSF-1R inhibitor: BLZ-945 (shorten as DH@ECm) to TAMs for TAMs depletion. The prepared DH@ECm possessed favorable particle size (~190 nm) preferable immune camouflage and tumor homologies targeting characteristic when it was intravenously administrated into blood system. In tumor acidic microenvironment, DH@ECm possessed pH-responsive characteristic and unique "membrane escape effect" to facilitate recognition and internalization by TAMs via dextran-CD206 receptor specific interaction (about 3.9 fold than free drug), followed by TAMs depletion in vitro. For in vivo studies, DH@ECm could reverse tumor immune-microenvironment with the elevation of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and possess sufficient tumor immunotherapy (inhibition rate: 64.5%). All the in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated the therapeutical potential of DH@ECm for tumor immunotherapy.

[PMID: 33881837]
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) of M2 phenotype have mediated the immunosuppression in a tumor microenvironment, facilitating the escape of tumor cells from immunosurveillance. Reprograming the immunosuppressive M2 TAMs to immunostimulatory M1 phenotype can activate the antitumor immune responses for cancer immunotherapy. Herein, hollow iron oxide (Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>) nanoparticles (NPs) were employed to reprogram M2 TAMs toward M1 TAMs, aiming to release proinflammatory cytokines and recruit T cells to kill tumor cells. After loaded with l-arginine (l-Arg) and sealed with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), hollow Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> NPs were fabricated into <sub>LP</sub>Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> NPs, which could release l-Arg based on pH-responsive PAA and produce nitric oxide (NO) with the help of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) overexpressed by M1 TAMs, as a result of additional tumor elimination for gas therapy. <i>In vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> studies demonstrate that <sub>LP</sub>Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> NPs could effectively reprogram M2 to M1 macrophages, activating T cells, releasing TNF-α, and producing high levels of NO, leading to synergistic tumor therapy.

[PMID: 34695762]
With the continuous development of cancer nanotechnology, an important trend in the research is to combine the broad application prospects of functional nanomaterials with recent biological discoveries and technological advances. Herein, a cancer cell membrane-camouflaged gold nanocage loading doxorubicin (DOX) and l-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) (denoted as m@Au-D/B NCs) was constructed as an innovative nanoplatform to confer promising cancer combination therapy by evoking effective ferroptosis and immune responses. Briefly, the loading of BSO and DOX could induce ferroptosis through simultaneous effective glutathione (GSH) consumption and reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Gold nanocages (AuNCs) with distinct anti-tumor application performance was utilized as ideal nanocarrier for drug loading, evoking photothermal effects and photochemical catalysis to generate more ROS under near-infrared (NIR) irradiation. Moreover, m@Au-D/B NCs-mediated photothermal therapy (PTT) combined with ROS production could repolarize the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) from pro-tumor (M2) phenotype to anti-tumor (M1) phenotype, thus improving tumor-suppressive immune environment and then promoting the activation of effector cells and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, in which the antitumor responses were evoked robustly in a methodical approach. The anti-tumor effects in vivo implied that m@Au-D/B NCs could significantly inhibit tumor growth without severe toxicity. Hence, this homotypic targeting nanosystem could offer an auspicious anticancer access by triggering combination cancer therapy via ferroptosis and tumor-associated macrophage repolarization mechanism.