[PMID: 24630051]
Mutations in the solute carrier family 9, subfamily A member 6 (SLC9A6) gene, encoding the endosomal Na+/H+ exchanger 6 (NHE6) are associated with Christianson syndrome, a syndromic form of X-linked intellectual disability characterized by microcephaly, severe global developmental delay, autistic behavior, early onset seizures and ataxia. In a 7-year-old boy with characteristic clinical and neuroimaging features of Christianson syndrome and epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spikes and waves during sleep, we identified a novel splice site mutation (IVS10-1G>A) in SLC9A6. These findings expand the clinical spectrum of the syndrome and indicate NHE6 dysfunction as a new cause of electrical status epilepticus during slow-wave sleep (ESES).

[PMID: 18342287]
Linkage analysis and DNA sequencing in a family exhibiting an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome, characterized by microcephaly, epilepsy, ataxia, and absent speech and resembling Angelman syndrome, identified a deletion in the SLC9A6 gene encoding the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE6. Subsequently, other mutations were found in a male with mental retardation (MR) who had been investigated for Angelman syndrome and in two XLMR families with epilepsy and ataxia, including the family designated as having Christianson syndrome. Therefore, mutations in SLC9A6 cause X-linked mental retardation. Additionally, males with findings suggestive of unexplained Angelman syndrome should be considered as potential candidates for SLC9A6 mutations.

[PMID: 26421989]
Mutations of SLC9A6 may cause an X-linked clinical syndrome first described by Christianson in 1999 in which affected males exhibited profound intellectual disability, autism, drug-resistant epilepsy, ophthalmoplegia, mild craniofacial dysmorphism, microcephaly, and ataxia. We describe a child with an SLC9A6 mutation and an electroencephalographic pattern consistent with electrographic status epilepticus of sleep. Our patient's electrographic status epilepticus of sleep resolved after treatment with felbamate. Following treatment, he remained seizure-free but did not make significant or lasting gains in language. Our report extends the clinical epilepsy phenotype in children with SLC9A6 mutations to include electrographic status epilepticus of sleep. In addition, felbamate was an effective treatment for electrographic status epilepticus of sleep in our patient.

[PMID: 25044251]
Recently, Christianson syndrome (CS) has been determined to be caused by mutations in the X-linked Na(+) /H(+) exchanger 6 (NHE6). We aimed to determine the diagnostic criteria and mutational spectrum for CS. Twelve independent pedigrees (14 boys, age = 4-19 years) with mutations in NHE6 were administered standardized research assessments, and mutations were characterized. The mutational spectrum was composed of 9 single nucleotide variants, 2 indels, and 1 copy number variation deletion. All mutations were protein-truncating or splicing mutations. We identified 2 recurrent mutations (c.1498 c>t, p.R500X; and c.1710 g>a, p.W570X). Otherwise, all mutations were unique. In our study, 7 of 12 mutations (58%) were de novo, in contrast to prior literature wherein mutations were largely inherited. We also report prominent neurological, medical, and behavioral symptoms. All CS participants were nonverbal and had intellectual disability, epilepsy, and ataxia. Many had prior diagnoses of autism and/or Angelman syndrome. Other neurologic symptoms included eye movement abnormalities (79%), postnatal microcephaly (92%), and magnetic resonance imaging evidence of cerebellar atrophy (33%). Regression was noted in 50%, with recurrent presentations involving loss of words and/or the ability to walk. Medical symptoms, particularly gastrointestinal symptoms, were common. Height and body mass index measures were below normal ranges in most participants. Behavioral symptoms included hyperkinetic behavior (100%), and a majority exhibited high pain threshold. This is the largest cohort of independent CS pedigrees reported. We propose diagnostic criteria for CS. CS represents a novel neurogenetic disorder with general relevance to autism, intellectual disability, Angelman syndrome, epilepsy, and regression.

[PMID: 25273398]
Christianson syndrome (CS) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder caused by deleterious mutations in SLC9A6. Affected families organized the inaugural Christianson Syndrome Association conference to advance CS knowledge and develop questions that may be prioritized in future research.

[PMID: 27142213]
Christianson syndrome (OMIM 300243), caused by mutations in the X-linked SLC9A6 gene, is characterized by severe global developmental delay and intellectual disability, developmental regression, epilepsy, microcephaly and impaired ocular movements. It shares many common features with Angelman syndrome. Carrier females have been described as having learning difficulties with mild to moderate intellectual disability, behavioural issues and psychiatric illnesses. There is little literature on the carrier female phenotype of Christianson syndrome. We describe a large extended family with three affected males, four carrier females, one presumed carrier female and one obligate carrier female with a c.190G>T, p.E64X mutation known to cause a premature stop codon in SLC9A6. We characterize and expand the clinical phenotype of female SLC9A6 mutation carriers by comparing our described family with female carriers previously discussed in the literature. In particular, we highlight the neurodevelopmental and psychiatric phenotypes observed in our family and previous reports.

[PMID: 26515654]
Christianson syndrome (CS) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental and neurological disorder characterized in males by core symptoms that include non-verbal status, intellectual disability, epilepsy, truncal ataxia, postnatal microcephaly and hyperkinesis. CS is caused by mutations in the SLC9A6 gene, which encodes a multipass transmembrane sodium (potassium)-hydrogen exchanger 6 (NHE6) protein, functional in early recycling endosomes. The extent and variability of the CS phenotype in female heterozygotes, who presumably express the wild-type and mutant SLC9A6 alleles mosaically as a result of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI), have not yet been systematically characterized. Slc9a6 knockout mice (Slc9a6 KO) were generated by insertion of the bacterial lacZ/β-galactosidase (β-Gal) reporter into exon 6 of the X-linked gene. Mutant Slc9a6 KO male mice have been shown to develop late endosomal/lysosomal dysfunction associated with glycolipid accumulation in selected neuronal populations and patterned degeneration of Purkinje cells (PCs). In heterozygous female Slc9a6 KO mice, β-Gal serves as a transcriptional/XCI reporter and thus facilitates testing of effects of mosaic expression of the mutant allele on penetrance of the abnormal phenotype. Using β-Gal, we demonstrated mosaic expression of the mutant Slc9a6 allele and mosaically distributed lysosomal glycolipid accumulation and PC pathology in the brains of heterozygous Slc9a6 KO female mice. At the behavioral level, we showed that heterozygous female mice suffer from visuospatial memory and motor coordination deficits similar to but less severe than those observed in X-chromosome hemizygous mutant males. Our studies in heterozygous Slc9a6 KO female mice provide important clues for understanding the likely phenotypic range of Christianson syndrome among females heterozygous for SLC9A6 mutations and might improve diagnostic practice and genetic counseling by helping to characterize this presumably underappreciated patient/carrier group.

[PMID: 27256868]
Using targeted next generation sequencing, we have identified a splicing mutation (c.526-9_526-5del) in the SLC9A6 gene in a 9-year-old boy with mild intellectual disability (ID), microcephaly, and social interaction disabilities. This intronic microdeletion leads to the skipping of exon 3 and to an in-frame deletion of 26 amino acids in the TM4 domain. It segregates with cognitive impairment or learning difficulties in other members of the family. Mutations in SLC9A6 have been reported in X-linked Christianson syndrome associating severe to profound intellectual deficiency and an Angelman-like phenotype with microcephaly, absent speech, ataxia with progressive cerebellar atrophy, ophthalmoplegia, epilepsy, and neurological regression. The proband and his maternal uncle both have an attenuated phenotype with mild ID, attention deficit disorder, speech difficulties, and mild asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. The proband also have microcephaly. The mutation cosegregated with learning disabilities and speech difficulties in the female carriers (mother and three sisters of the proband). Detailed neuropsychological, speech, and occupational therapy investigations in the female carriers revealed impaired oral and written language acquisition, with dissociation between verbal and performance IQ. An abnormal phenotype, ranging from learning disability with predominant speech difficulties to mild intellectual deficiency, has been described previously in a large proportion of female carriers. Besides broadening the clinical spectrum of SLC9A6 gene mutations, we present an example of a monogenic origin of mild learning disability. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 20949524]
Christianson syndrome is an X-linked mental retardation syndrome characterized by microcephaly, impaired ocular movement, severe global developmental delay, hypotonia which progresses to spasticity, and early onset seizures of variable types. Gilfillan et al.2008] reported mutations in SLC9A6, the gene encoding the sodium/hydrogen exchanger NHE6, in the family first reported and in three others. They also noted the clinical similarities to Angelman syndrome and found cerebellar atrophy on MRI and elevated glutamate/glutamine in the basal ganglia on MRS. Here we report on nonsense mutations in two additional families. The natural history is detailed in childhood and adult life, the similarities to Angelman syndrome confirmed, and the MRI/MRS findings documented in three affected boys.

[PMID: 25002837]
Autism imposes a major impediment to childhood development and a huge emotional and financial burden on society. In recent years, there has been rapidly accumulating genetic evidence that links the eNHE, a subset of Na(+)/H(+) exchangers that localize to intracellular vesicles, to a variety of neurological conditions including autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), intellectual disability, and epilepsy. By providing a leak pathway for protons pumped by the V-ATPase, eNHE determine luminal pH and regulate cation (Na(+), K(+)) content in early and recycling endosomal compartments. Loss-of-function mutations in eNHE cause hyperacidification of endosomal lumen, as a result of imbalance in pump and leak pathways. Two isoforms, NHE6 and NHE9 are highly expressed in brain, including hippocampus and cortex. Here, we summarize evidence for the importance of luminal cation content and pH on processing, delivery and fate of cargo. Drawing upon insights from model organisms and mammalian cells we show how eNHE affect surface expression and function of membrane receptors and neurotransmitter transporters. These studies lead to cellular models of eNHE activity in pre- and post-synaptic neurons and astrocytes, where they could impact synapse development and plasticity. The study of eNHE has provided new insight on the mechanism of autism and other debilitating neurological disorders and opened up new possibilities for therapeutic intervention.

[PMID: 27590723]
Christianson Syndrome, a recently identified X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder, is caused by mutations in the human gene SLC9A6 encoding the recycling endosomal alkali cation/proton exchanger NHE6. The patients have pronounced limitations in cognitive ability, motor skills and adaptive behaviour. However, the mechanistic basis for this disorder is poorly understood as few of the more than 20 mutations identified thus far have been studied in detail. Here, we examined the molecular and cellular consequences of a 6 base-pair deletion of amino acids Glu(287) and Ser(288) (∆ES) in the predicted seventh transmembrane helix of human NHE6 expressed in established cell lines (CHO/AP-1, HeLa and neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y) and primary cultures of mouse hippocampal neurons by measuring levels of protein expression, stability, membrane trafficking, endosomal function and cell viability. In the cell lines, immunoblot analyses showed that the nascent mutant protein was properly synthesized and assembled as a homodimer, but its oligosaccharide maturation and half-life were markedly reduced compared to wild-type (WT) and correlated with enhanced ubiquitination leading to both proteasomal and lysosomal degradation. Despite this instability, a measurable fraction of the transporter was correctly sorted to the plasma membrane. However, the rates of clathrin-mediated endocytosis of the ∆ES mutant as well as uptake of companion vesicular cargo, such as the ligand-bound transferrin receptor, were significantly reduced and correlated with excessive endosomal acidification. Notably, ectopic expression of ∆ES but not WT induced apoptosis when examined in AP-1 cells. Similarly, in transfected primary cultures of mouse hippocampal neurons, membrane trafficking of the ∆ES mutant was impaired and elicited marked reductions in total dendritic length, area and arborization, and triggered apoptotic cell death. These results suggest that loss-of-function mutations in NHE6 disrupt recycling endosomal function and trafficking of cargo which ultimately leads to neuronal degeneration and cell death in Christianson Syndrome.

[PMID: 24839169]
Several genetic disorders are characterized by normal head size at birth, followed by deceleration in head growth resulting in postnatal microcephaly. Among these are classic disorders such as Angelman syndrome and MECP2-related disorder (formerly Rett syndrome), as well as more recently described clinical entities associated with mutations in CASK, CDKL5, CREBBP, and EP300 (Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome), FOXG1, SLC9A6 (Christianson syndrome), and TCF4 (Pitt-Hopkins syndrome). These disorders can be identified clinically by phenotyping across multiple neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral realms, and enough data are available to recognize these postnatal microcephaly disorders as separate diagnostic entities in their own right. A second diagnostic grouping, comprised of Warburg MICRO syndrome, Cockayne syndrome, and Cerebral-oculo-facial skeletal syndrome, share similar features of somatic growth failure, ophthalmologic, and dysmorphologic features. Many postnatal microcephaly syndromes are caused by mutations in genes important in the regulation of gene expression in the developing forebrain and hindbrain, although important synaptic structural genes also play a role. This is an emerging group of disorders with a fascinating combination of brain malformations, specific epilepsies, movement disorders, and other complex neurobehavioral abnormalities.

[PMID: 24285247]
Christianson syndrome (CS) is caused by mutations in SLC9A6 and is characterized by severe intellectual disability, absent speech, microcephaly, ataxia, seizures, and behavioral abnormalities. The clinical phenotypes of CS and Angelman syndrome (AS) are similar. Differentiation between CS and AS is important in terms of genetic counseling. We report on two children with CS and confirmed mutations in SLC9A6 focusing on neuroimaging findings and review the available literature. Cerebellar atrophy (CA) occurs in approximately 60% of the patients with CS and develops after the age of 12 months. Hyperintense signal of the cerebellar cortex (CbC) is less common, and may be diffuse, patchy, or involve only the inferior part of the cerebellum and is best seen on coronal fluid attenuation inversion recovery images. CA and CbC-hyperintensity are not neuroimaging features of AS. In a child with the phenotype of AS, CA and/or CbC-hyperintensity are rather specific for CS and should prioritize sequencing of SLC9A6.

[PMID: 24779060]
Angelman syndrome (AS) is caused by a lack of expression of the maternally inherited UBE3A gene in the brain. However, about 10% of individuals with a clinical diagnosis of AS do not have an identifiable molecular defect. It is likely that most of those individuals have an AS-like syndrome that is clinically and molecularly distinct from AS. These AS-like syndromes can be broadly classified into chromosomal microdeletion and microduplication syndromes, and single-gene disorders. The microdeletion/microduplication syndromes are now easily identified by chromosomal microarray analysis and include Phelan–McDermid syndrome (chromosome 22q13.3 deletion), MBD5 haploinsufficiency syndrome (chromosome 2q23.1 deletion), and KANSL1 haploinsufficiency syndrome (chromosome 17q21.31 deletion). The single-gene disorders include Pitt–Hopkins syndrome (TCF4), Christianson syndrome (SLC9A6), Mowat–Wilson syndrome (ZEB2), Kleefstra syndrome (EHMT1), and Rett (MECP2) syndrome. They also include disorders due to mutations in HERC2, adenylosuccinase lyase (ADSL), CDKL5, FOXG1, MECP2 (duplications), MEF2C, and ATRX. Although many of these single-gene disorders can be caused by chromosomal microdeletions resulting in haploinsufficiency of the critical gene, the individual disorders are often caused by intragenic mutations that cannot be detected by chromosomal microarray analysis. We provide an overview of the clinical features of these syndromes, comparing and contrasting them with AS, in the hope that it will help guide clinicians in the diagnostic work-up of individuals with AS-like syndromes.

[PMID: 21964919]
Mutations in solute carrier family 9 isoform 6 on chromosome Xq26.3 encoding sodium-hydrogen exchanger 6, a protein mainly expressed in early and recycling endosomes are known to cause a complex and slowly progressive degenerative human neurological disease. Three resulting phenotypes have so far been reported: an X-linked Angelman syndrome-like condition, Christianson syndrome and corticobasal degeneration with tau deposition, with each characterized by severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, autistic behaviour and ataxia. Hypothesizing that a sodium-hydrogen exchanger 6 deficiency would most likely disrupt the endosomal-lysosomal system of neurons, we examined Slc9a6 knockout mice with tissue staining and related techniques commonly used to study lysosomal storage disorders. As a result, we found that sodium-hydrogen exchanger 6 depletion leads to abnormal accumulation of GM2 ganglioside and unesterified cholesterol within late endosomes and lysosomes of neurons in selective brain regions, most notably the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala, the CA3 and CA4 regions and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and some areas of cerebral cortex. In these select neuronal populations, histochemical staining for β-hexosaminidase activity, a lysosomal enzyme involved in the degradation of GM2 ganglioside, was undetectable. Neuroaxonal dystrophy similar to that observed in lysosomal disease was observed in the cerebellum and was accompanied by a marked and progressive loss of Purkinje cells, particularly in those lacking the expression of Zebrin II. On behavioural testing, Slc9a6 knockout mice displayed a discrete clinical phenotype attributable to motor hyperactivity and cerebellar dysfunction. Importantly, these findings show that sodium-hydrogen exchanger 6 loss of function in the Slc9a6-targeted mouse model leads to compromise of endosomal-lysosomal function similar to lysosomal disease and to conspicuous neuronal abnormalities in specific brain regions, which in concert could provide a unified explanation for the cellular and clinical phenotypes in humans with SLC9A6 mutations.

[PMID: 21932316]
Interstitial deletions of chromosome band Xq26.3 are rare. We report on a 2-year-old boy in whom array comparative genomic hybridization analysis revealed an interstitial 314 kb deletion in Xq26.3 affecting SLC9A6 and FHL1. Mutations in SLC9A6 are associated with Christianson syndrome (OMIM 300243), a syndromic form of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) characterized by microcephaly, severe global developmental delay, ataxia and seizures. FHL1 mutations cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (OMIM 310300), X-linked myopathy with postural muscle atrophy (XMPMA, OMIM 300696), scapuloperoneal myopathy (OMIM 300695), or reducing body myopathy (OMIM 300717, 300718). The clinical problems of the patient reported here comprised severe intellectual disability, absent speech, ataxia, epilepsy, and gastroesophageal reflux, and could mostly be attributed to SLC9A6 insufficiency. In contrast to the majority of reported Christianson syndrome patients who were microcephalic, this patient was normocephalic, but his head circumference had decelerated from the 50th centile at birth to the 25th centile at the age of 2 ²/¹² years. Muscle problems due to the FHL1 deletion are not to be expected before late childhood, which is the earliest age of onset for FHL1 associated Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. This patient broadens the spectrum of SLC9A6 mutations and contributes to the clinical delineation of Christianson syndrome. This is also the first patient with a deletion affecting both SLC9A6 and the complete FHL1 gene.

[PMID: 22541666]
Mutations in the SLC9A6 gene cause Christianson syndrome in boys. This X-linked syndrome is characterized by profound mental retardation with autistic behavior, microcephaly, epilepsy, ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia. Progressive cerebellar atrophy with motor regression is a remarkable feature in some patients. We report on a 22year-old male patient with Christianson syndrome carrying the novel p.Gln306X mutation. The infantile phenotype suggested pervasive developmental disorder, then profound mental retardation ensued. In later childhood, progressive cerebellar atrophy was diagnosed on serial brain MRIs and motor regression occurred. Furthermore, ophthalmological evaluations showed a retinitis pigmentosum previously unreported in this condition. We conclude that the natural history of the disease in this patient tends to confirm the degenerative nature of Christianson syndrome, and that retinal degeneration may be part of the condition. Before the onset of degeneration, the syndromic association of severe mental retardation, autistic behavior, external ophthalmoplegia, and facial dysmorphism in male patients is a clue to the diagnosis.