[PMID: 23185759]
To observe the metabolin difference between hypertension patients of Gan-yang hyperactivity syndrome (GYHS) and those of yin-yang deficiency syndrome (YYDS). Totally 26 hypertension patients at the Base for Chinese Medicine Clinical Research of Hypertension from June 2009 to May 2010 were assigned to two groups, the GYHS group (12 cases) and the YYDS group (14 cases). Besides, 14 healthy volunteers from the affiliated community were recruited as the control group. Their blood plasmas and principle component analysis (PCA) were analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography-time of flight mass spectrometry (HPLC-TOFMS) technology. The correlated metabolin and their metabolic pathways were identified using Metlin Database. The PCA chart showed that the dispersion was larger in the control group than in the other two groups. The data of the GYHS group and the YYDS group showed gathering tendency. Further PCA results showed good spatial separation between the two groups, with significant difference between them. Totally 6 metabolins were detected. Of them, estrodiol, leucotriene, ceramide, and glucose-ceramide increased more in the GYHS group, while triglyceride and diacylglycerol increased more significantly in the YYDS group. HPLC-TOFMS is capable of primarily identifying and clarifying different metabolic modes of the GYHS and the YYDS. Different contents of estrodiol, leucotriene, ceramide, glucose-ceramide, triglyceride, and diacylglycerol might probably become the differential points for identifying the two syndrome types.

[PMID: 25496351]
An autonomous metabolomic workflow combining mass spectrometry analysis with tandem mass spectrometry data acquisition was designed to allow for simultaneous data processing and metabolite characterization. Although previously tandem mass spectrometry data have been generated on the fly, the experiments described herein combine this technology with the bioinformatic resources of XCMS and METLIN. As a result of this unique integration, we can analyze large profiling datasets and simultaneously obtain structural identifications. Validation of the workflow on bacterial samples allowed the profiling on the order of a thousand metabolite features with simultaneous tandem mass spectra data acquisition. The tandem mass spectrometry data acquisition enabled automatic search and matching against the METLIN tandem mass spectrometry database, shortening the current workflow from days to hours. Overall, the autonomous approach to untargeted metabolomics provides an efficient means of metabolomic profiling, and will ultimately allow the more rapid integration of comparative analyses, metabolite identification, and data analysis at a systems biology level.

[PMID: 16404815]
Endogenous metabolites have gained increasing interest over the past 5 years largely for their implications in diagnostic and pharmaceutical biomarker discovery. METLIN (http://metlin.scripps.edu), a freely accessible web-based data repository, has been developed to assist in a broad array of metabolite research and to facilitate metabolite identification through mass analysis. METLINincludes an annotated list of known metabolite structural information that is easily cross-correlated with its catalogue of high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) spectra, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra, and LC/MS data.

[PMID: 23631600]
Reversed-phase gradient LC-MS was used to perform untargeted metabonomic analysis on extracts of human colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines (COLO 205, HT-29, HCT 116 and SW620) subcutaneously implanted into age-matched athymic nude male mice to study small molecule metabolic profiles and examine possible correlations with human cancer biopsies. Following high mass accuracy data analysis using MS and MS/MS, metabolites were identified by searching against major metabolite databases including METLIN, MASSBANK, The Human Metabolome Database, PubChem, Biospider, LipidMaps and KEGG. HT-29 and COLO 205 tumor xenografts showed a distribution of metabolites that differed from SW620 and HCT 116 xenografts (predominantly on the basis of relative differences in the amounts of amino acids and lipids detected). This finding is consistent with NMR-based analysis of human colorectal tissue, where the metabolite profiles of HT-29 tumors exhibit the greatest similarity to human rectal cancer tissue with respect to changes in the relative amounts of lipids and choline-containing compounds. As the metabolic signatures of cancer cells result from oncogene-directed metabolic reprogramming, the HT-29 xenografts in mice may prove to be a useful model to further study the tumor microenvironment and cancer biology.

[PMID: 21696903]
A rapid, sensitive and versatile liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC/ESI-MS/MS) method was developed for the comprehensive analyses of the chemical constituents contained in the Chinese medicine-Venenum Bufonis (VB, Chan' Su in Chinese). LC analysis was carried out on an Agilent Eclipse plus C₁₈ RRHD column (2.1 × 150 mm, 1.8 μm) with a linear gradient solvent system of water (0.1% formic acid) and acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) as mobile phase. Detection and quantification were performed by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) transitions via electrospray ionization (ESI) source operating in the positive ionization mode. Through "Molecular Feature Extraction" (MFE), more than 900 features were detected from VB extracts. Among them, a total of 97 components were identified using the Agilent METLIN accurate mass matching database (DB) established according to those reported in the literatures. Further more, 30 high quality matches were obtained by comparisons of their accurate mass and retention times (AMRT) with those imported out in the developed personal database (METLIN DB with AMRT). The characteristic fragmentation pathways were proposed for the tentative characterization of four representative types of bufadienolides in the present work. The targeted MS/MS experiment of the 30 major compounds was performed for their quantification and semi-quantification. And 7 of them were quantified over the assaying concentration range of 5.0-500 pg/μL. The lowest limit of detection and quantification of them were 0.25-0.50 and 1.25-0.25 pg/μL, respectively. The recoveries varied from 83 to 106% depending on the chemical types and different extraction solvents. The remained 23 bufosteroids were simultaneously semi-quantified using three representative standard compounds as their standard references, respectively.

[PMID: 22768229]
Searching metabolites against databases according to their masses is often the first step in metabolite identification for a mass spectrometry-based untargeted metabolomics study. Major metabolite databases include Human Metabolome DataBase (HMDB), Madison Metabolomics Consortium Database (MMCD), Metlin, and LIPID MAPS. Since each one of these databases covers only a fraction of the metabolome, integration of the search results from these databases is expected to yield a more comprehensive coverage. However, the manual combination of multiple search results is generally difficult when identification of hundreds of metabolites is desired. We have implemented a web-based software tool that enables simultaneous mass-based search against the four major databases, and the integration of the results. In addition, more complete chemical identifier information for the metabolites is retrieved by cross-referencing multiple databases. The search results are merged based on IUPAC International Chemical Identifier (InChI) keys. Besides a simple list of m/z values, the software can accept the ion annotation information as input for enhanced metabolite identification. The performance of the software is demonstrated on mass spectrometry data acquired in both positive and negative ionization modes. Compared with search results from individual databases, MetaboSearch provides better coverage of the metabolome and more complete chemical identifier information. The software tool is available at http://omics.georgetown.edu/MetaboSearch.html.

[PMID: 24015273]
To determine if plasma metabolic profiles can detect differences between patients with neovascular age-related macular degeneration (NVAMD) and similarly-aged controls. Metabolomic analysis using liquid chromatography with Fourier-transform mass spectrometry (LC-FTMS) was performed on plasma samples from 26 NVAMD patients and 19 controls. Data were collected from mass/charge ratio (m/z) 85 to 850 on a Thermo LTQ-FT mass spectrometer, and metabolic features were extracted using an adaptive processing software package. Both non-transformed and log2 transformed data were corrected using Benjamini and Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) to account for multiple testing. Orthogonal Partial Least Squares-Discriminant Analysis was performed to determine metabolic features that distinguished NVAMD patients from controls. Individual m/z features were matched to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database and the Metlin metabolomics database, and metabolic pathways associated with NVAMD were identified using MetScape. Of the 1680 total m/z features detected by LC-FTMS, 94 unique m/z features were significantly different between NVAMD patients and controls using FDR (q = 0.05). A comparison of these features to those found with log2 transformed data (n = 132, q = 0.2) revealed 40 features in common, reaffirming the involvement of certain metabolites. Such metabolites included di- and tripeptides, covalently modified amino acids, bile acids, and vitamin D-related metabolites. Correlation analysis revealed associations among certain significant features, and pathway analysis demonstrated broader changes in tyrosine metabolism, sulfur amino acid metabolism, and amino acids related to urea metabolism. These data suggest that metabolomic analysis can identify a panel of individual metabolites that differ between NVAMD cases and controls. Pathway analysis can assess the involvement of certain metabolic pathways, such as tyrosine and urea metabolism, and can provide further insight into the pathophysiology of AMD.

[PMID: 19137116]
In an effort to simplify and streamline compound identification from metabolomics data generated by liquid chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry, we have created software for constructing Personalized Metabolite Databases with content from over 15,000 compounds pulled from the public METLIN database (http://metlin.scripps.edu/). Moreover, we have added extra functionalities to the database that (a) permit the addition of user-defined retention times as an orthogonal searchable parameter to complement accurate mass data; and (b) allow interfacing to separate software, a Molecular Formula Generator (MFG), that facilitates reliable interpretation of any database matches from the accurate mass spectral data. To test the utility of this identification strategy, we added retention times to a subset of masses in this database, representing a mixture of 78 synthetic urine standards. The synthetic mixture was analyzed and screened against this METLIN urine database, resulting in 46 accurate mass and retention time matches. Human urine samples were subsequently analyzed under the same analytical conditions and screened against this database. A total of 1387 ions were detected in human urine; 16 of these ions matched both accurate mass and retention time parameters for the 78 urine standards in the database. Another 374 had only an accurate mass match to the database, with 163 of those masses also having the highest MFG score. Furthermore, MFG calculated a formula for a further 849 ions that had no match to the database. Taken together, these results suggest that the METLIN Personal Metabolite database and MFG software offer a robust strategy for confirming the formula of database matches. In the event of no database match, it also suggests possible formulas that may be helpful in interpreting the experimental results.

[PMID: 23593322]
Malaria is a global infectious disease that threatens the lives of millions of people. Transcriptomics, proteomics and functional genomics studies, as well as sequencing of the Plasmodium falciparum and Homo sapiens genomes, have shed new light on this host-parasite relationship. Recent advances in accurate mass measurement mass spectrometry, sophisticated data analysis software, and availability of biological pathway databases, have converged to facilitate our global, untargeted biochemical profiling study of in vitro P. falciparum-infected (IRBC) and uninfected (NRBC) erythrocytes. In order to expand the number of detectable metabolites, several key analytical steps in our workflows were optimized. Untargeted and targeted data mining resulted in detection of over one thousand features or chemical entities. Untargeted features were annotated via matching to the METLIN metabolite database. For targeted data mining, we queried the data using a compound database derived from a metabolic reconstruction of the P. falciparum genome. In total, over one hundred and fifty differential annotated metabolites were observed. To corroborate the representation of known biochemical pathways from our data, an inferential pathway analysis strategy was used to map annotated metabolites onto the BioCyc pathway collection. This hypothesis-generating approach resulted in over-representation of many metabolites onto several IRBC pathways, most prominently glycolysis. In addition, components of the "branched" TCA cycle, partial urea cycle, and nucleotide, amino acid, chorismate, sphingolipid and fatty acid metabolism were found to be altered in IRBCs. Interestingly, we detected and confirmed elevated levels for cyclic ADP ribose and phosphoribosyl AMP in IRBCs, a novel observation. These metabolites may play a role in regulating the release of intracellular Ca(2+) during P. falciparum infection. Our results support a strategy of global metabolite profiling by untargeted data acquisition. Untargeted and targeted data mining workflows, when used together to perform pathway-inferred metabolomics, have the benefit of obviating MS/MS confirmation for every detected compound.

[PMID: 25322782]
Metabolomics is a real challenge owing to the complexity and chemical heterogeneity of biological samples. In this study, a comparative analysis of metabolite profiling using ten metabolite extraction techniques were investigated on a pooled plasma sample followed by direct infusion ESI-MS analysis on both positive and negative modes. Methodology & Results: Metabolites from a pooled sample of 50 healthy volunteers were separated one- and two-dimensionally utilizing solvent precipitation, solid-phase extraction and molecular weight fractionation. Numbers of unique metabolites that are specific to a particular sample preparation approach were also identified by online available database, Metlin. The (1)H NMR study of different extraction procedures were also recorded to elaborate the comparative profiling of the various fractionation procedures. The results of this study suggest that the metabolite extraction procedures based on 1- and 2-dimensions, followed by direct infusion ESI-MS analysis were able to detect endogenous metabolites belonging to different chemical classes.

[PMID: 23829391]
Mass spectrometry-based metabolomics relies on MS(2) data for structural characterization of metabolites. To obtain the high-quality MS(2) data necessary to support metabolite identifications, ions of interest must be purely isolated for fragmentation. Here, we show that metabolomic MS(2) data are frequently characterized by contaminating ions that prevent structural identification. Although using narrow-isolation windows can minimize contaminating MS(2) fragments, even narrow windows are not always selective enough, and they can complicate data analysis by removing isotopic patterns from MS(2) spectra. Moreover, narrow windows can significantly reduce sensitivity. In this work, we introduce a novel, two-part approach for performing metabolomic identifications that addresses these issues. First, we collect MS(2) scans with less stringent isolation settings to obtain improved sensitivity at the expense of specificity. Then, by evaluating MS(2) fragment intensities as a function of retention time and precursor mass targeted for MS(2) analysis, we obtain deconvolved MS(2) spectra that are consistent with pure standards and can therefore be used for metabolite identification. The value of our approach is highlighted with metabolic extracts from brain, liver, astrocytes, as well as nerve tissue, and performance is evaluated by using pure metabolite standards in combination with simulations based on raw MS(2) data from the METLIN metabolite database. A R package implementing the algorithms used in our workflow is available on our laboratory website ( http://pattilab.wustl.edu/decoms2.php ).

[PMID: 20810534]
This paper presents an liquid chromatography (LC)/mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabonomic platform that combined the discovery of differential metabolites through principal component analysis (PCA) with the verification by selective multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). These methods were applied to analyze plasma samples from liver disease patients and healthy donors. LC-MS raw data (about 1000 compounds), from the plasma of liver failure patients (n = 26) and healthy controls (n = 16), were analyzed through the PCA method and a pattern recognition profile that had significant difference between liver failure patients and healthy controls (P < 0.05) was established. The profile was verified in 165 clinical subjects. The specificity and sensitivity of this model in predicting liver failure were 94.3 and 100.0%, respectively. The differential ions with m/z of 414.5, 432.0, 520.5, and 775.0 were verified to be consistent with the results from PCA by MRM mode in 40 clinical samples, and were proved not to be caused by the medicines taken by patients through rat model experiments. The compound with m/z of 520.5 was identified to be 1-Linoleoylglycerophosphocholine or 1-Linoleoylphosphatidylcholine through exact mass measurements performed using Ion Trap-Time-of-Flight MS and METLIN Metabolite Database search. In all, it was the first time to integrate metabonomic study and MRM relative quantification of differential peaks in a large number of clinical samples. Thereafter, a rat model was used to exclude drug effects on the abundance of differential ion peaks. 1-Linoleoylglycerophosphocholine or 1-Linoleoylphosphatidylcholine, a potential biomarker, was identified. The LC/MS-based metabonomic platform could be a powerful tool for the metabonomic screening of plasma biomarkers.

[PMID: 23391889]
Untargeted metabolomics provides a comprehensive platform for identifying metabolites whose levels are altered between two or more populations. By using liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC-Q-TOF-MS), hundreds to thousands of peaks with a unique m/z ratio and retention time are routinely detected from most biological samples in an untargeted profiling experiment. Each peak, termed a metabolomic feature, can be characterized on the basis of its accurate mass, retention time and tandem mass spectral fragmentation pattern. Here a seven-step protocol is suggested for such a characterization by using the METLIN metabolite database. The protocol starts from untargeted metabolomic LC-Q-TOF-MS data that have been analyzed with the bioinformatics program XCMS, and it describes a strategy for selecting interesting features as well as performing subsequent targeted tandem MS. The seven steps described will require 2-4 h to complete per feature, depending on the compound.

[PMID: 17951291]
We applied untargeted mass spectrometry-based metabolomics to the diseases methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) and propionic acidemia (PA). We used a screening platform that used untargeted, mass-based metabolomics of methanol-extracted plasma to find significantly different molecular features in human plasma samples from MMA and PA patients and from healthy individuals. Capillary reverse phase liquid chromatography (4 microL/min) was interfaced to a TOF mass spectrometer, and data were processed using nonlinear alignment software (XCMS) and an online database (METLIN) to find and identify metabolites differentially regulated in disease. Of the approximately 3500 features measured, propionyl carnitine was easily identified as the best biomarker of disease (P value 1.3 x 10(-18)), demonstrating the proof-of-concept use of untargeted metabolomics in clinical chemistry discovery. Five additional acylcarnitine metabolites showed significant differentiation between plasma from patients and healthy individuals, and gamma-butyrobetaine was highly increased in a subset of patients. Two acylcarnitine metabolites and numerous unidentified species differentiate MMA and PA. Many metabolites that do not appear in any public database, and that remain unidentified, varied significantly between normal, MMA, and PA, underscoring the complex downstream metabolic effects resulting from the defect in a single enzyme. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates that metabolomics can expand the range of metabolites associated with human disease and shows that this method may be useful for disease diagnosis and patient clinical evaluation.

[PMID: 25462372]
Data analysis is a key step in mass spectrometry based untargeted metabolomics, starting with the generation of generic peak lists from raw liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) data. Due to the use of various algorithms by different workflows, the results of different peak-picking strategies often differ widely. Raw LC/HRMS data from two types of biological samples (bile and urine), as well as a standard mixture of 84 metabolites, were processed with four peak-picking softwares: Peakview®, Markerview™, MetabolitePilot™ and XCMS Online. The overlaps between the results of each peak-generating method were then investigated. To gauge the relevance of peak lists, a database search using the METLIN online database was performed to determine which features had accurate masses matching known metabolites as well as a secondary filtering based on MS/MS spectral matching. In this study, only a small proportion of all peaks (less than 10%) were common to all four software programs. Comparison of database searching results showed peaks found uniquely by one workflow have less chance of being found in the METLIN metabolomics database and are even less likely to be confirmed by MS/MS. It was shown that the performance of peak-generating workflows has a direct impact on untargeted metabolomics results. As it was demonstrated that the peaks found in more than one peak detection workflow have higher potential to be identified by accurate mass as well as MS/MS spectrum matching, it is suggested to use the overlap of different peak-picking workflows as preliminary peak lists for more rugged statistical analysis in global metabolomics investigations.

[PMID: 18627180]
Mass spectrometry based metabolomics represents a new area for bioinformatics technology development. While the computational tools currently available such as XCMS statistically assess and rank LC-MS features, they do not provide information about their structural identity. XCMS(2) is an open source software package which has been developed to automatically search tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data against high quality experimental MS/MS data from known metabolites contained in a reference library (METLIN). Scoring of hits is based on a "shared peak count" method that identifies masses of fragment ions shared between the analytical and reference MS/MS spectra. Another functional component of XCMS(2) is the capability of providing structural information for unknown metabolites, which are not in the METLIN database. This "similarity search" algorithm has been developed to detect possible structural motifs in the unknown metabolite which may produce characteristic fragment ions and neutral losses to related reference compounds contained in METLIN, even if the precursor masses are not the same.

[PMID: 15801754]
Metabolites in islets of Langerhans and Escherichia coli strain DH5-alpha were analyzed using negative-mode, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). For analysis of anionic metabolites by MALDI, 9-aminoacridine as the matrix yielded a far superior signal in comparison to alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 2,5-dihydrobenzoic acid, 2,4,6,-trihydroxyacetophenone, and 3-hydroxypicolinic acid. Limits of detection for metabolite standards were as low as 15 nM for GDP, GTP, ADP, and ATP and as high as 1 muM for succinate in 1-muL samples. Analysis of islet extracts allowed detection of 44 metabolites, 29 of which were tentatively identified by matching molecular weight to compounds in METLIN and KEGG databases. Relative quantification was demonstrated by comparing the ratio of selected di- and triphosphorylated nucleotides for islets incubated with different concentrations of glucose. For islets at 3 mM glucose, concentration ratios of ATP/ADP, GTP/GDP, and UTP/UDP were 1.9 +/- 1.39, 1.12 +/- 0.50, and 0.79 +/- 0.35 respectively, and at 20 mM glucose stimulation, the ratios increased to 4.13 +/- 1.89, 5.62 +/-4.48, and 4.30 +/- 4.07 (n = 3). Analysis was also performed by placing individual, intact islets on a MALDI target plate with matrix and impinging the laser directly on the dried islet. Direct analysis of single islets allowed detection of 43 metabolites, 28 of which were database identifiable. A total of 43% of detected metabolites from direct islet analysis were different from those detected in islet extracts. The method was extended to prokaryotic cells by analysis of extracts from E. coli. Sixty metabolites were detected, 39 of which matched compounds in the MetaCyc database. A total of 27% of the metabolites detected from prokaryotes overlapped those found in islets. These results show that MALDI can be used for detection of metabolites in complex biological samples.