[PMID: 18042145]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a recently discovered group of small RNA molecules involved in the regulation of gene expression. Analogously to mRNAs, the non-protein-encoding pri-miRNAs are synthesized by RNA polymerase II and post-transcriptionally modified by addition of a 5'-cap and a 3'-poly (A) tail. Subsequently, the pri-miRNA undergoes a number of processing steps in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and ends up as a mature approximately 22 nt miRNA, which can exert its function by binding to the 3'-untranslated region of a subset of mRNAs. Binding of the miRNA to the mRNA results in a reduced translation rate and/or increased degradation of the mRNA. In this way a large number of cellular pathways, such as cellular proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, are regulated by mi-RNAs. As corruption of these pathways is the hallmark of many cancers, dysregulation of miRNA biogenesis or expression levels may lead to tumorigenesis. The mechanisms that alter the expression of miRNAs are similar to those that change the expression levels of mRNAs of tumor suppressor- and oncogenes, i.e. gross genomic aberrations, epigenetic changes, and minor mutations affecting the expression level, processing, or target-interaction potential of the miRNA. Furthermore, expression profiling of miRNAs has been found to be useful for classification of different tumor types. Taken together, miRNAs can be classified as onco-miRs or tumor suppressor-miRs, and may turn out to be potential targets for cancer therapy.

[PMID: 26473486]
The precise regulation of microRNA (miRNA) transcription and processing is important for eukaryotic development. Plant miRNAs are first transcribed as stem-loop primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) by RNA polymerase II,then cleaved in the nucleus into mature miRNAs by Dicer-like 1 (DCL1). We identified a cycling DOF transcription factor, CDF2, which interacts with DCL1 and regulates the accumulation of a population of miRNAs. CDF2 binds directly to the promoters of some miRNAs and works as a transcription activator or repressor for these miRNA genes. CDF2 binds preferentially to the pri-miRNAs regulated by itself and affects DCL1-mediated processing of these pri-miRNAs. Genetically, CDF2 works in the same pathway as miR156 or miR172 to control flowering. We conclude that CDF2 regulates a group of pri-miRNAs at both the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels to maintain proper levels of their mature miRNAs to control plant development.

[PMID: 18829588]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 21 nt RNAs that regulate many biological processes in plants by mediating translational inhibition or cleavage of target transcripts. Arabidopsis mutants defective in miRNA biogenesis have overlapping and highly pleiotropic phenotypes including serrated leaves and ABA hypersensitivity. Recent evidence indicates that miRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Since Pol II transcripts are capped, we hypothesized that CBP (cap-binding protein) 20 and 80 may bind to capped primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) transcripts and play a role in their processing. Here, we show that cbp20 and cbp80 mutants have reduced miRNA levels and increased pri-miRNA levels. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that pri-miRNAs 159, 166, 168 and 172 could be associated with CBP20 and CBP80. We found that CBP20 and CBP80 are stabilized by ABA by a post-translational mechanism, and these proteins are needed for ABA induction of miR159 during seed germination. The lack of miR159 accumulation in ABA-treated seeds of cbp20/80 mutants leads to increased MYB33 and MYB101 transcript levels, and presumably higher levels of these positive regulators result in ABA hypersensitivity. Genetic and molecular analyses show that CBP20 and 80 have overlapping function in the same developmental pathway as SE and HYL1. Our results identify new components in miRNA biogenesis.

[PMID: 26119101]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate many biological processes such as development, metabolism, and others. They are processed from their primary transcripts called primary miRNA transcripts (pri-miRNAs) by the processor complex containing the RNAse III enzyme, DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1), in plants. Consequently, miRNA biogenesis is controlled through altering pri-miRNA accumulation and processing, which is crucial for plant development and adaptation to environmental changes. Plant pri-miRNAs are transcribed by DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and their levels are determined through transcription and degradation, whereas pri-miRNA processing is affected by its structure, splicing, alternative splicing, loading to the processor and the processor activity, which involve in many accessory proteins. Here, we summarize recent progresses related to pri-miRNA transcription, stability, and processing in plants.

[PMID: 20144951]
The majority of human miRNA genes is transcribed by polymerase II and can be classified as class II genes similar to protein-coding genes. Whereas current research on miRNAs has focused on the physiological and pathological functions, the molecular mechanisms underlying their transcriptional regulation are largely unknown. We recently reported that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) alters mature miRNA expression profile in human biliary epithelial cells. In this study, we tested the role of transcription factor NF-kappaB in LPS-induced transcription of select miRNA genes. Of the majority of LPS-up-regulated mature miRNAs in cultured human biliary epithelial cells, potential NF-kappaB binding sites were identified in the putative promoter elements of their corresponding genes. Inhibition of NF-kappaB activation by SC-514, an IKK2 inhibitor, blocked LPS-induced up-regulation of a subset of pri-miRNAs, including pri-miR-17-92, pri-miR-125b-1, pri-miR-21, pri-miR-23b-27b-24-1, pri-miR-30b, pri-miR-130a and pri-miR-29a. Moreover, direct binding of NF-kappaB p65 subunit to the promoter elements of mir-17-92, mir-125b-1, mir-21, mir-23b-27b-24-1, mir-30b and mir-130a genes was identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis and confirmed by the luciferase reporter assay. Thus, a subset of miRNA genes is regulated in human biliary epithelial cells through NF-kappaB activation induced by LPS, suggesting a role of the NF-kappaB pathway in the transcriptional regulation of miRNA genes.

[PMID: 21702984]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNAs with important roles in regulating gene expression. Recent studies indicate that transcription and cleavage of miRNA are coupled, and that chromatin structure may influence miRNA transcription. However, little is known about the relationship between the chromatin structure and cleavage of pre-miRNA from pri-miRNA. By analysis of genome-wide nucleosome positioning data sets from human and Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), we found an enrichment of positioned nucleosome on pre-miRNA genomic sequences, which is highly correlated with GC content within pre-miRNA. In addition, obvious enrichments of three histone modifications (H2BK5me1, H3K36me3 and H4K20me1) as well as RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) were observed on pre-miRNA genomic sequences corresponding to the active-promoter miRNAs and expressed miRNAs. Our results revealed the chromatin structure characteristics of pre-miRNA genomic sequences, and implied potential mechanisms that can recognize these characteristics, thus improving pre-miRNA cleavage.

[PMID: 15372072]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a large family of noncoding RNAs that function as guide molecules in diverse gene silencing pathways. Current efforts are focused on the regulatory function of miRNAs, while little is known about how these unusual genes themselves are regulated. Here we present the first direct evidence that miRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (pol II). The primary miRNA transcripts (pri-miRNAs) contain cap structures as well as poly(A) tails, which are the unique properties of class II gene transcripts. The treatment of human cells with alpha-amanitin decreased the level of pri-miRNAs at a concentration that selectively inhibits pol II activity. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses show that pol II is physically associated with a miRNA promoter. We also describe, for the first time, the detailed structure of a miRNA gene by determining the promoter and the terminator of mir-23a approximately 27a approximately 24-2. These data indicate that pol II is the main, if not the only, RNA polymerase for miRNA gene transcription. Our study offers a basis for understanding the structure and regulation of miRNA genes.

[PMID: 26149087]
Previous studies in vivo reported that processing of primary microRNA (pri-miRNA) is coupled to transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) and can occur co-transcriptionally. Here we have established a robust in vivo system in which pri-miRNA is transcribed by RNAP II and processed to pre-miRNA in HeLa cell nuclear extracts. We show that both the kinetics and efficiency of pri-miRNA processing are dramatically enhanced in this system compared to that of the corresponding naked pri-miRNA. Moreover, this enhancement is general as it occurs with multiple pri-miRNAs. We also show that nascent pri-miRNA is efficiently processed before it is released from the DNA template. Together, our work directly demonstrates that transcription and pri-miRNA processing are functionally coupled and establishes the first in vivo model systems for this functional coupling and for co-transcriptional processing.

[PMID: 21685453]
In plant, primary transcripts (pri-miRNAs) transcribed from miRNA genes by RNA polymerase II are first processed into stem-loop pre-miRNAs and further chopped into ∼21 nt long miRNAs by RNase III-like enzyme DCL1. SERRATE (SE) protein is an essential component for miRNA processing by assisting DCL1 for accurate cleavage. Here we report the crystal structure of Arabidopsis SE core (residues 194-543) at 2.7 Å. SE core adopts the 'walking man-like' topology with N-terminal α helices, C-terminal non-canonical zinc-finger domain and novel Middle domain resembling the leading leg, the lagging leg and the body, respectively. Pull-down assay shows that SE core provides the platform for HYL1 and DCL1 binding, whereas in vitro RNA binding and in vivo mutant rescue experiments suggest that the non-canonical zinc-finger domain coupled with C-terminal tail binds miRNA precursors. SE presumably works as a scaffold-like protein capable of binding both protein and RNA to guide the positioning of miRNA precursor toward DCL1 catalytic site within miRNA processing machinery in plant.

[PMID: 15589161]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a family of small noncoding RNAs that are found in plants and animals (for recent reviews, see ). miRNAs are expressed in a developmentally and tissue-specific manner and regulate the translational efficiency and stability of partial or fully sequence-complementary mRNAs. miRNAs are excised in a stepwise process from double-stranded RNA precursors that are embedded in long RNA polymerase II primary transcripts (pri-miRNA). Drosha RNase III catalyzes the first excision event, the release in the nucleus of a hairpin RNA (pre-miRNA), which is followed by export of the pre-miRNA to the cytoplasm and further processing by Dicer to mature miRNAs. Here, we characterize the human DGCR8, the DiGeorge syndrome critical region gene 8, and its Drosophila melanogaster homolog. We provide biochemical and cell-based readouts to demonstrate the requirement of DGCR8 for the maturation of miRNA primary transcripts. RNAi knockdown experiments of fly and human DGCR8 resulted in accumulation of pri-miRNAs and reduction of pre-miRNAs and mature miRNAs. Our results suggest that DGCR8 and Drosha interact in human cells and reside in a functional pri-miRNA processing complex.

[PMID: 15525708]
The factors regulating the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs), a ubiquitous family of approximately 22-nt noncoding regulatory RNAs, remain undefined. However, it is known that miRNAs are first transcribed as a largely unstructured precursor, termed a primary miRNA (pri-miRNA), which is sequentially processed in the nucleus, to give the approximately 65-nt pre-miRNA hairpin intermediate, and then in the cytoplasm, to give the mature miRNA. Here we have sought to identify the RNA polymerase responsible for miRNA transcription and to define the structure of a full-length human miRNA. We show that the pri-miRNA precursors for nine human miRNAs are both capped and polyadenylated and report the sequence of the full-length, approximately 3433-nt pri-miR-21 RNA. This pri-miR-21 gene sequence is flanked 5' by a promoter element able to transcribe heterologous mRNAs and 3' by a consensus polyadenylation sequence. Nuclear processing of pri-miRNAs was found to be efficient, thus largely preventing the nuclear export of full-length pri-miRNAs. Nevertheless, an intact miRNA stem-loop precursor located in the 3' UTR of a protein coding gene only moderately inhibited expression of the linked open reading frame, probably because the 3' truncated mRNA could still be exported and expressed. Together, these data show that human pri-miRNAs are not only structurally similar to mRNAs but can, in fact, function both as pri-miRNAs and mRNAs.

[PMID: 21178961]
Quantitative real-time PCR (QPCR) has emerged as an accurate and valuable tool in profiling gene expression levels. One of its many advantages is a lower detection limit compared to other methods of gene expression profiling while using smaller amounts of input for each assay. Automated qPCR setup has improved this field by allowing for greater reproducibility. Its convenient and rapid setup allows for high-throughput experiments, enabling the profiling of many different genes simultaneously in each experiment. This method along with internal plate controls also reduces experimental variables common to other techniques. We recently developed a qPCR assay for profiling of pre-microRNAs (pre-miRNAs) using a set of 186 primer pairs. MicroRNAs have emerged as a novel class of small, non-coding RNAs with the ability to regulate many mRNA targets at the post-transcriptional level. These small RNAs are first transcribed by RNA polymerase II as a primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) transcript, which is then cleaved into the precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA). Pre-miRNAs are exported to the cytoplasm where Dicer cleaves the hairpin loop to yield mature miRNAs. Increases in miRNA levels can be observed at both the precursor and mature miRNA levels and profiling of both of these forms can be useful. There are several commercially available assays for mature miRNAs; however, their high cost may deter researchers from this profiling technique. Here, we discuss a cost-effective, reliable, SYBR-based qPCR method of profiling pre-miRNAs. Changes in pre-miRNA levels often reflect mature miRNA changes and can be a useful indicator of mature miRNA expression. However, simultaneous profiling of both pre-miRNAs and mature miRNAs may be optimal as they can contribute nonredundant information and provide insight into microRNA processing. Furthermore, the technique described here can be expanded to encompass the profiling of other library sets for specific pathways or pathogens.

[PMID: 19398578]
The positive regulatory machinery in the microRNA (miRNA) processing pathway is relatively well characterized, but negative regulation of the pathway is largely unknown. Here we show that a complex of nuclear factor 90 (NF90) and NF45 proteins functions as a negative regulator in miRNA biogenesis. Primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) processing into precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) was inhibited by overexpression of the NF90 and NF45 proteins, and considerable amounts of pri-miRNAs accumulated in cells coexpressing NF90 and NF45. Treatment of cells overexpressing NF90 and NF45 with an RNA polymerase II inhibitor, alpha-amanitin, did not reduce the amounts of pri-miRNAs, suggesting that the accumulation of pri-miRNAs is not due to transcriptional activation. In addition, the NF90 and NF45 complex was not found to interact with the Microprocessor complex, which is a processing factor of pri-miRNAs, but was found to bind endogenous pri-miRNAs. NF90-NF45 exhibited higher binding activity for pri-let-7a than pri-miR-21. Of note, depletion of NF90 caused a reduction of pri-let-7a and an increase of mature let-7a miRNA, which has a potent antiproliferative activity, and caused growth suppression of transformed cells. These findings suggest that the association of the NF90-NF45 complex with pri-miRNAs impairs access of the Microprocessor complex to the pri-miRNAs, resulting in a reduction of mature miRNA production.

[PMID: 25730776]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a major part in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Mammalian miRNA biogenesis begins with cotranscriptional cleavage of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcripts by the Microprocessor complex. Although most miRNAs are located within introns of protein-coding transcripts, a substantial minority of miRNAs originate from long noncoding (lnc) RNAs, for which transcript processing is largely uncharacterized. We show, by detailed characterization of liver-specific lnc-pri-miR-122 and genome-wide analysis in human cell lines, that most lncRNA transcripts containing miRNAs (lnc-pri-miRNAs) do not use the canonical cleavage-and-polyadenylation pathway but instead use Microprocessor cleavage to terminate transcription. Microprocessor inactivation leads to extensive transcriptional readthrough of lnc-pri-miRNA and transcriptional interference with downstream genes. Consequently we define a new RNase III-mediated, polyadenylation-independent mechanism of Pol II transcription termination in mammalian cells.

[PMID: 20129062]
Canonical primary microRNA (pri-miRNA) precursors are transcribed by RNA polymerase II and then processed by the Drosha endonuclease to generate approximately 60 nt pre-miRNA hairpins. Pre-miRNAs in turn are cleaved by Dicer to generate mature miRNAs. Previously, some short introns, called miRtrons, were reported to fold into pre-miRNA hairpins after splicing and debranching, and miRNAs can also be excised by Dicer cleavage of rare endogenous short hairpin RNAs. Here we report that the miRNAs encoded by murine gamma-herpesvirus 68 (MHV68) are also generated via atypical mechanisms. Specifically, MHV68 miRNAs are transcribed from RNA polymerase III promoters located within adjacent viral tRNA-like sequences. The resultant pri-miRNAs, which bear a 5' tRNA moiety, are not processed by Drosha but instead by cellular tRNase Z, which cleaves 3' to the tRNA to liberate pre-miRNA hairpins that are then processed by Dicer to yield the mature viral miRNAs.

[PMID: 22499686]
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding, short (21-23nt) regulators of protein-coding genes that are generally transcribed first into primary miRNA (pri-miR), followed by the generation of precursor miRNA (pre-miR). This finally leads to the production of the mature miRNA. A large amount of information is available on the pre- and mature miRNAs. However, very little is known about the pri-miRs, due to a lack of knowledge about their transcription start sites (TSSs). Based on the genomic loci, miRNAs can be categorized into two types --intragenic (intra-miR) and intergenic (inter-miR). While it is already an established fact that intra-miRs are commonly transcribed in conjunction with their host genes, the transcription machinery of inter-miRs is poorly understood. Although it is assumed that miRNA promoters are similar in structure to gene promoters, since both are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II), computational validations exhibit poor performance of gene promoter prediction methods on miRNAs. In this paper, we concentrate on the problem of TSS prediction for miRNAs. The present study begins with the identification of positive and negative promoter samples from recently published data stemming from RNA-sequencing studies. From these samples of experimentally validated miRNA TSSs, a number of standard sequence features are extracted. Furthermore, to account for potential footprints related to promoter regulation by CpG dinucleotide targeted DNA methylation, a number of novel features are defined. We develop a support vector machine (SVM) with RBF kernel for the prediction of miRNA TSSs trained on human miRNA promoters. A novel feature reduction technique based on archived multi-objective simulated annealing (AMOSA) identifies the final set of features. The resulting model trained on miRNA promoters shows improved performance over the one trained on protein-coding gene promoters in terms of classification accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. Results are also reported for a completely independent biologically validated test set. In a part of the investigation, the proposed approach is used to predict protein-coding gene TSSs. It shows a significantly improved performance when compared to previously published gene TSS prediction methods.

[PMID: 20655920]
MicroRNAs (miRNA) participate in regulating diverse biological pathways by translational repression in animals. They have attracted increasing attention recently. However, little work has been done on the miRNA genes in agriculturally important pests. Because the transcripts of most miRNA genes are the products of type-II RNA polymerase, pri-miRNA has a poly(A) tail and appears in expressed sequence tags (EST). We developed a computational pipeline to identify miRNA genes from insect ESTs. First, 980,697 ESTs from 63 insects were collected and used to search the nr database. The ESTs which did not share significant similarities with any known protein-coding genes were treated as non-coding ESTs. Next, known mature miRNAs were used to align with non-coding ESTs. The ESTs which contain the sequence of mature miRNA were treated as candidate ESTs. Finally, putative precursors were extracted flanking the mature miRNA region in candidate ESTs and evaluated by the Triplet-SVM algorithm. As a result, 86 miRNAs from 30 insect species were found based on a strict criterion while 330 miRNAs from 51 species were found based on a loose criterion. Evolution analysis indicated that mir-467, mir-297 and mir-466 were the highest conserved miRNA families in insects. To confirm the reliability of putative insect miRNAs, the expression profile of nine predicted miRNAs in Locusta migratoria was investigated. Eight miRNAs were successfully detected by RT-PCR. Most miRNAs were expressed ubiquitously at all examined tissues and developmental stages whereas Lmi-mir-509 was specifically expressed in the thorax of the 2nd, 4th and 5th instars and adult locust. In all, our work reported an efficient computational strategy for predicting miRNA genes from insect ESTs and presented tens of miRNAs in diverse insect species which are expected to participate in many important physiological processes.