[PMID: 23228017]
Dovitinib is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor targeting vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, fibroblast growth factor receptors and platelet-derived growth factor receptor β. Dovitinib is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we used five HCC cell lines and five endothelial cell lines to validate molecular and cellular targets of dovitinib. Tumor growth and pulmonary metastasis were significantly suppressed in an orthotopic HCC model. Immunoblotting revealed that among known dovitinib targets, only PDGFR-β was expressed in two HCC cell lines, while four of five endothelial lines expressed PDGFR-β, FGFR-1, and VEGFR-2. Dovitinib inhibited endothelial cell proliferation and motility at 0.04 μmol/L, a pharmacologically relevant concentration; it was unable to inhibit the proliferation or motility of HCC cells at the same concentration. Immunohistochemical analyses showed that dovitinib significantly decreased the microvessel density of xenograft tumors, inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis in HCC cells. Our findings indicate that dovitinib inhibits HCC growth and metastasis preferentially through an antiangiogenic mechanism, not through direct targeting of HCC cells.

[PMID: 24908540]
Everolimus (mammalian target of rapmaycin (mTOR) inhibitor) and dovitinib (vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) inhibitor) demonstrate activity in metastatic clear cell renal cancer. The combination of these agents has a broad spectrum of relevant activity. The combination is explored in this phase Ib study. Patients with metastatic clear cell renal cancer who have failed VEGF targeted therapy were eligible. Up to four cohorts of three to six patients (3+3 design) were treated with escalating doses of everolimus and dovitinib. Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were assessed to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD). An expansion cohort (n=15) was investigated to obtain additional efficacy information. Sequential fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was used as a surrogate marker of response. Overall 18 patients were recruited into the study. Fifteen patients received the MTD, which was everolimus 5mg orally (PO) once daily (OD) and dovitinib 200mg PO day 1-5/7. The MTD was associated with toxicity, which included fatigue, mucositis and diarrhoea in 73%, 53% and 53% (Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) grade 1-4) of patients, respectively. Frequent biochemical abnormalities occurred (such as hypertriglyceridaemia in 67%). Higher doses of the combination were not tolerable due to grade 3 fatigue in 2/3 patients and grade 3 nausea in 1/3 patients within 1 month of therapy. The response rate at the MDT was 1/15 (7%) while the progression free survival for the MTD was 7 months (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.2-11 months). Pharmacokinetic data at the MTD showed stable kinetics with time. Dovitinib and everolimus had modest activity, but did not meet all of the planned efficacy end-points. Fatigue was the dose limiting toxicity.

[PMID: 21521775]
There is no standard of therapy for the treatment of Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM), therefore there is a need for the development of new agents. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) was shown to play a major role in several types in cancer. Dovitinib, an inhibitor of FGFR3, was effective in hematologic malignancies. In this study, we tested FGFR3 as a therapeutic target in WM and tested the effect of dovitinib on cell proliferation and apoptosis of WM cells in the context of BM microenvironment. The expression of FGFR3 in WM cells was tested using immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Cell signaling in response to stimulation with FGF3 and stromal cells, and its inhibition by dovitinib was performed using immunoblotting. Cell survival and cell proliferation were assessed by MTT and BrdU assays. Apoptosis was measured by detection of APO-2.7 and cleavage of caspase-3 using flow cytometry. Cell cycle was performed by PI staining of cells and flow cytometry. The combinatory effect of dovitinib with other drugs was analyzed using Calcusyn software. The effect of dovitinib was tested in vivo. FGFR3 was overexpressed in WM cells and its activation induced cell proliferation. Inhibition of FGFR3 with dovitinib decreased cell survival, increased apoptosis, and induced cell cycle arrest. Inhibition of FGFR3 by dovitinib reduced the interaction of WM to bone marrow components, and reversed its proliferative effect. Dovitinib had an additive effect with other drugs. Moreover, dovitinib reduced WM tumor progression in vivo. We report that FGFR3 is a novel therapeutic target in WM, and suggest dovitinib for future clinical trial the treatment of patients with WM.

[PMID: 23443805]
The recent identification of activating fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) mutations in endometrial cancer has generated an opportunity for a novel target-based therapy. Here, we explore the therapeutic potential of 2 FGFR inhibitors, the multikinase inhibitor dovitinib (TKI258) and the more selective FGFR inhibitor NVP-BGJ398 for the treatment of endometrial cancer. We examined the effects of both inhibitors on tumor cell growth, FGFR2 signaling, cell cycle, and apoptosis using a panel of 20 molecularly characterized human endometrial cancer cell lines. Anchorage-independent growth was studied using soft agar assays. In vivo studies were conducted using endometrial cancer xenograft models. Cell lines with activating FGFR2 mutations (S252W, N550K) were more sensitive to dovitinib or NVP-BGJ398 when compared with their FGFR2 wild-type counterparts (P = 0.073 and P = 0.021, respectively). Both agents inhibited FGFR2 signaling, induced cell-cycle arrest, and significantly increased apoptosis in FGFR2-mutant lines. In vitro, dovitinib and NVP-BGJ398 were both potent at inhibiting cell growth of FGFR2-mutant endometrial cancer cells, but the activity of dovitinib was less restricted to FGFR2-mutant lines when compared with NVP-BGJ398. In vivo, dovitinib and NVP-BGJ398 significantly inhibited the growth of FGFR2-mutated endometrial cancer xenograft models. In addition, dovitinib showed significant antitumor activity in FGFR2 wild-type endometrial cancer xenograft models including complete tumor regressions in a long-term in vivo study. Dovitinib and NVP-BGJ398 warrant further clinical evaluation in patients with FGFR2-mutated endometrial cancer. Dovitinib may have antitumor activity in endometrial cancer beyond FGFR2-mutated cases and may permit greater flexibility in patient selection.

[PMID: 24495750]
Cancer is the result of a multistep process of genomic alterations, including mutations in key regulatory proteins that result in loss of balanced gene expression and subsequent malignant transformation. Throughout the various stages of colorectal carcinoma (CRC), complex genetic alterations occur, of which over-expression of growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, fibroblast growth factor and platelet-derive growth factor and their corresponding receptor tyrosine kinases, have been shown to correlate with invasiveness, tumor angiogenesis, metastasis, recurrence, and poor prognosis of colorectal cancer. To evaluate the therapeutic effect, we combined Dovitinib, an orally bioavailable, potent inhibitor of class III-V receptor tyrosine kinases with chemotherapeutic drug, oxaliplatin in preclinical models of colon cancer. Human colon cancer cells with different RAS-RAF mutation status (HCT-116, HT-29, SW-480, CaCO2 and LS174T) were treated with a combination of Dovitinib and Oxaliplatin at low dosage followed by assays to investigate the effect of the combination on cell proliferation, cell migration, cell apoptosis and signaling pathways involved in molecular mechanism of drug(s). The antitumor effects of either of the drugs were compared to the combination using human colon carcinoma cell line HT-29 xenograft model. Treated vs untreated tumor sections were also compared for proliferation and angiogenesis markers by immunohistochemistry. The combination of dovitinib and oxaliplatin showed higher in vitro cytotoxicity in colon cell lines irrespective of their RAS-RAF status as compared to either of the drugs alone. Simultaneous inhibition of MAP kinase and AKT pathways and induction of apoptosis via activation of caspases 9/caspases 3 contributed to the synergistic effect of this combination therapy. In the xenograft model, the combination showed a significantly higher antitumor activity. Immunohistochemistry of post treatment tumors showed a significant decrease in proliferation and angiogenesis as compared to either of the treatments alone. This study demonstrates the synergistic antitumor activity of combination of dovitinib and oxaliplatin against colon cancer with different RAS-RAF status. The combination also showed its antitumor efficacy in a multidrug resistant phenotype xenograft model. This provides a basis for further investigation for its potential in clinical setting for colorectal cancer.

[PMID: 21976540]
Dovitinib (TKI258) is an orally available inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor (FGF), VEGF, and platelet-derived growth factor receptors. This phase I/II dose-escalation study was conducted to evaluate the safety, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary efficacy of dovitinib in the treatment of advanced melanoma. Patients with advanced melanoma resistant or refractory to standard therapies or for whom no standard therapy was available were enrolled. Dovitinib was administered at doses ranging from 200 to 500 mg/d. Forty-seven patients were enrolled. The most frequently reported adverse events were fatigue (77%; grade ≥3, 28%), diarrhea (77%; grade ≥3, 11%), and nausea (77%; grade ≥3, 9%). Six dose-limiting toxicities were observed in the 400-mg and 500-mg dose cohorts, which consisted of grade 3 nausea, fatigue, and diarrhea and grade 4 fatigue events. The maximum tolerated dose was 400 mg/d. The best tumor response was stable disease, which was observed in 12 patients. Increases in plasma FGF23, VEGF, and placental growth factor and decreases in soluble VEGF receptor 2 were noted during the first cycle of treatment, consistent with FGF receptor (FGFR) and VEGF receptor (VEGFR) inhibition. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI analysis showed a dose-dependent decrease in tumor blood flow and vascular permeability with dovitinib therapy. A decrease in FGFR phosphorylation was observed in paired tumor biopsy samples from a patient treated with dovitinib at a dose of 400 mg/d. At a dose of 400 mg/d, dovitinib showed an acceptable safety profile and limited clinical benefit and inhibited FGFR and VEGFR.

[PMID: 25023489]
Dovitinib is a small molecule kinase inhibitor with activity against the fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor families. The purpose of this phase Ib study was to define the recommended phase 2 dose of the combinations of gemcitabine and cisplatin or gemcitabine and carboplatin plus dovitinib. Patients with advanced solid tumors were enrolled in two parallel dose escalation arms (cisplatin- or carboplatin-based regimens). Treatment was administered with gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m(2) on days 1 and 8), cisplatin (70 mg/m(2)), or carboplatin (AUC 5) on day 1, and dovitinib (orally on days 1-5, 8-12, and 15-19), every 21 days. The starting dose of dovitinib was 300 mg and was dose escalated in successive cohorts using 3 + 3 dose escalation rules. Fourteen patients with advanced solid tumors were enrolled, five to the cisplatin arm and nine to the carboplatin arm. Patients enrolled in the cisplatin arm received a median of two cycles of treatment (range 1-5), and patients enrolled in the carboplatin arm received a median of one cycle of treatment (range 1-4). There were no protocol-defined dose-limiting toxicities in the cisplatin arm. However, the cohort was closed due to the need for frequent dose delays and/or reductions and two patients experiencing severe thromboembolic events. There were two dose-limiting toxicities in the carboplatin arm at the starting dose level of dovitinib (both prolonged neutropenia), and the dose of dovitinib was de-escalated to 200 mg. Two additional dose-limiting toxicities (prolonged neutropenia and febrile neutropenia) occurred in the lower dose cohort, and the study was closed. No patients achieved an objective response to treatment. Dovitinib in combination with gemcitabine plus cisplatin or gemcitabine plus carboplatin was poorly tolerated due to myelosuppression.

[PMID: 22180308]
The multiple kinase inhibitor dovitinib is currently under clinical investigation for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we investigated the mechanistic basis for the effects of dovitinib in HCCs. Dovitinib showed significant antitumor activity in HCC cell lines PLC5, Hep3B, Sk-Hep1, and Huh-7. Dovitinib downregulated phospho-STAT3 (p-STAT3) at tyrosine 705 and subsequently reduced the levels of expression of STAT3-related proteins Mcl-1, survivin, and cyclin D1 in a time-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of STAT3 abolished the apoptotic effect of dovitinib, indicating that STAT3 is indispensable in mediating the effect of dovitinib in HCC. SHP-1 inhibitor reversed downregulation of p-STAT3 and apoptosis induced by dovitinib, and silencing of SHP-1 by RNA interference abolished the effects of dovitinib on p-STAT3, indicating that SHP-1, a protein tyrosine phosphatase, mediates the effects of dovitinib. Notably, dovitinib increased SHP-1 activity in HCC cells. Incubation of dovitinib with pure SHP-1 protein enhanced its phosphatase activity, indicating that dovitinib upregulates the activity of SHP-1 via direct interactions. In addition, dovitinib induced apoptosis in two sorafenib-resistant cell lines through inhibition of STAT3, and sorafenib-resistant cells showed significant activation of STAT3, suggesting that targeting STAT3 may be a useful approach to overcome drug resistance in HCC. Finally, in vivo, dovitinib significantly suppressed growth of both Huh-7 and PLC5 xenograft tumors and downregulated p-STAT3 by increasing SHP-1 activity. In conclusion, dovitinib induces significant apoptosis in HCC cells and sorafenib-resistant cells via SHP-1-mediated inhibition of STAT3.

[PMID: 24238094]
Dovitinib (TKI258; formerly CHIR-258) is an orally bioavailable inhibitor of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases. Interestingly, Dovitinib triggered a G2 /M arrest in cancer cell lines from diverse origins including HeLa, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Single-cell analysis revealed that Dovitinib promoted a delay in mitotic exit in a subset of cells, causing the cells to undergo mitotic slippage. Higher concentrations of Dovitinib induced a G2 arrest similar to the G2 DNA damage checkpoint. In support of this, DNA damage was triggered by Dovitinib as revealed by γ-H2AX and comet assays. The mitotic kinase CDK1 was found to be inactivated by phosphorylation in the presence of Dovitinib. Furthermore, the G2 arrest could be overcome by abrogation of the G2 DNA damage checkpoint using small molecule inhibitors of CHK1 and WEE1. Finally, Dovitinib-mediated G2 cell cycle arrest and subsequent cell death could be promoted after DNA damage repair was disrupted by inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases. These results are consistent with the recent finding that Dovitinib can also target topoisomerases. Collectively, these results suggest additional directions for use of Dovitinib, in particular with agents that target the DNA damage checkpoint.

[PMID: 23010851]
This study investigated the metabolism and excretion of dovitinib (TKI258), a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits fibroblast, vascular endothelial, and platelet-derived growth factor receptors, in patients with advanced solid tumors. Four patients (cohort 1) received a single 500 mg oral dose of (14)C-dovitinib, followed by the collection of blood, urine, and feces for ≤10 days. Radioactivity concentrations were measured by liquid scintillation counting and plasma concentrations of dovitinib by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Both techniques were applied for metabolite profiling and identification. A continuous-dosing extension phase (nonlabeled dovitinib 400 mg daily) was conducted with the 3 patients from cohort 1 and 9 additional patients from cohort 2. The majority of radioactivity was recovered in feces (mean 61 %; range 52-69 %), as compared with urine (mean 16 %; range 13-21 %). Only 6-19 % of the radioactivity was recovered in feces as unchanged dovitinib, suggesting high oral absorption. (14)C-dovitinib was eliminated predominantly via oxidative metabolism, with prominent primary biotransformations including hydroxylation on the fluorobenzyl ring and N-oxidation and carbon oxidation on the methylpiperazine moiety. Dovitinib was the most prominent radioactive component in plasma. The high apparent volume of distribution (2,160 L) may indicate that dovitinib distributes extensively to tissues. Adverse events were predominantly mild to moderate, and most common events included nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, and fatigue. Dovitinib was well absorbed, extensively distributed, and eliminated mainly by oxidative metabolism, followed by excretion, predominantly in feces. The adverse events were as expected for this class of drug.

[PMID: 23339124]
Signaling through the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway may account for tumor resistance to antiangiogenic therapies targeting the VEGF pathway. Here, dovitinib (TKI258), a potent oral inhibitor of FGF receptor, VEGF receptor (VEGFR), and platelet-derived growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases, is studied in a dose escalation trial. Patients with advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with predominant clear cell histology were treated with oral dovitinib 500 or 600 mg/day (5-days-on/2-days-off schedule). Twenty heavily pretreated patients (median 3 prior regimens) were enrolled, with 16, 11, and 12 patients having previously received at least 1: VEGFR inhibitor, mTOR inhibitor, and immunotherapy, respectively. Fifteen and 5 patients were treated in 500- and 600-mg cohorts, respectively. Three patients experienced dose-limiting toxicities: grade 2 bradycardia (500 mg), grade 4 hypertensive crisis (600 mg), and grade 3 asthenia with grade 2 nausea and vomiting (600 mg). The most common adverse events related to dovitinib were nausea (75%), diarrhea (70%), vomiting (70%), and asthenia (50%), the majority of which were mild (grade 1 or 2), with grade 3 events 5% or less (except asthenia, 15%) and only one grade 4 event (hypertensive crisis). Two patients achieved a partial response (500 mg), and 12 patients had stable disease, including 2 patients with long lasting disease stabilizations (>1 year) in the 500-mg cohort. Dovitinib was tolerable and showed antitumor activity at a maximum tolerated dose of 500 mg on a 5-days-on/2-days-off schedule in heavily pretreated RCC patients.

[PMID: 26070683]
This phase 2 study investigated the efficacy and safety of dovitinib (TKI258), a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor with potent activity against fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), in locally advanced or metastatic thyroid cancer patients. Patients with advanced thyroid cancer that was refractory or not appropriate for (131)I received dovitinib orally, 500mg once daily for five consecutive days, followed by a 2-day rest every week. The primary end-point was objective response rate. Secondary end-points were progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), duration of response, changes in tumour markers and safety. Between January 2013 and October 2014, a total of 40 patients were enrolled. There were 23 (57.5%) papillary thyroid cancer, 12 (30%) medullary thyroid cancer and 5 (12.5%) follicular thyroid cancer patients. One patient had withdrawn consent before the administration of dovitinib. The overall response rate was 20.5% (8/39) and disease control rate was 69.1% (26/39). Median PFS was 5.4 months (95% confidence interval (CI), 2.0-8.8) and median OS was not reached with 8.4 months follow-up duration. Common treatment-related adverse events were diarrhoea (53.8%), anorexia (35.8%), vomiting (25.6%), fatigue (23%) and nausea (20.5%), most of which were grade 1 or 2. There were no grade 4 events or treatment-related deaths. Dose interruption occurred in 12 (30.7%) patients, and 19 (48.7%) patients experienced dose reduction due to adverse events. Dovitinib has a modest activity with manageable toxicity in locally advanced or metastatic thyroid cancer.

[PMID: 23041231]
Dovitinib (TKI258/CHIR258) is a multi-kinase inhibitor in phase III development for the treatment of several cancers. Dovitinib is a benzimidazole-quinolinone compound that structurally resembles the bisbenzimidazole minor groove binding dye Hoechst 33258. Dovitinib bound to DNA as shown by its ability to increase the DNA melting temperature and by increases in its fluorescence spectrum that occurred upon the addition of DNA. Molecular modeling studies of the docking of dovitinib into an X-ray structure of a Hoechst 33258-DNA complex showed that dovitinib could reasonably be accommodated in the DNA minor groove. Because DNA binders are often topoisomerase I (EC 5.99.1.2) and topoisomerase II (EC 5.99.1.3) inhibitors, the ability of dovitinib to inhibit these DNA processing enzymes was also investigated. Dovitinib inhibited the catalytic decatenation activity of topoisomerase IIα. It also inhibited the DNA-independent ATPase activity of yeast topoisomerase II which suggested that it interacted with the ATP binding site. Using isolated human topoisomerase IIα, dovitinib stabilized the enzyme-cleavage complex and acted as a topoisomerase IIα poison. Dovitinib was also found to be a cellular topoisomerase II poison in human leukemia K562 cells and induced double-strand DNA breaks in K562 cells as evidenced by increased phosphorylation of H2AX. Finally, dovitinib inhibited the topoisomerase I-catalyzed relaxation of plasmid DNA and acted as a cellular topoisomerase I poison. In conclusion, the cell growth inhibitory activity and the anticancer activity of dovitinib may result not only from its ability to inhibit multiple kinases, but also, in part, from its ability to target topoisomerase I and topoisomerase II.

[PMID: 23400739]
Dovitinib is an oral multitargeted kinase inhibitor with potent activity against receptors for vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and basic fibroblast growth factor. Initial phase 1 to 2 studies of dovitinib using a continuous daily dosing schedule has shown that dovitinib exhibits a prolonged and overproportional increase in dose and exposure relationship above 400 mg/d. To address this, intermittent dosing schedules were explored using a model-based approach. A semi-mechanistic population pharmcokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PD) model was developed from 4 dovitinib phase 1 studies with daily dosing schedules. Autoinduction of cytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) responsible for dovitinib metabolism was described using an indirect response model. Simulation of dovitinib plasma concentration profiles following 4 intermittent dosing schedules suggested that intermittent dosing could prevent prolonged drug accumulation. Based on the simulated plasma profiles, PD response, and patient compliance, a 5-days-on/2-days-off intermittent dosing schedule was selected for a phase 1 to 2 clinical study. The observed dovitinib plasma concentrations in this study confirmed the model predictions. Furthermore, dovitinib was well tolerated, and antitumor activity was observed as well in this new study. The 5-days-on/2-days-off dosing schedule is currently used in a dovitinib registration trial and other clinical trials.

[PMID: 24448819]
Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) have been recently described as a molecular-specific feature in endometrial carcinomas and the presence of activated FGFR2 mutations is associated with poor prognosis. For that reason, inhibition of FGFR2 could be a therapeutic target in the treatment of endometriod carcinomas. In this work, we investigated the antitumoral activity of dovitinib (a multiple kinase inhibitor) in human endometrial cancer cell (ECC) lines. We found that dovitinib caused cell growth arrest, loss of clonogenic growth, and cell-cycle arrest in FGFR2-mutated ECCs in in vitro and in vivo experiments. Next, we investigated the mechanistic basis of dovitinib effects. We could determine that dovitinib modified expression levels of well-known key cell-cycle regulatory proteins that induce cellular senescence. To further investigate the role of dovitinib, we analyzed its effect on estrogen receptor α (ER-α) expression. Surprisingly, we discovered that dovitinib enhances ER-α expression in FGFR2-mutant ECCs. Because blocking one signaling pathway is often not sufficient to cause total tumor regression and the effectiveness of individual inhibitors is often short-lived, we examined the impact of targeting FGFR2 with dovitinib in combination with a selective ER antagonist, fulvestrant (ICI182.780). Combination of dovitinib plus ICI182.780 resulted in a significantly higher inhibition of cell growth than dovitinib treatment alone. These findings suggest that combinatory therapies using dovitinib plus ICI182.780 treatment can be truly effective in patients with endometrial carcinomas carrying FGFR2 mutations.

[PMID: 22230479]
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) often displays resistance to recombinant tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis. Dovitinib, a multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and tigatuzumab, a novel humanized anti-human death receptor 5 (DR5) agonistic antibody, are both under clinical investigations in HCC. Here, we report that dovitinib sensitizes resistant HCC cells to TRAIL- and tigatuzumab-induced apoptosis through inhibition of signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3). Our data indicate that HCC cells showed significant resistance to TRAIL- and tigatuzumab-induced apoptosis. The combination of dovitinib and tigatuzumab restored the sensitivity of HCC cells to TRAIL- and tigatuzumab-induced apoptosis. Dovitinib down-regulated phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (p-STAT3) and subsequently reduced the protein levels of STAT3-regulated proteins, Mcl-1, survivin and cylcin D1, in TRAIL-treated HCC cells. Knockdown of STAT3 by RNA-interference overcame apoptotic resistance to TRAIL in HCC cells, and ectopic expression of STAT3 in HCC cells abolished the sensitizing effect of dovitinib on TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Importantly, silencing SHP-1 by RNA-interference reduced the effects of dovitinib and TRAIL on p-STAT3 and apoptosis, whereas co-treatment of TRAIL and dovitinib increased the activity of SHP-1. Moreover, in vivo the combination of tigatuzumab and dovitinib inhibited Huh-7 xenograft tumor growth. In conclusion, dovitinib sensitizes resistant HCC cells to TRAIL- and tigatuzumab-induced apoptosis through a novel machinery: SHP-1 dependent STAT3 inhibition.

[PMID: 24556040]
An unmet medical need exists for patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma who have progressed on VEGF-targeted and mTOR-inhibitor therapies. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway activation has been proposed as a mechanism of escape from VEGF-targeted therapies. Dovitinib is an oral tyrosine-kinase inhibitor that inhibits VEGF and FGF receptors. We therefore compared dovitinib with sorafenib as third-line targeted therapies in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. In this multicentre phase 3 study, patients with clear cell metastatic renal cell carcinoma who received one previous VEGF-targeted therapy and one previous mTOR inhibitor were randomly assigned through an interactive voice and web response system to receive open-label dovitinib (500 mg orally according to a 5-days-on and 2-days-off schedule) or sorafenib (400 mg orally twice daily) in a 1:1 ratio. Randomisation was stratified by risk group and region. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) assessed by masked central review. Efficacy was assessed in all patients who were randomly assigned and safety was assessed in patients who received at least one dose of study drug. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01223027. 284 patients were randomly assigned to the dovitinib group and 286 to the sorafenib group. Median follow-up was 11·3 months (IQR 7·9-14·6). Median PFS was 3·7 months (95% CI 3·5-3·9) in the dovitinib group and 3·6 months (3·5-3·7) in the sorafenib group (hazard ratio 0·86, 95% CI 0·72-1·04; one-sided p=0·063). 280 patients in the dovitinib group and 284 in the sorafenib group received at least one dose of study drug. Common grade 3 or 4 adverse events included hypertriglyceridaemia (38 [14%]), fatigue (28 [10%]), hypertension (22 [8%]), and diarrhoea (20 [7%]) in the dovitinib group, and hypertension (47 [17%]), fatigue (24 [8%]), dyspnoea (21 [7%]), and palmar-plantar erythrodysaesthesia (18 [6%]) in the sorafenib group. The most common serious adverse event was dyspnoea (16 [6%] and 15 [5%] in the dovitinib and sorafenib groups, respectively). Dovitinib showed activity, but this was no better than that of sorafenib in patients with renal cell carcinoma who had progressed on previous VEGF-targeted therapies and mTOR inhibitors. This trial provides reference outcome data for future studies of targeted inhibitors in the third-line setting. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation.