[PMID: 2085926]
Autonomic failure with Lewy bodies (AF-LB) was first described by Fichefet et al. in 1965, and more than ten cases have been reported to date. AF-LB and Parkinson's disease (PD) share the neuropathological findings characterized by widely distributed Lewy bodies in the central nervous system including the substantia nigra and locus coeruleus. However, clinical manifestations of AF-LB are far different from PD in which autonomic dysfunction, if present, is not a predominant feature. In the present study, clinical features were comparatively analysed in AF-LB and PD to investigate the nosological relation between PD and AF-LB. The subjects were 94 patients with PD and 11 reported cases of AF-LB in the literature. A test of 70 degrees passive head-up tilt was performed upon the patients with PD in our laboratory. Based on the results in tilting test, the patients with PD were divided into two groups; PD-I (69 cases) with an orthostatic fall of systolic blood pressure less than 30 mmHg, and PD-II (25 cases) with a fall of 30 mmHg or more. Autonomic dysfunctions were more extent in PD-II than in PD-I, because the incidences of anhidrosis, impotence, neurogenic bladder and constipation were higher in PD-II. All of the cases of AF-LB were contained in the previous literatures with reasonably full clinical descriptions. Mean age at onset of the disease was 62.1 +/- 8.7 (mean +/- SD) years old in PD-I, 64.5 +/- 7.5 years old in PD-II and 63.9 +/- 9.0 years old in AF-LB, and no significant differences were found among the three groups.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 22355263]
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are characterized by abnormal deposition of α-synuclein aggregates in many regions of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Accumulating evidence suggests that the α-synuclein pathology initiates in a few discrete regions and spreads to larger areas in the nervous system. Recent pathological studies of PD patients have raised the possibility that the enteric nervous system is one of the initial sites of α-synuclein aggregation and propagation. Here, we evaluated the induction and propagation of α-synuclein aggregates in the enteric nervous system of the A53T α-synuclein transgenic mice after injection of human brain tissue extracts into the gastric walls of the mice. Western analysis of the brain extracts showed that the DLB extract contained detergent-stable α-synuclein aggregates, but the normal brain extract did not. Injection of the DLB extract resulted in an increased deposition of α-synuclein in the myenteric neurons, in which α-synuclein formed punctate aggregates over time up to 4 months. In these mice, inflammatory responses were increased transiently at early time points. None of these changes were observed in the A53T mice injected with saline or the normal brain extract, nor were these found in the wild type mice injected with the DLB extract. These results demonstrate that pathological α-synuclein aggregates present in the brain of DLB patient can induce the aggregation of endogenous α-synuclein in the myenteric neurons in A53T mice, suggesting the transmission of synucleinopathy lesions in the enteric nervous system.

[PMID: 22251432]
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies are common disorders of the aging population and characterized by the progressive accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn) in the central nervous system. Aggregation of α-syn into oligomers with a ring-like appearance has been proposed to play a role in toxicity. However, the molecular mechanisms and the potential sequence of events involved in the formation of pore-like structures are unclear. We utilized computer modeling and cell-based studies to investigate the process of oligomerization of wild-type and A53T mutant α-syn in membranes. The studies suggest that α-syn penetrates the membrane rapidly, changing its conformation from α-helical towards a coiled structure. This penetration facilitates the incorporation of additional α-syn monomers in the complex, and the subsequent displacement of phospholipids and the formation of oligomers in the membrane. This process occurred more rapidly, and with a more favorable energy of interaction, for mutant A53T compared with wild-type α-syn. After 4 ns of simulation of the protein-membrane model, α-syn had penetrated through two-thirds of the membrane. By 9 ns, the penetration of the annular α-syn oligomers can result in the formation of pore-like structures that fully perforate the lipid bilayer. Experimental incubation of recombinant α-syn in synthetic membranes resulted in the formation of similar pore-like complexes. Moreover, mutant (A53T) α-syn had a greater tendency to accumulate in neuronal membrane fractions in cell cultures, resulting in greater neuronal permeability, as demonstrated with the calcein efflux assay. These studies provide a sequential molecular explanation for the process of α-syn oligomerization in the membrane, and support the role of formation of pore-like structures in the pathogenesis of the neurodegenerative process in PD.

[PMID: 25514659]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by two major neuropathological hallmarks: the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the presence of Lewy bodies in the surviving SN neurons, as well as other regions of the central and peripheral nervous system. Animal models have been invaluable tools for investigating the underlying mechanisms of the pathogenesis of PD and testing new potential symptomatic, neuroprotective and neurorestorative therapies. However, the usefulness of these models is dependent on how precisely they replicate the features of clinical PD with some studies now employing combined gene-environment models to replicate more of the affected pathways. The rotenone model of PD has become of great interest following the seminal paper by the Greenamyre group in 2000 (Betarbet et al., 2000). This paper reported for the first time that systemic rotenone was able to reproduce the two pathological hallmarks of PD as well as certain parkinsonian motor deficits. Since 2000, many research groups have actively used the rotenone model worldwide. This paper will review rotenone models, focusing upon their ability to reproduce the two pathological hallmarks of PD, motor deficits, extranigral pathology and non-motor symptoms. We will also summarize the recent advances in neuroprotective therapies, focusing on those that investigated non-motor symptoms and review rotenone models used in combination with PD genetic models to investigate gene-environment interactions.

[PMID: 23281786]
Parkinson's disease, also known as paralysis agitans, is a progressive degenerative disorder of the central nervous system, with onset usually between the ages of 50 and 65 years, and is associated with loss of dopaminergic neurons in the subsantia nigra and the presence of Lewy bodies. It is characterized by the triad of resting tremor, muscular rigidity and bradykinesia. Often-accompanying abnormalities include disorders of equilibrium, posture and autonomic function, including micturition. Symptoms from the lower urinary tract add a significant comorbidity factor in these patients. The incidence and prevalence of lower urinary tract dysfunction rise with increasing progression of the underlying neurological disease. They present a troublesome and difficult to treat health issue with a profound impact on the patient's quality of life. Storage symptoms seem to predominate. In the long term, renal function might be compromised, mainly as a result of elevated intravesical pressure. Various conservative, minimally-invasive and surgical treatment options are available to prevent harmful sequelae, and to improve the quality of life of these patients. We present an overview of current and prospective treatment strategies.

[PMID: 23979994]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common degenerative disorders of the central nervous system that produces motor and non-motor symptoms. The majority of cases are idiopathic and characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies containing fibrillar α-synuclein. Small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) immunoreactivity was observed among others in cases with PD. Key disease-associated proteins are SUMO-modified, linking this posttranslational modification to neurodegeneration. SUMOylation and SUMO-mediated mechanisms have been intensively studied in recent years, revealing nuclear and extranuclear functions for SUMO in a variety of cellular processes, including the regulation of transcriptional activity, modulation of signal transduction pathways, and response to cellular stress. This points to a role for SUMO more than just an antagonist to ubiquitin and proteasomal degradation. The identification of risk and age-at-onset gene loci was a breakthrough in PD and promoted the understanding of molecular mechanisms in the pathology. PD has been increasingly linked with mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired mitochondrial quality control. Interestingly, SUMO is involved in many of these processes and up-regulated in response to cellular stress, further emphasizing the importance of SUMOylation in physiology and disease.

[PMID: 23587141]
Parkinson's disease is characterized by α-synuclein pathology in the form of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. Braak et al described the spatial and temporal spread of α-synuclein pathology in Parkinson's disease. Recent experimental studies have demonstrated that α-synuclein can transfer from cell to cell. In this review, we highlight the involvement of α-synuclein in Parkinson's disease and in Braak's staging of Parkinson's disease pathology. We discuss whether a prion-like mechanism of α-synuclein spread might contribute to Parkinson's disease pathology. We describe recent studies investigating cell-to-cell transfer of α-synuclein and focus our review on the long-distance axonal transport of α-synuclein along neurons.

[PMID: 24465140]
Parkinson's disease (PD) and related Lewy body diseases are characterized by deposition of α-synuclein aggregates in both the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system. Synucleinopathy lesions spread to larger brain areas as the disease progresses, and prion-like cell-to-cell transmission of aggregated α-synuclein is thought to be the underlying mechanism for this pathological spreading. LRRK2 is another protein linked to the pathogenesis of PD, and its presence in Lewy bodies has attracted much attention as to whether LRRK2 and α-synuclein interplay during the pathogenesis of PD. However, the relationship between these two crucial proteins still remains unclear. In this review article, we will discuss the current state of knowledge in terms of how these proteins cause the disease and provide the hypothetical mechanisms by which LRRK2 might modify the generation and progression of synucleinopathy.

[PMID: 10986355]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegnerative disorder that is pathologically characterized by the presence of Lewy bodies in the brain. We show that Lewy bodies in PD are strongly immunoreactive for torsinA, the protein product of the DYT1 gene, which is associated with primary generalized dystonia. In the substantia nigra, torsinA immunoreactivity is localized to the periphery of Lewy bodies, whereas, in cortical Lewy bodies it is uniformly distributed. The significance of this finding is unknown, but may implicate torsinA in neuronal dysfunction that occurs in PD as well as in primary dystonia.

[PMID: 23225525]
Protein aggregation within the central nervous system has been recognized as a defining feature of neurodegenerative diseases since the early 20th century. Since that time, there has been a growing list of neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease, which are characterized by inclusions of specific pathogenic proteins. This has led to the long-held dogma that these characteristic protein inclusions, which are composed of large insoluble fibrillar protein aggregates and visible by light microscopy, are responsible for cell death in these diseases. However, the correlation between protein inclusion formation and cytotoxicity is inconsistent, suggesting that another form of the pathogenic proteins may be contributing to neurodegeneration. There is emerging evidence implicating soluble oligomers, smaller protein aggregates not detectable by conventional microscopy, as potential culprits in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. The protein α-synuclein is well recognized to contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease and is the major component of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. However, α-synuclein also forms oligomeric species, with certain conformations being toxic to cells. The mechanisms by which these α-synuclein oligomers cause cell death are being actively investigated, as they may provide new strategies for diagnosis and treatment of Parkinson disease and related disorders. Here we review the possible role of α-synuclein oligomers in cell death in Parkinson disease and discuss the potential clinical implications.

[PMID: 24291999]
It is well known that autonomic failure is severer in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) compared with patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). According to the Braak's hypothesis, Lewy bodies first appear in the olfactory bulb or peripheral autonomic nervous system. Lewy bodies in the peripheral autonomic nervous system ascend to dorsal motor nuclei of vagus nerve, while those in the olfactory bulb expand to the limbic system. Lewy bodies later attain the substantia nigra. However, it seems that Braak staging can not explain difference in severity of autonomic failure between DLB and PD. As a possibility, in DLB patients with significant autonomic failure, Lewy bodies may have been localized to the peripheral autonomic nervous system in a long time before onset of dementia or parkinsonism, and propagation of Lewy bodies into the central nervous system may be initiated by apparition of certain promotion factor, such as ageing and amyloid-β.

[PMID: 19877240]
Although Parkinson's disease with later dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are pathologically characterized by the presence of intraneuronal Lewy inclusion bodies, amyloid deposition is also associated to varying degrees with both these disorders. Fibrillar amyloid load can now be quantitated in vivo with positron emission tomography (PET) using imaging biomarkers. Here the reported findings of 11C-PIB PET studies concerning the amyloid load associated with PD and its influence on dementia are reviewed. It is concluded that the presence of amyloid acts to accelerate the dementia process in Lewy body disorders, though has little influence on its nature. Anti-amyloid strategies could be a relevant approach for slowing dementia in a number of DLB and PDD cases.

[PMID: 20174468]
Lewy body disease is a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by alpha-synuclein accumulation that includes dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's Disease (PD). Recent evidence suggests that impairment of lysosomal pathways (i.e. autophagy) involved in alpha-synuclein clearance might play an important role. For this reason, we sought to examine the expression levels of members of the autophagy pathway in brains of patients with DLB and Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and in alpha-synuclein transgenic mice. By immunoblot analysis, compared to controls and AD, in DLB cases levels of mTor were elevated and Atg7 were reduced. Levels of other components of the autophagy pathway such as Atg5, Atg10, Atg12 and Beclin-1 were not different in DLB compared to controls. In DLB brains, mTor was more abundant in neurons displaying alpha-synuclein accumulation. These neurons also showed abnormal expression of lysosomal markers such as LC3, and ultrastructural analysis revealed the presence of abundant and abnormal autophagosomes. Similar alterations were observed in the brains of alpha-synuclein transgenic mice. Intra-cerebral infusion of rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTor, or injection of a lentiviral vector expressing Atg7 resulted in reduced accumulation of alpha-synuclein in transgenic mice and amelioration of associated neurodegenerative alterations. This study supports the notion that defects in the autophagy pathway and more specifically in mTor and Atg7 are associated with neurodegeneration in DLB cases and alpha-synuclein transgenic models and supports the possibility that modulators of the autophagy pathway might have potential therapeutic effects.

[PMID: 19155272]
A number of neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy are characterized by the formation and intraneuronal accumulation of fibrillar aggregates of alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) protein in affected brain regions. These and other findings suggest that the accumulation of alpha-syn in the brain plays an important role in the pathogenesis of these diseases. However, more recently it has been reported that early amyloid aggregates or 'soluble oligomers' are the pathogenic species that lead to neurodegeneration and neuronal cell death rather than the later 'mature fibrils'. In this study, we investigated the presence of alpha-syn oligomers in brain lysates prepared from frozen post-mortem brains of normal, Alzheimer's disease and DLB patients. The brain extracts were subjected to high speed centrifugation, to remove insoluble alpha-syn aggregates, followed by specific detection of soluble oligomers in the supernatants by employing FILA-1, an antibody that specifically binds to alpha-syn aggregates, but not to alpha-syn monomers, or to tau or beta-amyloid aggregates. Using this novel enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method to quantify the amounts of alpha-syn oligomers in the brain extracts, our data clearly show an increase in the levels of soluble oligomers of alpha-syn in the DLB brains compared to those with Alzheimer's disease and the controls (P < 0.0001). Our findings provide strong evidence to support the contention that elevated soluble oligomers of alpha-syn are involved in the pathogenesis of DLB. Furthermore, these findings establish FILA-1 as a very sensitive tool for the detection of oligomeric forms of alpha-syn in human brain lysates.

[PMID: 23531432]
Parkinson's disease is characterized by neuronal death in the substantia nigra and the presence of intracellular inclusions of α-synuclein in the Lewy bodies. Several lines of data support a role for iron in Parkinson's disease: iron is present in Lewy bodies, iron accumulates in the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, and Parkinson's disease is correlated with polymorphisms of several genes implicated in iron metabolism. Furthermore, iron can compromise the solubility of α-synuclein through direct interaction and can induce neurotoxicity in vitro. Here, we investigate the possible neuroprotective effect of the iron chelator deferoxamine in vivo to elucidate whether iron chelation can provide meaningful therapy for Parkinson's disease. Hence, we used a Parkinson's disease animal model based on unilateral injection of a recombinant adeno-associated viral vector encoding α-synuclein in the rat midbrain. Rats were treated with a novel deferoxamine delivery approach: 6 mg of the compound was administered intranasally three times a week for 3 or 7 weeks. The behavior of the animals and histopathological changes in the brain were analyzed. Our data show that although intranasal administration of deferoxamine in rats did not protect them from dopaminergic cell death, it did decrease the number of the pathological α-synuclein formations at the terminal level. In addition, this treatment resulted in changes in the immune response and an overall partial improvement in motor behavior. Taken together, our data show that in vivo iron chelation can modulate α-synuclein-induced pathology in the central nervous system. Our data suggest that chronic administration of intranasal deferoxamine may be a valid approach to limiting the mishandling of α-synuclein in the central nervous system observed in Parkinson's disease and slowing disease progression.

[PMID: 1534893]
Lewy bodies are intraneuronal inclusions initially found in the pigmented brainstem nuclei of patients with Parkinson's disease. Their aspect varies according to their neuronal or cerebral situation. They have been a long time the hallmark of Parkinson's disease, but in recent years it has emerged that a small group of rare disorders or rare variants of common degenerative diseases are also sometimes associated with Lewy bodies in the nervous system. Pathological studies have also individualized a new disorder characterized by the presence of numerous Lewy bodies throughout the cerebral cortex and the brainstem: Lewy body disease. The clinical syndrome associates dementia, parkinsonian features, dysautonomia and motor neuron disease. The dementia is cortical in type and psychiatric symptoms such as agitation, hallucinations or delusions are frequent. The pathological features are nerve cell loss, diffuse Lewy bodies, and sometimes senile plaques. The origin of this disorder remains unclear, but it could be a primitive abnormality of neuronal cytoskeleton.

[PMID: 24095115]
The central autonomic network includes the insular cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, parabrachial nucleus, nucleus of the solitary tract, ventrolateral reticular formation of the medulla, and medullary raphe. These areas: are reciprocally interconnected; receive converging visceral and somatosensory information; generate stimulus-specific patterns of autonomic, endocrine, and motor responses; and are regulated according to the behavioral state, including the sleep-wake cycle. Several components of the central autonomic networks are affected in neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the presence of intracellular inclusions containing α-synuclein. These include multiple system atrophy (MSA), characterized by accumulation of glial cytoplasmic inclusions, and Lewy body disorders, including Parkinson disease (PD), dementia with Lewy bodies, and the so-called "pure" autonomic failure. In MSA, involvement of the rostral ventrolateral medulla may be primarily responsible for orthostatic hypotension; involvement in the pontine micturition area, sacral preganglionic nucleus, and Onuf nucleus is responsible for neurogenic bladder; and involvement of the pre-Bötzinger complex and medullary raphe may contribute to sleep-related respiratory abnormalities. In contrast, Lewy body disorders are characterized by early involvement of the enteric nervous system and cardiac sympathetic ganglia. The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus is affected both in MSA and at early stages of PD.