[PMID: 17093249]
Neurostimulation of the internal globus pallidus has been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms of primary dystonia. We compared this surgical treatment with sham stimulation in a randomized, controlled clinical trial. Forty patients with primary segmental or generalized dystonia received an implanted device for deep-brain stimulation and were randomly assigned to receive either neurostimulation or sham stimulation for 3 months. The primary end point was the change from baseline to 3 months in the severity of symptoms, according to the movement subscore on the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale (range, 0 to 120, with higher scores indicating greater impairment). Two investigators who were unaware of treatment status assessed the severity of dystonia by reviewing videotaped sessions. Subsequently, all patients received open-label neurostimulation; blinded assessment was repeated after 6 months of active treatment. Three months after randomization, the change from baseline in the mean (+/-SD) movement score was significantly greater in the neurostimulation group (-15.8+/-14.1 points) than in the sham-stimulation group (-1.4+/-3.8 points, P<0.001). During the open-label extension period, this improvement was sustained among patients originally assigned to the neurostimulation group, and patients in the sham-stimulation group had a similar benefit when they switched to active treatment. The combined analysis of the entire cohort after 6 months of neurostimulation revealed substantial improvement in all movement symptoms (except speech and swallowing), the level of disability, and quality of life, as compared with baseline scores. A total of 22 adverse events occurred in 19 patients, including 4 infections at the stimulator site and 1 lead dislodgment. The most frequent adverse event was dysarthria. Bilateral pallidal neurostimulation for 3 months was more effective than sham stimulation in patients with primary generalized or segmental dystonia. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00142259 [ClinicalTrials.gov].).

[PMID: 11254790]
A 70 year old woman presented with a 6 year history of medically refractory severe tardive dystonia. After informed consent, a bilateral stereotactic electrode placement targeting the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) and the globus pallidus internus (GPi) was performed. After bilateral stimulation of the GPi, the patient showed a clear and stable improvement of the painful dystonic syndrome within hours. Stimulation of the VIM did not improve the hyperkinetic movements and simultaneous stimulation of both the GPi and the VIM did not result in any additional benefit. The possible pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed.

[PMID: 11481711]
We report on the effects of bilateral neurostimulation of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) in a patient with medically intractable and progressing inherited myoclonus dystonia syndrome (IMDS). Postoperatively, the patient improved by approximately 80% on the modified version of a myoclonus score without any significant change in the dystonic symptoms. This suggests that neurostimulation of the VIM may be an effective treatment for myoclonus in pharmacologically intractable IMDS.

[PMID: 21549607]
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is the technique of neurostimulation of deep brain structures for the treatment of conditions such as essential tremor, dystonia, Parkinson's disease and chronic pain syndromes. The procedure uses implanted deep brain stimulation electrodes connected to extension leads and an implantable pulse generator (IPG). Hardware failure related to the DBS procedure is not infrequent, and includes electrode migration and disconnection. We describe a patient who received bilateral globus pallidus internus DBS for dystonia with initially good clinical response, but the device eventually failed. Radiographs showed multiple twisting of the extension leads with disconnection from the brain electrodes and a diagnosis of Twiddler's syndrome was made. Twiddler's syndrome was first described in patients with cardiac pacemakers. Patients with mental disability, elderly and obese patients are at increased risk. Twiddler's syndrome should be suspected whenever there is a failure of the DBS device to relieve symptoms previously responsive to stimulation. Surgical correction is usually required.

[PMID: 12151848]
The present review covers recent advances in dystonia research related to dystonia genetics and treatment. These have led to the discovery of novel dystonia genes and loci, to changing classification schemes, and to the introduction of improved and new treatment options. Currently 13 different forms of dystonia can be distinguished on a genetic basis (dystonia types 1-13). Recently, a novel gene locus (DYT13) was detected in a family with segmental dystonia, and the gene causing myoclonus-dystonia was identified (SGCE). Furthermore, a novel mutation in the DYT1 gene is associated with a myoclonus-dystonia phenotype. Regarding dystonia treatment, patients refractory to botulinum toxin type A can now be treated with botulinum toxin type B. Selective peripheral denervation remains an effective form of treatment for patients with secondary, but probably not with primary botulinum toxin treatment failure. Finally, a renaissance of functional surgical ablative procedures has taken place, with high frequency deep brain stimulation being introduced in dystonia treatment. Bilateral pallidotomy or pallidal stimulation may provide major benefit especially in patients with generalized, disabling dystonia with the most dramatic improvements in dystonia type 1 patients. Neurostimulation may also be effective in primary segmental axial dystonia, myoclonus-dystonia, and tardive dystonia. The recent mapping of additional dystonia gene loci, the identification of novel dystonia genes, and the characterization of proteins encoded by these genes have enhanced our understanding of various forms and aspects of the dystonias and have opened up new avenues for research. Treatment options include both medical and surgical therapies, with deep brain simulation being the most recent development.

[PMID: 24268100]
Deep brain stimulation of the internal pallidum (GPi-DBS) is effective for various types of drug-refractory primary dystonias. Rare clinical forms as dystonic camptocormia may profit but available data are scarce. We here report on a retrospective clinical assessment of three patients with primary dystonic camptocormia treated with GPi-DBS. All three patients showed marked response to bilateral GPi-DBS within days to weeks after surgery which was preserved in the long-term (38-45 months after implantation: mean improvement 82% as rated on the Burke Fahn Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale, 89% in the subitem "trunk"). Two patients developed mild stimulation induced speech problems (stuttering or dysarthria) which resolved with reprogramming or were acceptable in return for the control of dystonic symptoms. The diagnosis and treatment of camptocormia will continue to require expert knowledge in movement and neuromuscular disorders, but DBS may expand treatment options in this difficult patient population.

[PMID: 16410002]
Despite that deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus internus (GPi) is emerging as the favored intervention for patients with medically intractable dystonia, the pathophysiological mechanisms of dystonia are largely unclear. In eight patients with primary dystonia who were treated with bilateral chronic pallidal stimulation, we correlated symptom-related electromyogram (EMG) activity of the most affected muscles with the local field potentials (LFPs) recorded from the globus pallidus electrodes. In 5 dystonic patients with mobile involuntary movements, rhythmic EMG bursts in the contralateral muscles were coherent with the oscillations in the pallidal LFPs at the burst frequency. In contrast, no significant coherence was seen between EMG and LFPs either for the sustained activity separated out from the compound EMGs in those 5 cases, or in the EMGs in 3 other cases without mobile involuntary movements and rhythmic EMG bursts. In comparison with the resting condition, in both active and passive movements, significant modulation in the GPi LFPs was seen in the range of 8-16 Hz. The finding of significant coherence between GPi oscillations and rhythmic EMG bursts but not sustained tonic EMG activity suggests that the synchronized pallidal activity may be directly related to the rhythmic involuntary movements. In contrast, the sustained hypertonic muscle activity may be represented by less synchronized activity in the pallidum. Thus, the pallidum may play different roles in generating different components of the dystonic symptom complex.

[PMID: 19576854]
Cerebral palsy (CP) with dystonia-choreoathetosis is a common cause of disability in children and in adults, and responds poorly to medical treatment. Bilateral pallidal deep brain stimulation (BP-DBS) of the globus pallidus internus (GPi) is an effective treatment for primary dystonia, but the effect of this reversible surgical procedure on dystonia-choreoathetosis CP, which is a subtype of secondary dystonia, is unknown. Our aim was to test the effectiveness of BP-DBS in adults with dystonia-choreoathetosis CP. We did a multicentre prospective pilot study of BP-DBS in 13 adults with dystonia-choreoathetosis CP who had no cognitive impairment, little spasticity, and only slight abnormalities of the basal ganglia on MRI. The primary endpoint was change in the severity of dystonia-choreoathetosis after 1 year of neurostimulation, as assessed with the Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale. The accuracy of surgical targeting to the GPi was assessed masked to the results of neurostimulation. Analysis was by intention to treat. The mean Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale movement score improved from 44.2 (SD 21.1) before surgery to 34.7 (21.9) at 1 year post-operatively (p=0.009; mean improvement 24.4 [21.1]%, 95% CI 11.6-37.1). Functional disability, pain, and mental health-related quality of life were significantly improved. There was no worsening of cognition or mood. Adverse events were related to stimulation (arrest of the stimulator in one patient, and an adjustment to the current intensity in four patients). The optimum therapeutic target was the posterolateroventral region of the GPi. Little improvement was seen when the neurostimulation diffused to adjacent structures (mainly to the globus pallidus externus [GPe]). Bilateral pallidal neurostimulation could be an effective treatment option for patients with dystonia-choreoathetosis CP. However, given the heterogeneity of motor outcomes and the small sample size, results should be interpreted with caution. The optimum placement of the leads seemed to be a crucial, but not exclusive, factor that could affect a good outcome. National PHRC; Cerebral Palsy Foundation: Fondation Motrice/APETREIMC; French INSERM Dystonia National Network; Medtronic.

[PMID: 15689584]
Severe forms of dystonia respond poorly to medical treatment. Deep-brain stimulation is a reversible neurosurgical procedure that has been used for the treatment of dystonia, but assessment of its efficacy has been limited to open studies. We performed a prospective, controlled, multicenter study assessing the efficacy and safety of bilateral pallidal stimulation in 22 patients with primary generalized dystonia. The severity of dystonia was evaluated before surgery and 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively during neurostimulation, with the use of the movement and disability subscores of the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Scale (range, 0 to 120 and 0 to 30, respectively, with higher scores indicating greater impairment). Movement scores were assessed by a review of videotaped sessions performed by an observer who was unaware of treatment status. At three months, patients underwent a double-blind evaluation in the presence and absence of neurostimulation. We also assessed the patients' quality of life, cognition, and mood at baseline and 12 months. The dystonia movement score improved from a mean (+/-SD) of 46.3+/-21.3 before surgery to 21.0+/-14.1 at 12 months (P<0.001). The disability score improved from 11.6+/-5.5 before surgery to 6.5+/-4.9 at 12 months (P<0.001). General health and physical functioning were significantly improved at month 12; there were no significant changes in measures of mood and cognition. At the three-month evaluation, dystonia movement scores were significantly better with neurostimulation than without neurostimulation (24.6+/-17.7 vs. 34.6+/-12.3, P<0.001). There were five adverse events (in three patients); all resolved without permanent sequelae. These findings support the efficacy and safety of the use of bilateral stimulation of the internal globus pallidus in selected patients with primary generalized dystonia.

[PMID: 17277672]
GM1 Type 3 gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder for which no specific treatment is available. It is characterized by progressive generalized dystonia, which is refractory to pharmacological treatment and results in severe disability and life-threatening complications. We performed bilateral pallidal stimulation in a patient with GM1 gangliosidosis and report the 12-month postoperative course. A 24-year old woman presented with genetically confirmed GM1 gangliosidosis, resulting in severe progressive generalized dystonia. Leads were implanted bilaterally into the internal part of the globus pallidus under stereotactic guidance. At follow-up visits, both the patient and the neurologists who performed the assessment were unaware of whether the neurostimulator was on or off. The patient was videotaped with a standardized protocol and scored by an independent expert. After 1 year of follow-up, double-blind comparison of the patient's status with and without neurostimulation showed a 20% improvement, with a significant functional benefit, but no change in disease progression. Although further studies are needed to evaluate this therapeutic approach, this report suggests that pallidal stimulation might be a promising treatment for dystonia caused by GM1 Type 3 gangliosidosis.

[PMID: 16717218]
To assess the effects of bilateral pallidal deep brain stimulation (DBS) on mood and cognitive performance in patients with dystonia before surgery (at baseline, while patients received their usual treatment) and 12 months postoperatively (while patients received neurostimulation and their medications) in a multicenter prospective study. Twenty-two patients with primary generalized dystonia were evaluated with tests focused on executive functions. The authors considered the patients' severe disability and selected the following tests: Raven Progressive Matrices 38, Similarities and Arithmetic subtests of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-R, Grober and Buschke, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), verbal fluency, Trail Making Test, and the Beck Depression Inventory. Median age at surgery was 30 years (range = 14 to 54 years), median duration of disease was 18.5 years (range = 4 to 37 years). Before surgery, no patients showed cognitive decline or depression. The surgical procedure appeared to be benign cognitively. One year after surgery, free recall improved. There was a significant reduction in the number of errors in the WCST. No behavioral or mood changes were found. Bilateral pallidal stimulation has a good benefit-to-risk ratio as it did not negatively affect cognitive performance and mood in primary dystonia, while a significant motor improvement was obtained. Moreover, a significant mild improvement in executive functions was observed, which may have been related either to the surgical treatment or to the marked decrease in anticholinergic drugs.

[PMID: 24292857]
Some neurological conditions require admission to an intensive care unit (ICU) where deep sedation and mechanical ventilation are administered to improve the patient's condition. Nevertheless, these treatments are not always helpful in disease control. At this stage, deep brain stimulation (DBS) could become a viable alternative in the treatment of critical neurological conditions with long-lasting clinical benefit. The value of deep brain stimulation has been investigated in the treatment of patients who had undergone surgical electrode implants as an emergency procedure to treat acute life-threatening conditions requiring admission to neurological ICU (NICU). A before-and-after perspective study was examined of seven patients who were treated with DBS for status dystonicus (SD) and post-stroke severe hemiballismus. Bilateral globus pallidus internus (GPi) DBS was performed in five SD patients and unilateral ventralis oralis anterior and posterior (Voa/Vop) nucleus of the thalamus DBS in two post-stroke hemiballismus patients. Bilateral GPi-DBS allowed SD resolution in a time lapse varying from 1 week to 3 months. No clear improvements compared to the baseline clinical condition were observed. Unilateral Voa/Vop-DBS intervention controlled hemiballismus after 10 h, and the patient was discharged in 2 days. The other patient was transferred from the NICU to the neurosurgery ward after 13 days. No surgical complications were observed in any of the above procedures. Neurostimulation procedures could represent a valuable choice in critical care conditions, when involuntary movements are continuous, life-threatening and refractory to intensive care procedures. DBS is feasible, safe and effective in selected cases.

[PMID: 25127231]
Cervical dystonia is managed mainly by repeated botulinum toxin injections. We aimed to establish whether pallidal neurostimulation could improve symptoms in patients not adequately responding to chemodenervation or oral drug treatment. In this randomised, sham-controlled trial, we recruited patients with cervical dystonia from centres in Germany, Norway, and Austria. Eligible patients (ie, those aged 18-75 years, disease duration ≥3 years, Toronto Western Spasmodic Torticollis Rating Scale [TWSTRS] severity score ≥15 points) were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive active neurostimulation (frequency 180 Hz; pulse width 120 μs; amplitude 0·5 V below adverse event threshold) or sham stimulation (amplitude 0 V) by computer-generated randomisation lists with randomly permuted block lengths stratified by centre. All patients, masked to treatment assignment, were implanted with a deep brain stimulation device and received their assigned treatment for 3 months. Neurostimulation was activated in the sham group at 3 months and outcomes were reassessed in all patients after 6 months of active treatment. Treating physicians were not masked. The primary endpoint was the change in the TWSTRS severity score from baseline to 3 months, assessed by two masked dystonia experts using standardised videos, analysed by intention to treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00148889. Between Jan 19, 2006, and May 29, 2008, we recruited 62 patients, of whom 32 were randomly assigned to neurostimulation and 30 to sham stimulation. Outcome data were recorded in 60 (97%) patients at 3 months and 56 (90%) patients at 6 months. At 3 months, the reduction in dystonia severity was significantly greater with neurostimulation (-5·1 points [SD 5·1], 95% CI -7·0 to -3·5) than with sham stimulation (-1·3 [2·4], -2·2 to -0·4, p=0·0024; mean between-group difference 3·8 points, 1·8 to 5·8) in the intention-to-treat population. Over the course of the study, 21 adverse events (five serious) were reported in 11 (34%) of 32 patients in the neurostimulation group compared with 20 (11 serious) in nine (30%) of 30 patients in the sham-stimulation group. Serious adverse events were typically related to the implant procedure or the implanted device, and 11 of 16 resolved without sequelae. Dysarthria (in four patients assigned to neurostimulation vs three patients assigned to sham stimulation), involuntary movements (ie, dyskinesia or worsening of dystonia; five vs one), and depression (one vs two) were the most common non-serious adverse events reported during the course of the study. Pallidal neurostimulation for 3 months is more effective than sham stimulation at reducing symptoms of cervical dystonia. Extended follow-up is needed to ascertain the magnitude and stability of chronic neurostimulation effects before this treatment can be recommended as routine for patients who are not responding to conventional medical therapy. Medtronic.

[PMID: 17973330]
As part of the first randomized, sham-stimulation controlled trial on deep brain stimulation (DBS) in primary segmental or generalized dystonia, health-related quality of life (HRQoL) was assessed by SF-36. After the 3-month sham-controlled phase, significant HRQoL improvement occurred only in the active-stimulation group. The open-label extension phase resulted in a significant improvement in all SF-36 domains following 6 months of neurostimulation. These results demonstrate a favorable impact of DBS on HRQoL in primary dystonia.

[PMID: 23123071]
Severe forms of primary dystonia are difficult to manage medically. We assessed the safety and efficacy of pallidal neurostimulation in patients with primary generalised or segmental dystonia prospectively followed up for 5 years in a controlled multicentre trial. In the parent trial, 40 patients were randomly assigned to either sham neurostimulation or neurostimulation of the internal globus pallidus for a period of 3 months and thereafter all patients completed 6 months of active neurostimulation. 38 patients agreed to be followed up annually after the activation of neurostimulation, including assessments of dystonia severity, pain, disability, and quality of life. The primary endpoint of the 5-year follow-up study extension was the change in dystonia severity at 3 years and 5 years as assessed by open-label ratings of the Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale (BFMDRS) motor score compared with the preoperative baseline and the 6-month visit. The primary endpoint was analysed on an intention-to-treat basis. The original trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT00142259). An intention-to-treat analysis including all patients from the parent trial showed significant improvements in dystonia severity at 3 years and 5 years compared with baseline, which corresponded to -20·8 points (SD 17·1; -47·9%; n=40) at 6 months; -26·5 points (19·7; -61·1%; n=31) at 3 years; and -25·1 points (21·3; -57·8%; n=32). The improvement from 6 months to 3 years (-5·7 points [SD 8·4]; -34%) was significant and sustained at the 5-year follow-up (-4·3 [10·4]). 49 new adverse events occurred between 6 months and 5 years. Dysarthria and transient worsening of dystonia were the most common non-serious adverse events. 21 adverse events were rated serious and were almost exclusively device related. One patient attempted suicide shortly after the 6-month visit during a depressive episode. All serious adverse events resolved without permanent sequelae. 3 years and 5 years after surgery, pallidal neurostimulation continues to be an effective and relatively safe treatment option for patients with severe idiopathic dystonia. This long-term observation provides further evidence in favour of pallidal neurostimulation as a first-line treatment for patients with medically intractable, segmental, or generalised dystonia. Medtronic.

[PMID: 20482602]
to provide a revised version of earlier guidelines published in 2006. primary dystonias are chronic and often disabling conditions with a widespread spectrum mainly in young people. primary dystonias are classified as pure dystonia, dystonia plus or paroxysmal dystonia syndromes. Assessment should be performed using a validated rating scale for dystonia. Genetic testing may be performed after establishing the clinical diagnosis. DYT1 testing is recommended for patients with primary dystonia with limb onset before age 30, and in those with an affected relative with early-onset dystonia. DYT6 testing is recommended in early-onset or familial cases with cranio-cervical dystonia or after exclusion of DYT1. Individuals with early-onset myoclonus should be tested for mutations in the DYT11 gene. If direct sequencing of the DYT11 gene is negative, additional gene dosage is required to improve the proportion of mutations detected. A levodopa trial is warranted in every patient with early-onset primary dystonia without an alternative diagnosis. In patients with idiopathic dystonia, neurophysiological tests can help with describing the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the disorder. botulinum toxin (BoNT) type A is the first-line treatment for primary cranial (excluding oromandibular) or cervical dystonia; it is also effective on writing dystonia. BoNT/B is not inferior to BoNT/A in cervical dystonia. Pallidal deep brain stimulation (DBS) is considered a good option, particularly for primary generalized or cervical dystonia, after medication or BoNT have failed. DBS is less effective in secondary dystonia. This treatment requires a specialized expertise and a multidisciplinary team.

[PMID: 23037556]
Surgical therapy for the secondary dystonias is generally perceived to be less effective than for primary disease. However, a number of case reports and small open series have recently appeared describing quite favorable outcomes following surgery for some nonprimary dystonias. We discuss surgical treatment options for this group of diverse conditions, including tardive dystonia, dystonic cerebral palsy, and certain heredodegenerative diseases in which deep brain stimulation and ablative lesions of the posteroventral pallidum have been shown to be effective. Other types of secondary dystonia respond less well to pallidal surgery, particularly when anatomical lesions of the basal ganglia are prominent on preoperative imaging. For these conditions, central baclofen delivery and botulinum toxin denervation may be considered. With optimal medical and surgical care, some patients with secondary dystonia have achieved reductions in disability and pain that approach those documented for primary dystonia.