[PMID: 10952390]
Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is a transcription factor with a basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHZip) structure. Mutations of the MITF gene cause a variety of phenotypes, most notably in pigmented cells, in several species. In humans, haploinsufficiency of MITF causes Waardenburg syndrome type 2, while a dominant-negative mutation causes Tietz syndrome. Four isoforms have been cloned so far: MITF-M is the most abundant and is expressed in neural-crest-derived melanocytes; MITF-A is expressed in various cultured cells including retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and enriched in RPE of embryonal and developing eyes; MITF-H are expressed in many types of cultured cells and in the heart tissue; MITF-C is expressed in many types of cultured cells, but not in melanocytes. Many growth factor signaling pathways have been implicated for regulation of MITF at both protein and promoter levels. Most notably, Steel factor/c-Kit signaling pathway was linked to phosphorylation of MITF at Ser73 and Ser409 through activation of MAP kinase and RSK-1, respectively. Phosphorylation of MITF is also conducted at Ser298 through GSK3beta, although the signaling pathway for this event still remains to be elucidated. IGF-1 and HGF/SF pathways may merge with the c-Kit signaling pathway. WNT and MSH signaling pathways regulate MITF positively at the promoter level. Endothelins may regulate MITF at the protein and promoter levels. MITF is involved in the differentiation, growth and survival of pigment cells, employing a number of signaling pathways.

[PMID: 22371403]
The article presents the melanogenesis pathway and the role of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) in regulation of this process. Products of melanogenesis are eu- and/or pheomelanins synthesized in a multistage process of tyrosine oxidation and polymerization. The conversions require the presence of tyrosinase (TYR, key enzyme), tyrosine hydroxylase isoform I (THI) and tyrosinase related proteins (TRP1 and TRP2). Many types of signal molecules and transcription factors participate in regulation of melanin synthesis, but the most important are cAMP and MITF. cAMP is the second messenger in the intracellular signal cascade, which is synthesized from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by adenylyl cyclase, activated among others by the melanocortin receptor and the αS subunit of G protein. The signal molecule cAMP regulates MITF, TYR, THI, GTP-cyclohydroxylase I (GTP-CHI) transcription and phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) phosphorylation at Ser16 by protein kinase A (PKA). Mutations of genes encoding proteins belonging to the cAMP signal cascade may lead to McCune-Albright and Carney syndromes. MITF is one of the most important nuclear transcription factors regulating melanogenesis. Currently 10 isoforms of human MITF are known, but in melanocytes only MITF-M, MITF-Mdel, MITF-A and MITF-H occur. MITF transcription factor regulates melanogenesis by activation of tyrosinase, TRP1 and TRP2 transcription. It also affects expression of other factors regulating melanosome maturation, biogenesis and transport. Moreover, it regulates melanocyte proliferation and protection against apoptosis. Mutations of the MITF gene may lead to hereditary diseases: Waardenburg type II and Tietz syndromes.

[PMID: 24379252]
Hypo- and hyperpigmentation disorders are the most severe dermatological diseases observed in patients from all over the world. These disorders can be divided into melanoses connected with disorders of melanocyte function and melanocytoses connected with melanocyte development. The article presents some hereditary hypomelanocytoses, which are caused by abnormal melanoblast development, migration and proliferation as well as by abnormal melanocyte viability and proliferation. These disorders are represented by Waardenburg syndrome, piebaldism and Tietz syndrome, and are caused by different mutations of various or the same genes. The types of mutations comprise missense and nonsense mutations, frameshifts (in-frame insertions or deletions), truncating variations, splice alterations and non-stop mutations. It has been demonstrated that mutations of the same gene may cause different hypopigmentation syndromes that may have similar phenotypes. For example, mutations of the MITF gene cause Waardenburg syndrome type 2A as well as Tietz syndrome. It has also been demonstrated that mutations of different genes may cause an identical syndrome. For example, mutations of MITF, SNAI2 and SOX10 genes are observed in Waardenburg syndrome type II and mutations of EDNRB, EDN3 and SOX10 genes are responsible for Waardenburg syndrome type IV. In turn, mutation of the KIT gene and/or heterozygous deletion of the SNAI2 gene result in piebaldism disease. The knowledge of the exact mechanisms of pigmentary disorders may be useful in the development of new therapeutic approaches to their treatment.

[PMID: 23098757]
MITF mutations results in an abnormal melanocyte development and lead to Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2). Here, we analyzed the in vitro activities of two recently identified WS2-associated MITF mutations (p.R217I and p.T192fsX18). The R217I MITF retained partial activity, normal DNA-binding ability and nuclear distribution, whereas the T192fsX18 MITF failed to activate TYR promoter and showed aberrant subcellular localization which may be caused by deletion of nuclear localization signal (NLS) at aa 213-218 (ERRRRF). These results suggest that haploinsufficiency may be the underlying mechanism for the mild phenotypes of WS2 caused by these two mutations.

[PMID: 22258527]
The microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factor, which regulates melanocyte development and the biosynthetic melanin pathway. A notable relationship has been described between non-truncating mutations of its basic domain and Tietz syndrome, which is characterized by albinoid-like hypopigmentation of the skin and hair, rather than the patchy depigmentation seen in Waardenburg syndrome, and severe hearing loss. Twelve patients with new or recurrent non-truncating mutations of the MITF basic domain from six families were enrolled in this study. We observed a wide range of phenotypes and some unexpected features. All the patients had blue irides and pigmentation abnormalities that ranged from diffuse hypopigmentation to Waardenburg-like patches. In addition, they showed congenital complete hearing loss, diffuse hypopigmentation of the skin, freckling and ocular abnormalities, more frequently than patients with MITF mutations outside the basic domain. In conclusion, the non-truncating mutations of the basic domain do not always lead to Tietz syndrome but rather to a large range of phenotypes. Sun-exposed freckles are interestingly observed more frequently in Asian populations. This variability argues for the possible interaction with modifier loci.

[PMID: 10536986]
On some occasions, mutations of a gene cause different syndromes that may have similar phenotypes. For example, mutations of the MITF gene cause Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (Tassabehji et al, 1994; Nobukuni et al, 1996) as well as Tietz syndrome (Smith et al, 1997). On other occasions, mutations of different genes cause an identical syndrome. Molecular analyses of these genes may provide a good opportunity to not only understand such syndromes themselves but also the biologic aspects of cells relevant to these syndromes. By analyzing the genes for Waardenburg syndrome, we showed that PAX3, the gene responsible for Waardenburg syndrome type 1, regulates MITF, the gene responsible for Waardenburg syndrome type 2. Such epistatic relationships have been shown between other genes related to Waardenburg syndrome, and likely to construct a cascade. This paper proposes such a cascade, one that involves genes for PAX3, MITF, human MyoD, MYF5, c-MET, c-KIT, tyrosinase, TRP-1, human QNR-71, SOX10, EDNRB, and EDN3.

[PMID: 19938076]
Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a series of auditory-pigmentary disorders inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In most patients, WS2 results from mutations in the MITF gene. MITF encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that activates transcription of tyrosinase and other melanocyte proteins. The clinical presentation of WS is highly variable, and we believe that Tietz syndrome and WS2 with ocular albinism (OA) are likely two variations of WS2 due to the presence of modifiers. One family with a molecular diagnosis of WS2 co-segregating with OA has previously been reported. A digenic mutation mechanism including both a MITF mutation and the TYR(R402Q) hypomorphic allele was proposed to be the cause of OA in this family. Here, we present a second WS2 family with OA and provide evidence suggesting the TYR(R402Q) allele does not cause OA in this family. We hypothesize the presence of a novel OCA3 mutation together with the MITF del p.R217 mutation account for the OA phenotype in this family. Since MITF is a transcription factor for pigmentation genes, a mutation in MITF plus a heterozygous mutation in OCA3 together provide an adverse effect crossing a quantitative threshold; therefore, WS2 with OA occurs. We have hypothesized previously that the clinical spectrum and mutation mechanism of OCA depend on the pigmentation threshold of an affected individual. This unique family has provided further evidence supporting this hypothesis. We suggest that by studying OCA patients alongside WS patients with various pigmentation profiles we can facilitate further understanding of the pigmentation pathway.

[PMID: 23787126]
The basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHZip) protein MITF (microphthalmia-associated transcription factor) is a master regulator of melanocyte development. Mutations in the MITF have been found in patients with the dominantly inherited hypopigmentation and deafness syndromes Waardenburg syndrome type 2A (WS2A) and Tietz syndrome (TS). Additionally, both somatic and germline mutations have been found in MITF in melanoma patients. Here, we characterize the DNA-binding and transcription activation properties of 24 MITF mutations found in WS2A, TS and melanoma patients. We show that most of the WS2A and TS mutations fail to bind DNA and activate expression from melanocyte-specific promoters. Some of the mutations, especially R203K and S298P, exhibit normal activity and may represent neutral variants. Mutations found in melanomas showed normal DNA-binding and minor variations in transcription activation properties; some showed increased potential to form colonies. Our results provide molecular insights into how mutations in a single gene can lead to such different phenotypes.

[PMID: 20485200]
Mutations in microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) lead to Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2), a dominantly inherited disorder involving hearing loss and pigment disturbances caused by a lack of melanocytes. On rare occasions, mutations in MITF lead to Tietz syndrome (TS), which is characterized by a severe WS2 phenotype. The MITF gene is the human homolog of the mouse microphthalmia (mi) gene in some families. Mi/mi mice show decreased numbers and an abnormal phenotype of mast cells (MC). In contrast, the number and phenotype of MC in WS2/TS patients who also have an alteration in their MITF gene are unclear. In this study, we identified a mutation in the MITF gene, delR217, which was equivalent to that found in mi/mi mice, in a case of TS. None of the MITF isoforms with the mutation were able to transactivate the tyrosinase gene promoter. In addition, mutant MITF-M showed dominant negative activity toward wild-type MITF-M, inhibiting its transactivation of the tyrosinase gene promoter. The patient's peripheral blood CD34 cells showed no differences with respect to total cell number or their expression levels of tryptase mRNA in a serum-deprived liquid culture system for 6 weeks when compared with normal control cells. These findings suggest that MITF does not play a critical role in MC development in humans.

[PMID: 9546825]
A mother and her son with albinism and sensorineural deafness compatible with Tietz syndrome (MIM 103500) are reported. An in-frame deletion of the MITF gene that is identical at the molecular level to the mouse mi mutant allele has been found in this family. MITF gene mutations account for 20% of Waardenburg syndrome (WS) type II. These data, together with the wide spectrum of mutant alleles reported in mi mice (which have pigmentary disorders), suggest that MITF could be regarded as a candidate gene in various pigmentation disorders in man.

[PMID: 10790403]
Mouse microphthalmia transcription factor (Mitf) mutations affect the development of four cell types: melanocytes, mast cells, osteoclasts, and pigmented epithelial cells of the eye. The mutations are phenotypically diverse and can be arranged in an allelic series. In humans, MITF mutations cause Waardenburg syndrome type 2A (WS2A) and Tietz syndrome, autosomal dominant disorders resulting in deafness and hypopigmentation. Mitf mice thus represent an important model system for the study of human disease. Here we report the complete exon/intron structure of the mouse Mitf gene and show it to be similar to the human gene. We also found that the mouse gene is transcriptionally complex and is capable of generating at least 13 different Mitf isoforms. Some of these isoforms are missing important functional domains of the protein, suggesting that they might play an inhibitory role in Mitf function and signal transduction. In addition, we determined the molecular basis for six microphthalmia mutations. Two of the mutations are reported for the first time here (Mitf(mi-enu198) and Mitf(mi-x39)), while the others (Mitf(mi-ws), Mitf(mi-bws), Mitf(mi-ew), and Mitf(mi-di)) have been described but the molecular basis for the mutation not determined. When analyzed in terms of the genomic and transcriptional data presented here, it is apparent that these mutations result from RNA processing or transcriptional defects. Interestingly, three of the mutations (Mitf(mi-x39), Mitf(mi-bws), and Mitf(mi-ws)) produce proteins that are missing important functional domains of the protein identified in in vitro studies, further confirming a biological role for these domains in the whole animal.

[PMID: 23020089]
The human deafness-pigmentation syndromes, Waardenburg syndrome (WS) type 2a, and Tietz syndrome are characterized by profound deafness but only partial cutaneous pigmentary abnormalities. Both syndromes are caused by mutations in MITF. To illuminate differences between cutaneous and otic melanocytes in these syndromes, their development and survival in heterozygous Microphthalmia-White (Mitf(Mi-wh) /+) mice were studied and hearing function of these mice characterized. Mitf(Mi-wh) /+ mice have a profound hearing deficit, characterized by elevated auditory brainstem response thresholds, reduced distortion product otoacoustic emissions, absent endocochlear potential, loss of outer hair cells, and stria vascularis abnormalities. Mitf(Mi-wh) /+ embryos have fewer melanoblasts during embryonic development than their wild-type littermates. Although cochlear melanocytes are present at birth, they disappear from the Mitf(Mi-wh) /+ cochlea between P1 and P7. These findings may provide insight into the mechanism of melanocyte and hearing loss in human deafness-pigmentation syndromes such as WS and Tietz syndrome and illustrate differences between otic and follicular melanocytes.

[PMID: 23512835]
Till date, mutations in the genes PAX3 and MITF have been described in Waardenburg syndrome (WS), which is clinically characterised by congenital hearing loss and pigmentation anomalies. Our study intended to determine the frequency of mutations and deletions in these genes, to assess the clinical phenotype in detail and to identify rational priorities for molecular genetic diagnostics procedures. Prospective analysis. 19 Caucasian patients with typical features of WS underwent stepwise investigation of PAX3 and MITF. When point mutations and small insertions/deletions were excluded by direct sequencing, copy number analysis by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was performed to detect larger deletions and duplications. Clinical data and photographs were collected to facilitate genotype-phenotype analyses. All analyses were performed in a large German laboratory specialised in genetic diagnostics. 15 novel and 4 previously published heterozygous mutations in PAX3 and MITF were identified. Of these, six were large deletions or duplications that were only detectable by copy number analysis. All patients with PAX3 mutations had typical phenotype of WS with dystopia canthorum (WS1), whereas patients with MITF gene mutations presented without dystopia canthorum (WS2). In addition, one patient with bilateral hearing loss and blue eyes with iris stroma dysplasia had a de novo missense mutation (p.Arg217Ile) in MITF. MITF 3-bp deletions at amino acid position 217 have previously been described in patients with Tietz syndrome (TS), a clinical entity with hearing loss and generalised hypopigmentation. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that sequencing and copy number analysis of both PAX3 and MITF have to be recommended in the routine molecular diagnostic setting for patients, WS1 and WS2. Furthermore, our genotype-phenotype analyses indicate that WS2 and TS correspond to a clinical spectrum that is influenced by MITF mutation type and position.

[PMID: 10851256]
Patients with Tietz syndrome have congenital profound deafness and generalised hypopigmentation, inherited in a fully penetrant autosomal dominant fashion. The pigmentary features and complete penetrance make this syndrome distinct among syndromes with pigmentary anomalies and deafness, which characteristically have patchy depigmentation and variable penetrance. Only one family has been reported with the exact features described in the original report of this syndrome. This family was reascertained and a missense mutation was found in the basic region of the MITF gene in family members with Tietz syndrome. Mutations in other regions of this gene have been found to produce Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2), which also includes pigmentary changes and hearing loss, but in contrast to Tietz syndrome, depigmentation is patchy and hearing loss is variable in WS2.

[PMID: 27604145]
Tietz syndrome and Waardenburg syndrome type 2A are allelic conditions caused by MITF mutations. Tietz syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is characterized by congenital deafness and generalized skin, hair, and eye hypopigmentation, while Waardenburg syndrome type 2A typically includes variable degrees of sensorineural hearing loss and patches of de-pigmented skin, hair, and irides. In this paper, we report two unrelated families with MITF mutations. The first family showed an autosomal dominant pattern and variable expressivity. The second patient was isolated. MITF gene analysis in the first family demonstrated a c.648A>C heterozygous mutation in exon 8 c.648A>C; p. (R216S), while in the isolated patient, an apparently de novo heterozygous c.1183_1184insG truncating mutation was demonstrated in exon 10. All patients except one had bilateral reduced ocular anteroposterior axial length and a high hyperopic refractive error corresponding to posterior microphthalmos, features that have not been described as part of the disease. Our results suggest that posterior microphthalmos might be part of the clinical characteristics of Tietz/Waardenburg syndrome type 2A and expand both the clinical and molecular spectrum of the disease. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 22196401]
Waardenburg syndrome type II (WS2) is associated with syndromic deafness. A subset of WS2, WS2A, accounting for approximately 15% of patients, is attributed to mutations in the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) gene. We examined the genetic basis of WS2 in a large Chinese family. All 9 exons of the MITF gene, the single coding exon (exon 2) of the most common hereditary deafness gene GJB2 and the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 12S rRNA were sequenced. A novel heterozygous mutation c.[742_743delAAinsT;746_747delCA] in exon 8 of the MITF gene co-segregates with WS2 in the family. The MITF mutation results in a premature termination codon and a truncated MITF protein with only 247 of the 419 wild type amino acids. The deaf proband had this MITF gene heterozygous mutation as well as a c.[109G>A]+[235delC] compound heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the GJB2 gene. No pathogenic mutation was found in mtDNA 12S rRNA in this family. Thus, a novel compound heterozygous mutation, c.[742_743delAAinsT;746_747delCA] in MITF exon 8 was the key genetic reason for WS2 in this family, and a digenic effect of MITF and GJB2 genes may contribute to deafness of the proband.

[PMID: 26252099]
To determine the genetic cause for a patient featuring decreased pigmentation of the skin and iris, hearing loss and multiple congenital anomalies. Routine chromosomal banding was performed to analyze the karyotype of the patient and his parents. Single nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP array) was employed to identify cryptic chromosome aberrations, and quantitative real-time PCR was used to confirm the results. Karyotype analysis has revealed no obvious anomaly for the patient and his parents. SNP array analysis of the patient has demonstrated a 3.9 Mb deletion encompassing 3p13p14.1, which caused loss of entire MITF gene. The deletion was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR. Clinical features of the patient have included severe bilateral hearing loss, decreased pigmentation of the skin and iris and multiple congenital anomalies. The patient, carrying a 3p13p14.1 deletion, has features of Tietz syndrome/Waardenburg syndrome type IIa. This case may provide additional data for the study of genotype-phenotype correlation of this disease.