[PMID: 10593671]
Recurrent syncope, malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death are complications of the long QT syndrome (LQTS). Two well-known syndromes with long QT intervals are known. The Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is characterized by prolongation of the QT interval, deafness, and autosomal-recessive inheritance, and the Romano-Ward syndrome is characterized by a prolonged QT interval, autosomal-dominant inheritance, and no deafness. In the present study assessment was performed of the diagnostic importance of the ventricular derepolarization parameters, clinical features, and prevalence of JLNS among 132 children with congenital hearing loss (CHL). In the CHL group the mean QT, QTc, JT, and JTc intervals and the dispersion values (QT-d, JT-d, QTc-d, and JTc-d) were significantly longer than those of control subjects (n = 96) (P < 0.05). Patients with CHL and JLNS (n = 5) had significantly longer mean values of QT, QTc, JT, and JTc intervals and dispersion values than those of CHL without JLNS (n = 127) and control subjects (P < 0.05). The results suggest that assessment of ventricular derepolarization parameters in children with CHL will be helpful in the early detection of JLNS because infants with CHL cannot accurately describe the symptoms of syncope.

[PMID: 23400408]
Long QT syndrome is one of the most common cardiac ion channel diseases, but its morbidity and mortality rate can be lessened with an early diagnosis and proper treatment. This cardiac ventricular repolarization abnormality is characterized by a prolonged QT interval and a propensity for ventricular tachycardia (VT) of the torsades de pointes type. The long QT syndrome represents a high risk for presyncope, syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is a recessively inherited form of long QT syndrome characterized by profound sensorineural deafness and prolongation of the QT interval. Findings have shown that JLNS occurs due to homozygous and compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in KCNQ1 or KCNE1. A 3.5-year-old girl presented to the hospital with recurrent syncope, seizures, and congenital sensorineural deafness. Her electrocardiogram showed a markedly prolonged QT interval, and she had a diagnosis of JLNS. The sequence analysis of the proband showed the presence of a pathogenic homozygous missense variant (c.728G>A, p.Arg243His). Heterozygous mutations of KCNQ1 were identified in her mother, father, and sister, demonstrating true homozygosity. Even with high-dose beta-blocker therapy, the patient had two VT attacks, so an implantable cardioverter defibrillator was fitted. The authors suggest early genetic diagnosis for proper management of the disease in the proband and genetic counseling for both the proband and the girl's extended family.

[PMID: 9341873]
Jervell Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is a recessive disorder with congenital deafness and long-QT syndrome (LQTS 1). Mutations in the potassium-channel gene KVLQT1 (LQTS 1) have been identified in JLNS and in autosomal-dominant LQTS as well. We performed haplotype analysis with microsatellite markers in a Lebanese family with JLNS, but failed to detect linkage at LQTS 1. Moreover, using this approach, we excluded two other ion-channel genes involved in autosomal-dominant LQTS, HERG (LQTS 2) and SCN5A (LQTS 3). Our findings indicate that JLNS is genetically heterogeneous and that, in this family, an unknown LQTS gene causes the disease.

[PMID: 12132284]
In contrast to the Romano-Ward (R-W) syndrome, the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen (J-LN) syndrome is an autosomal recessive inherited disease characterized by QT-prolongation in the electrocardiogram (ECG) and recurrent syncopal attacks which are also typical for the R-W syndrome, but also by congenital deafness. Recently, defect alleles in the genes for KCNQ1 and KCNE1 have been identified in patients with the J-LN syndrome. These genes may be causative for the R-W syndrome as well but in J-LN patients, they are only present in the homozygote or compound heterozygote form. In the present paper, we review the clinical and genetic similarities and differences of the J-LN and the R-W syndrome as well as the diagnostic and therapeutic management of these patients and their family members.

[PMID: 11140949]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is an autosomal recessive syndrome characterised by profound congenital sensorineural deafness and prolongation of the QT interval on the electrocardiogram, representing abnormal ventricular repolarisation. In a study of ten British and Norwegian families with JLNS, we have identified all of the mutations in the KCNQ1 gene, including two that are novel. Of the nine mutations identified in this group of 10 families, five are nonsense or frameshift mutations. Truncation of the protein proximal to the recently identified C-terminal assembly domain is expected to preclude assembly of KCNQ1 monomers into tetramers and explains the recessive inheritance of JLNS. However, study of a frameshift mutation, with a dominant effect phenotypically, suggests the presence of another assembly domain nearer to the N-terminus.

[PMID: 10077519]
Long-QT (LQT) syndrome is a cardiac disorder that causes syncope, seizures, and sudden death from ventricular arrhythmias, specifically torsade de pointes. Both autosomal dominant LQT (Romano-Ward syndrome) and autosomal recessive LQT (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, JLNS) have been reported. Heterozygous mutations in 3 potassium channel genes, KVLQT1, KCNE1 (minK), and HERG, and the cardiac sodium channel gene SCN5A cause autosomal dominant LQT. Autosomal recessive LQT, which is associated with deafness, has been found to occur with homozygous mutations in KVLQT1 and KCNE1 in JLNS families in which QTc prolongation was inherited as a dominant trait. An Amish family with clinical evidence of JLNS was analyzed for mutations by use of single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing analyses for mutations in all known LQT genes. A novel homozygous 2-bp deletion in the S2 transmembrane segment of KVLQT1 was identified in affected members of this Amish family in which both QTc prolongation and deafness were inherited as recessive traits. This deletion represents a new JLNS-associated mutation in KVLQT1 and has deleterious effects on the KVLQT1 potassium channel, causing a frameshift and the truncation of the KVLQT1 protein. In contrast to previous reports in which LQT was inherited as a clear dominant trait, 2 parents in the JLNS family described here have normal QTc intervals (0.43 and 0.44 seconds, respectively). A novel homozygous KVLQT1 mutation causes JLNS in an Amish family with deafness that is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

[PMID: 1917338]
Deafness and electrocardiographic changes (prolongation of the Q-T interval and inversion of the T wave) with a clinical picture of syncopal attacks and sudden death, were described as a distinct syndrome by Jervell and Lange-Nielsen in 1957. The syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. In this study, all the cases reported since 1957 and their proposed prevalence are reviewed. The authors describe the 4 cases they have studied, all of which presented congenital sensorineural hearing loss and electrocardiographic changes characteristic of the syndrome. The relatively high number of cases they have encountered casts doubt on literature that states that the syndrome occurs more frequently in Northern-European populations. Consequently, it is advisable to perform an electrocardiogram in all children affected by congenital deafness.

[PMID: 10704188]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (MIM 220400; JLNS), is a rare form of profound congenital deafness combined with syncopal attacks and sudden death due to prolonged QTc; it is an autosomal recessive trait. After its first description in Norway in 1957, later reports from many other countries have confirmed its occurrence. Nowhere is the prevalence so high as in Norway, where we estimate a prevalence of at least 1:200,000. The KCNQ1 and KCNE1 proteins coassemble in a potassium channel, and mutations in either the KCNQ1 gene or the KCNE1 gene disrupt endolymph production in the stria vascularis in the cochlea, causing deafness. KCNQ1 seems to be the major gene in JLNS. Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a separate disorder of either autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance caused by mutations in four different ion channel genes; KCNQ1 is the one most frequently involved. Some heterozygous carriers of JLNS mutations in either gene may suffer from prolonged QTc and be symptomatic LQTS patients with a need for appropriate medical treatment to prevent life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia. In general, frameshift/stop mutations cause JLNS, and missense/splice site mutations cause LQTS, but a precise genotype-phenotype correlation in LQTS and JLNS is not established, which complicates both genetic counseling and clinical risk evaluation in carriers. We review JLNS from a Norwegian perspective because of the unusually high prevalence, the genetic homogeneity associated with considerable mutational heterogeneity, and some evidence for recurrent mutational events as well as one founder mutation. We outline the clinical implications for investigation of deaf children and cases of sudden infant death syndrome as well as careful electrocardiographic monitoring of identified mutation carriers to prevent sudden death. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Semin. Med. Genet.) 89:137-146, 1999.

[PMID: 15950200]
Hereditary long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by prolonged QT intervals and an increased risk for ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Mutations in the voltage-gated potassium channel subunit KCNQ1 induce the most common form of LQTS. KCNQ1 is associated with two different entities of LQTS, the autosomal-dominant Romano-Ward syndrome (RWS), and the autosomal-recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) characterized by bilateral deafness in addition to cardiac arrhythmias. In this study, we investigate and discuss dominant-negative I(Ks) current reduction by a KCNQ1 deletion mutation identified in a RWS family. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing were used to screen LQTS genes for mutations. Mutant KCNQ1 channels were heterologously expressed in Xenopus oocytes, and potassium currents were recorded using the two-microelectrode voltage clamp technique. A heterozygous deletion of three nucleotides (CTT) identified in the KCNQ1 gene caused the loss of a single phenylalanine residue at position 339 (KCNQ1-deltaF339). Electrophysiological measurements in the presence and absence of the regulatory beta-subunit KCNE1 revealed that mutant and wild type forms of an N-terminal truncated KCNQ1 subunit (isoform 2) caused much stronger dominant-negative current reduction than the mutant form of the full-length KCNQ1 subunit (isoform 1). This study highlights the functional relevance of the truncated KCNQ1 splice variant (isoform 2) in establishment and mode of inheritance in long QT syndrome. In the RWS family presented here, the autosomal-dominant trait is caused by multiple dominant-negative effects provoked by heteromultimeric channels formed by wild type and mutant KCNQ1-isoforms in combination with KCNE1.

[PMID: 23392653]
BACKGROUND- Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in KCNQ1 cause Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, a rare, autosomal-recessive form of long-QT syndrome characterized by deafness, marked QT prolongation, and a high risk of sudden death. However, it is not understood why some individuals with mutations on both KCNQ1 alleles present without deafness. In this study, we sought to determine the prevalence and genetic determinants of this phenomenon in a large referral population of patients with long-QT syndrome. METHODS AND RESULTS- A retrospective analysis of all patients with long-QT syndrome evaluated from July 1998 to April 2012 was used to identify those with ≥1 KCNQ1 mutation. Of the 249 KCNQ1-positive patients identified, 15 (6.0%) harbored a rare putative pathogenic mutation on both KCNQ1 alleles. Surprisingly, 11 of these patients (73%) presented without the sensorineural deafness associated with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. The degree of QT-interval prolongation and the number of breakthrough cardiac events were similar between patients with and without deafness. Interestingly, truncating mutations were more prevalent in patients with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (79%) than in nondeaf patients (36%; P<0.001) derived from this study and those in the literature. CONCLUSIONS- In this study, we provide evidence that the recessive inheritance of a severe long-QT syndrome type 1 phenotype in the absence of an auditory phenotype may represent a more common pattern of long-QT syndrome inheritance than previously anticipated and that these cases should be treated as a higher-risk long-QT syndrome subset similar to their Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome counterparts. Furthermore, mutation type may serve as a genetic determinant of deafness, but not cardiac expressivity, in individuals harboring ≥1 KCNQ1 mutation on each allele.

[PMID: 7721491]
The association of prolongation of the QT interval with recurrent attacks of syncope, sudden death, and malignant ventricular arrhythmias is known as the long QT syndrome. The syndrome may be familial with or without congenital deafness, or idiopatic. The syndrome with deafness (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome) is inherited through an autosomal recessive mechanism. In this study, we attempted to identify patients with the Jervell Lange-Nielsen syndrome amongst 154 deaf mute school children. Two patients had a corrected QT interval of 0.52 and congenital sensorineural hearing loss with the other electrocardiographic changes characteristic of the syndrome, such as inverted or bifid T wave. There was no evidence of electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormality in family members, except only one case of parental deafness. This is the first and preliminary report that analyzed the incidence of the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome amongst 154 deaf mute school children in Turkey. Our study was conducted to identify patients with this syndrome amongst children of another deaf mute school in Turkey.

[PMID: 18595190]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is a rare cause of autosomal recessive inherited deafness. JLNS patients are candidates for cochlear implantation, and represent a group that needs special attention and precautions. The aim of this article is to draw some guidelines for dealing with these patients, and to emphasize the importance of electrocardiography (ECG) screening of congenitally deaf patients. A probable vestibular dysfunction is also discussed. Eight of 273 implanted children (2.9%) at Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo, Norway have been diagnosed with JLNS. All the children were evaluated with ECG, six of them before cochlear implantation. Auditory perception was evaluated with the littlEARS Auditory Questionnaire, or with a test battery developed at Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center. DNA sequencing was used to screen for mutations in the genes KCNQ1 and KCNE1. The cases are presented and discussed in a retrospective case review. Two of the children are dead. The corrected QT (QTc) interval in the ECG was markedly prolonged in all the children (median QTc, 0.59 sec; range, 0.53-0.65). Six children have more than 1 yr experience with their cochlear implant. Four of them are performing average or above compared with the other implanted children. All the children have mutations in the KCNQ1 gene. Six of our patients have delayed gross motor development, and the remaining two are markedly delayed compared with their older siblings. Cochlear implantation can be performed safely and with good results in children with JLNS, but requires knowledge of the diagnosis and necessary precautions have to be taken. ECG should be taken for all children with congenital deafness, preferably before exposure to strong sound stimuli. Vestibular dysfunction seems to be a part of JLNS, but this needs further investigation.

[PMID: 11140992]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome represents a rare, autosomal recessive cause of congenital deafness. Affected patients have a characteristic prolongation of the QT interval on electrocardiogram, along with cardiac arrhythmias, recurrent syncopal episodes, and a predisposition to sudden death. We present the first reported case of cochlear implantation in a child with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome. Special perioperative precautions were required, including cardiac monitoring for 48 hours, perioperative beta blockade, and special anesthetic considerations. Because sudden patient death has been associated with exposures to loud sounds in patients with prolonged QT syndrome without hearing loss (Ward-Romano syndrome), initial cochlear implant stimulation was performed with cardiac monitoring. This patient has responded well to cochlear implantation with 11 months of implant use. The patient has achieved limited open-set word comprehension and significantly improved speech, as is expected for her age. Although the patient had no problems with cardiac arrhythmias at surgery, she has since experienced a syncopal episode requiring placement of an automatic pacemaker and defibrillator. The implant has continued to work well despite the pacemaker and defibrillator. Cochlear implantation can be relatively safely performed in patients with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, provided proper precautions are followed.

[PMID: 9302275]
The inherited long QT syndrome (LQTS), characterized by a prolonged QT interval in the electrocardiogram and cardiac arrhythmia, is caused by mutations in at least four different genes, three of which have been identified and encode cardiac ion channels. The most common form of LQTS is due to mutations in the potassium channel gene KVLQT1, but their effects on associated currents are still unknown. Different mutations in KVLQT1 cause the dominant Romano-Ward (RW) syndrome and the recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen (JLN) syndrome, which, in addition to cardiac abnormalities, includes congenital deafness. Co-expression of KvLQT1 with the IsK protein elicits slowly activating potassium currents resembling the cardiac Iks current. We now show that IsK not only changes the kinetics of KvLQT1 currents, but also its ion selectivity. Several mutations found in RW, including a novel mutation (D222N) in the putative channel pore, abolish channel activity and reduce the activity of wild-type KvLQT1 by a dominant-negative mechanism. By contrast, a JLN mutation truncating the carboxyterminus of the KvLQT1 channel protein abolishes channel function without having a dominant-negative effect. This fully explains the different patterns of inheritance. Further, we identified a novel splice variant of the KVLQT1 gene, but could not achieve functional expression of this nor of a previously described heart-specific isoform.

[PMID: 10654932]
The LQT1 locus (KCNQ1) has been correlated with the most common form of inherited long QT (LQT) syndrome. LQT patients suffer from syncopal episodes and high risk of sudden death. The KCNQ1 gene encodes KvLQT1 alpha-subunits, which together with auxiliary IsK (KCNE1, minK) subunits form IK(s) K(+) channels. Mutant KvLQT1 subunits may be associated either with an autosomal dominant form of inherited LQT, Romano-Ward syndrome, or an autosomal recessive form, Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS). We have identified a small domain between residues 589 and 620 in the KvLQT1 C-terminus, which may function as an assembly domain for KvLQT1 subunits. KvLQT1 C-termini do not assemble and KvLQT1 subunits do not express functional K(+) channels without this domain. We showed that a JLN deletion-insertion mutation at KvLQT1 residue 544 eliminates important parts of the C-terminal assembly domain. Therefore, JLN mutants may be defective in KvLQT1 subunit assembly. The results provide a molecular basis for the clinical observation that heterozygous JLN carriers show slight cardiac dysfunctions and that the severe JLNS phenotype is characterized by the absence of KvLQT1 channel.

[PMID: 1721555]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome is an autosomal recessive hereditary condition that presents with cardiac abnormalities characterized by a prolonged Q-T electrocardiographic pattern and congenital severe-to-profound auditory deficits. This paper describes the auditory history of twin boys born out of consanguinity and diagnosed with this syndrome. Both infants were products of the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and failed initial ABR screening. Diagnostic evaluation demonstrated profound hearing loss and developmental delays for each infant. Because sudden death is a consequence, audiologists are advised to recognize signs and symptoms associated with this syndrome.

[PMID: 12051962]
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is characterized by sensorineural deafness, QT prolongation, abnormal T waves, ventricular tachyarrhythmias, and autosomal recessive inheritance. Previously homozygous mutations in the potassium channel-encoding genes, KvLQT1 (alpha-subunit) and KCNE1 (beta-subunit), have been described in consanguineous families with JLNS. We screened two nonconsanguineous families with JLNS for mutations in KvLQT1, using single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and DNA sequencing. In one family, a missense mutation was identified in exon 6 of KvLQT1 on the maternal side, resulting in a glycine to aspartic acid substitution at codon 269 (G269D). The apparently normal father had an incompletely penetrant missense mutation in exon 3 of KvLQT1, introducing a premature stop codon at position 171. In the other family, a missense mutation resulting in the substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid at codon 202 (D202N) was identified in the mother and maternal grandmother, who had QTc prolongation (borderline in the mother), while the father and paternal grandfather, who were clinically normal, had a deletion of nucleotide 585, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. In both families, the proband inherited both mutations. In this report we provide evidence that not only homozygous but also compound heterozygous mutations in KvLQT1 may cause JLNS in nonconsanguineous families. Incomplete penetrance in individuals with mutations appears to be frequent, indicating a higher prevalence of mutations than estimated previously. Interestingly, mutations resulting in truncation of the protein appear to be benign, with heterozygous carriers being asymptomatic.