[PMID: 12393810]
The severe reduction in mRNA and protein levels of the mitochondrial protein frataxin, encoded by the X25 gene, causes Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common form of recessive hereditary ataxia. Increasing evidence underlines the pathogenetic role of oxidative stress in this disease. We generated an in vitro cellular model of regulated human frataxin overexpression. We identified, by differential display technique, the mitogen activated protein kinase kinase 4 mRNA down regulation in frataxin overexpressing cells. We studied the stress kinases pathway in this cellular model and in fibroblasts from FRDA patients. Frataxin overexpression reduced c-Jun N-terminal kinase phosphorylation. Furthermore, exposure of FRDA fibroblasts to several forms of environmental stress caused an up regulation of phospho-JNK and phospho-c-Jun. To understand if this susceptibility results in cell death, we have investigated the involvement of caspases. A significantly higher activation of caspase-9 was observed in FRDA versus control fibroblasts after serum-withdrawal. Our findings suggest the presence, in FRDA patient cells, of a 'hyperactive' stress signaling pathway. The role of frataxin in FRDA pathogenesis could be explained, at least in part, by this hyperactivity.

[PMID: 24242291]
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by a decreased expression of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. Major neurological symptoms of the disease are due to degeneration of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons. In this study we have explored the neurodegenerative events occurring by frataxin depletion on primary cultures of neurons obtained from rat DRGs. Reduction of 80% of frataxin levels in these cells was achieved by transduction with lentivirus containing shRNA silencing sequences. Frataxin depletion caused mitochondrial membrane potential decrease, neurite degeneration and apoptotic cell death. A marked increase of free intracellular Ca(2+) levels and alteration in Ca(2+)-mediated signaling pathways was also observed, thus suggesting that altered calcium homeostasis can play a pivotal role in neurodegeneration caused by frataxin deficiency. These deleterious effects were reverted by the addition of a cell-penetrant TAT peptide coupled to the BH4, the anti-apoptotic domain of Bcl-x(L). Treatment of cultured frataxin-depleted neurons with TAT-BH4 was able to restore the free intracellular Ca(2+) levels and protect the neurons from degeneration. These observations open the possibility of new therapies of FRDA based on modulating the Ca(2+) signaling and prevent apoptotic process to protect DRG neurons from neurodegeneration.

[PMID: 20819074]
DNA-repair mechanisms enable cells to maintain their genetic information by protecting it from mutations that may cause malignant growth. Recent evidence suggests that specific DNA-repair enzymes contain ISCs (iron-sulfur clusters). The nuclearencoded protein frataxin is essential for the mitochondrial biosynthesis of ISCs. Frataxin deficiency causes a neurodegenerative disorder named Friedreich's ataxia in humans. Various types of cancer occurring at young age are associated with this disease, and hence with frataxin deficiency. Mice carrying a hepatocyte-specific disruption of the frataxin gene develop multiple liver tumours for unresolved reasons. In the present study, we show that frataxin deficiency in murine liver is associated with increased basal levels of oxidative DNA base damage. Accordingly, eukaryotic V79 fibroblasts overexpressing human frataxin show decreased basal levels of these modifications, while prokaryotic Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium TA104 strains transformed with human frataxin show decreased mutation rates. The repair rates of oxidative DNA base modifications in V79 cells overexpressing frataxin were significantly higher than in control cells. Lastly, cleavage activity related to the ISC-independent repair enzyme 8-oxoguanine glycosylase was found to be unaltered by frataxin overexpression. These findings indicate that frataxin modulates DNA-repair mechanisms probably due to its impact on ISC-dependent repair proteins, linking mitochondrial dysfunction to DNA repair and tumour initiation.

[PMID: 18206656]
Pathological expansions of GAA repeats in the first intron of the frataxin gene cause most cases of Friedreich ataxia, a progressively debilitating neurodegenerative disease. The disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and the GAA repeats are suspected to form unusual non B-DNA conformations that decrease transcription and subsequently reduce levels of the encoded protein, frataxin. Recent work has shown that GAA repeats induce heterochromatin formation and silencing of the frataxin gene locus. Frataxin plays a crucial role in iron metabolism and detoxification and interacts with electron transport chain proteins. Clinical trials are currently underway to examine the efficacy of antioxidants in the treatment of Friedreich ataxia, but therapeutics designed to increase frataxin message levels are still in the developmental stages. This review will focus on the progress of potential treatment strategies for Friedreich ataxia that target the GAA expanded gene and seek to increase the level of frataxin message and protein.

[PMID: 12174969]
A 13-year-old boy with clinical and electrophysiologic findings of Friedreich's ataxia developed unusually prominent myopathy. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed mitochondrial proliferation and structural abnormalities. No mutation was found in skeletal muscle mitochondrial DNA to explain this finding. Molecular genetic and pathologic studies confirmed a diagnosis of Friedreich's ataxia in the proband and affected relatives. Although the Friedreich's ataxia phenotype results from decreased expression of a mitochondrially targeted protein, frataxin, mitochondrial myopathy has not been described as a feature of the disease. The association between the frataxin gene mutation and mitochondrial myopathy in this case suggests that severe or cumulative insults to mitochondrial function may produce myopathic changes in some cases of Friedreich's ataxia. The patient also responded clinically to carnitine supplementation, suggesting a potential palliative therapy for the disease.

[PMID: 23247094]
Severe mitochondria deficiency leads to a number of devastating degenerative disorders, yet, mild mitochondrial dysfunction in different species, including the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, can have pro-longevity effects. This apparent paradox indicates that cellular adaptation to partial mitochondrial stress can induce beneficial responses, but how this is achieved is largely unknown. Complete absence of frataxin, the mitochondrial protein defective in patients with Friedreich's ataxia, is lethal in C. elegans, while its partial deficiency extends animal lifespan in a p53 dependent manner. In this paper we provide further insight into frataxin control of C. elegans longevity by showing that a substantial reduction of frataxin protein expression is required to extend lifespan, affect sensory neurons functionality, remodel lipid metabolism and trigger autophagy. We find that Beclin and p53 genes are required to induce autophagy and concurrently reduce lipid storages and extend animal lifespan in response to frataxin suppression. Reciprocally, frataxin expression modulates autophagy in the absence of p53. Human Friedreich ataxia-derived lymphoblasts also display increased autophagy, indicating an evolutionarily conserved response to reduced frataxin expression. In sum, we demonstrate a causal connection between induction of autophagy and lifespan extension following reduced frataxin expression, thus providing the rationale for investigating autophagy in the pathogenesis and treatment of Friedreich's ataxia and possibly other human mitochondria-associated disorders.

[PMID: 11823441]
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive degenerative disease caused by a deficiency of frataxin, a conserved mitochondrial protein of unknown function. Mitochondrial iron accumulation, loss of iron-sulfur cluster-containing enzymes and increased oxidative damage occur in yeast and mouse frataxin-depleted mutants as well as tissues and cell lines from FRDA patients, suggesting that frataxin may be involved in export of iron from the mitochondria, synthesis of iron-sulfur clusters and/or protection from oxidative damage. We have previously shown that yeast frataxin has structural and functional features of an iron storage protein. In this study we have investigated the function of human frataxin in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When expressed in E.coli, the mature form of human frataxin assembles into a stable homopolymer that can bind approximately 10 atoms of iron per molecule of frataxin. The iron-loaded homopolymer can be detected on non-denaturing gels by either protein or iron staining demonstrating a stable association between frataxin and iron. As analyzed by gel filtration and electron microscopy, the homopolymer consists of globular particles of approximately 1 MDa and ordered rod-shaped polymers of these particles that accumulate small electron-dense cores. When the human frataxin precursor is expressed in S.cerevisiae, the mitochondrially generated mature form is separated by gel filtration into monomer and a high molecular weight pool of >600 kDa. A high molecular weight pool of frataxin is also present in mouse heart indicating that frataxin can assemble under native conditions. In radiolabeled yeast cells, human frataxin is recovered by immunoprecipitation with approximately five atoms of (55)Fe bound per molecule. These findings suggest that FRDA results from decreased mitochondrial iron storage due to frataxin deficiency which may impair iron metabolism, promote oxidative damage and lead to progressive iron accumulation.

[PMID: 25430730]
In eukaryotes, frataxin deficiency (FXN) causes severe phenotypes including loss of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster protein activity, accumulation of mitochondrial iron and leads to the neurodegenerative disease Friedreich's ataxia. In contrast, in prokaryotes, deficiency in the FXN homolog, CyaY, was reported not to cause any significant phenotype, questioning both its importance and its actual contribution to Fe-S cluster biogenesis. Because FXN is conserved between eukaryotes and prokaryotes, this surprising discrepancy prompted us to reinvestigate the role of CyaY in Escherichia coli. We report that CyaY (i) potentiates E. coli fitness, (ii) belongs to the ISC pathway catalyzing the maturation of Fe-S cluster-containing proteins and (iii) requires iron-rich conditions for its contribution to be significant. A genetic interaction was discovered between cyaY and iscX, the last gene of the isc operon. Deletion of both genes showed an additive effect on Fe-S cluster protein maturation, which led, among others, to increased resistance to aminoglycosides and increased sensitivity to lambda phage infection. Together, these in vivo results establish the importance of CyaY as a member of the ISC-mediated Fe-S cluster biogenesis pathway in E. coli, like it does in eukaryotes, and validate IscX as a new bona fide Fe-S cluster biogenesis factor.

[PMID: 16510442]
Friedreich ataxia is a human neurodegenerative and myocardial disease caused by decreased expression of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. Proteomic analysis of the mutant yeast model of Friedreich ataxia presented in this paper reveals that these cells display increased amounts of proteins involved in antioxidant defenses, including manganese-superoxide dismutase. This enzyme shows, however, lower activity than that found in wild type cells. Our results indicate that this lack of activity is a consequence of cellular manganese deficiency, because in manganese-supplemented cultures, cell manganese content, and manganese-superoxide dismutase activity were restored. One of the hallmarks of Friedreich ataxia is the decreased activity of iron/sulfur-containing enzymes. The activities of four enzymes of this group (aconitase, glutamate synthase, succinate dehydrogenase, and isopropylmalate dehydratase) have been analyzed for the effects of manganese supplementation. Enzyme activities were recovered by manganese treatment, except for aconitase, for which, a specific interaction with frataxin has been demonstrated previously. Similar results were obtained when cells were grown in iron-limited media suggesting that manganese-superoxide dismutase deficiency is a consequence of iron overload. In conclusion, these data indicate that generalized deficiency of iron-sulfur protein activity could be a consequence of manganese-superoxide dismutase deficiency, and consequently, it opens new strategies for Friedreich ataxia treatment.

[PMID: 18463734]
Friedreich ataxia, an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative and cardiac disease, is caused by abnormally low levels of frataxin, an essential mitochondrial protein. All Friedreich ataxia patients carry a GAATTC repeat expansion in the first intron of the frataxin gene, either in the homozygous state or in compound heterozygosity with other loss-of-function mutations. The GAA expansion inhibits frataxin expression through a heterochromatin-mediated repression mechanism. Histone modifications that are characteristic of silenced genes in heterochromatic regions occur at expanded alleles in cells from Friedreich ataxia patients, including increased trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 and hypoacetylation of histones H3 and H4. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, we detected the same heterochromatin marks in homozygous mice carrying a (GAA)(230) repeat in the first intron of the mouse frataxin gene (KIKI mice). These animals have decreased frataxin levels and, by microarray analysis, show significant gene expression changes in several tissues. We treated KIKI mice with a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, compound 106, which substantially increases frataxin mRNA levels in cells from Friedreich ataxia individuals. Treatment increased histone H3 and H4 acetylation in chromatin near the GAA repeat and restored wild-type frataxin levels in the nervous system and heart, as determined by quantitative RT-PCR and semiquantitative western blot analysis. No toxicity was observed. Furthermore, most of the differentially expressed genes in KIKI mice reverted towards wild-type levels. Lack of acute toxicity, normalization of frataxin levels and of the transcription profile changes resulting from frataxin deficiency provide strong support to a possible efficacy of this or related compounds in reverting the pathological process in Friedreich ataxia, a so far incurable neurodegenerative disease.

[PMID: 12194387]
Friedreich's ataxia is the most frequent inherited ataxia in Caucasians. It is caused by deficiency of frataxin, a highly conserved nuclear-encoded protein localized in mitochondria. The DNA abnormality found in 98% of Friedreich's ataxia chromosomes is the unstable hyperexpansion of a GAA triplet repeat in the first intron of the frataxin gene. Most patients are homozygous for this repeat expansion. The expanded GAA repeat causes frataxin deficiency because it interferes with the transcription of the gene by adopting a non-B (probably triple helical) structure. Longer repeats cause a more profound frataxin deficiency and are associated with earlier onset and increased severity of the disease. Molecular testing has shown that the phenotypic spectrum of Friedreich's ataxia is wider than previously thought. Up to 10% of patients with recessive or sporadic degenerative ataxia who do not fulfill the Friedreich's ataxia diagnostic criteria are homozygous for expanded alleles at the Friedreich's ataxia locus. Late age of onset, retained tendon reflexes, and lack of pyramidal signs are among the atypical features observed in some patients with a positive molecular test. Yeast cells deficient in the frataxin homologue accumulate iron in mitochondria and show increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. This suggests that Friedreich's ataxia is caused by mitochondrial dysfunction and free radical toxicity, with consequent mitochondrial damage, axonal degeneration, and cell death.

[PMID: 25929520]
It is generally accepted that Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is caused by a deficiency in frataxin expression, a mitochondrial protein involved in iron homeostasis, which mainly affects the brain, dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord, heart and in certain cases the pancreas. However, there is little knowledge as to other possible genes that may be affected in this disorder, and which can contribute to its complexity. In the current study we compared human periodontal ligament cells gene expression of healthy individuals and FRDA patients. The expression of active-caspase 3, as well as other apoptosis-related genes, was increased in the FRDA cells. Furthermore, iron-sulphur cluster genes, as well as oxidative stress-related genes were overexpressed in FRDA. Moreover, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neuregulin 1 and miR-132 were all upregulated. These three genes are capable of regulating the expression of each other. Interestingly, when the cells from FRDA patients were co-cultured in the presence of idebenone and deferiprone, caspase expression decreased while antioxidant gene expression, as well as frataxin expression, increased. Regarding epigenetic mechanisms, the frataxin gene was hypermethylated, compared to the healthy counterparts, in the upstream GAA repetitive region. Of the three DNA methyltransferases, DNMT1 but not DNMT3׳s gene expression was higher in FRDA cells. In conclusion, our data show that FRDA cells present altered expression of genes related to cell cycle, oxidative stress and iron homeostasis which may be implicated in the increased apoptotic levels. Also, the altered expression is in a certain degree normalized in the presence of idebenone and deferiprone.

[PMID: 18537827]
Friedreich's ataxia results from a deficiency in the mitochondrial protein frataxin, which carries single point mutations in some patients. In the present study, we analysed the consequences of different disease-related mutations in vitro on the stability and dynamics of human frataxin. Two of the mutations, G130V and D122Y, were investigated for the first time. Analysis by CD spectroscopy demonstrated a substantial decrease in the thermodynamic stability of the variants during chemical and thermal unfolding (wild-type > W155R > I154F > D122Y > G130V), which was reversible in all cases. Protein dynamics was studied in detail and revealed that the mutants have distinct propensities towards aggregation. It was observed that the mutants have increased correlation times and different relative ratios between soluble and insoluble/aggregated protein. NMR showed that the clinical mutants retained a compact and relatively rigid globular core despite their decreased stabilities. Limited proteolysis assays coupled with LC-MS allowed the identification of particularly flexible regions in the mutants; interestingly, these regions included those involved in iron-binding. In agreement, the iron metallochaperone activity of the Friedreich's ataxia mutants was affected: some mutants precipitate upon iron binding (I154F and W155R) and others have a lower binding stoichiometry (G130V and D122Y). Our results suggest that, in heterozygous patients, the development of Friedreich's ataxia may result from a combination of reduced efficiency of protein folding and accelerated degradation in vivo, leading to lower than normal concentrations of frataxin. This hypothesis also suggests that, although quite different from other neurodegenerative diseases involving toxic aggregation, Friedreich's ataxia could also be linked to a process of protein misfolding due to specific destabilization of frataxin.

[PMID: 12140189]
Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA), an autosomal recessive cardio- and neurodegenerative disease, is caused by low expression of frataxin, a small mitochondrial protein, encoded in the nucleus. At the biochemical level, the lack of frataxin leads to dysregulation of mitochondrial iron homeostasis and oxidative damage, which eventually causes neuronal death. It is, however, still unclear whether frataxin is directly involved in iron binding, since the yeast orthologue, but not the human protein, has been shown to form large aggregates in the presence of large iron excess. We have compared the properties of three proteins from the frataxin family--the bacterial CyaY from Escherichia coli, the yeast Yfh1 and human frataxin--as representative of organisms of increasing complexity. We show that the three proteins have the same fold but different thermal stabilities and iron-binding properties. While human frataxin has no tendency to bind iron, CyaY forms iron-promoted aggregates with a behaviour similar to that of yeast frataxin. However, aggregation can be competed by chelator agents or by ionic strength. At physiological salt conditions, almost no aggregation is observed. The design of mutants produced to identify the protein surface involved in iron-promoted aggregation allows us to demonstrate that the process is mediated by a negatively charged surface ridge. Mutation of three of these residues is sufficient to convert CyaY in a protein with properties similar to those of human frataxin. On the other hand, mutation of the exposed surface of the beta sheet, which contains most of the conserved residues, does not affect aggregation, suggesting that iron binding is a non-conserved part of a more complex cellular function of frataxins.

[PMID: 25597503]
Friedreich's ataxia is a severe neurodegenerative disease caused by the decreased expression of frataxin, a mitochondrial protein that stimulates iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis. In mammals, the primary steps of Fe-S cluster assembly are performed by the NFS1-ISD11-ISCU complex via the formation of a persulfide intermediate on NFS1. Here we show that frataxin modulates the reactivity of NFS1 persulfide with thiols. We use maleimide-peptide compounds along with mass spectrometry to probe cysteine-persulfide in NFS1 and ISCU. Our data reveal that in the presence of ISCU, frataxin enhances the rate of two similar reactions on NFS1 persulfide: sulfur transfer to ISCU leading to the accumulation of a persulfide on the cysteine C104 of ISCU, and sulfur transfer to small thiols such as DTT, L-cysteine and GSH leading to persulfuration of these thiols and ultimately sulfide release. These data raise important questions on the physiological mechanism of Fe-S cluster assembly and point to a unique function of frataxin as an enhancer of sulfur transfer within the NFS1-ISD11-ISCU complex.

[PMID: 9700204]
Frataxin is a mitochondrial protein deficient in Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) and which is associated with abnormal intramitochondrial iron handling. We identified the mitochondrial processing peptidase beta (MPPbeta) as a frataxin protein partner using the yeast two-hybrid assay. In in vitro assays, MPPbeta binds frataxin which is cleaved by the reconstituted MPP heterodimer. MPP cleavage of frataxin results in an intermediate form (amino acids 41-210) that is processed further to the mature form. In vitro and in vivo experiments suggest that two C-terminal missense mutations found in FRDA patients modulate interaction with MPPbeta, resulting in a slower maturation process at the normal cleavage site. The slower processing rate of frataxin carrying such missense mutations may therefore contribute to frataxin deficiency, in addition to an impairment of its function.

[PMID: 16787388]
The neurodegenerative disorder FRDA (Friedreich's ataxia) results from a deficiency in frataxin, a putative iron chaperone, and is due to the presence of a high number of GAA repeats in the coding regions of both alleles of the frataxin gene, which impair protein expression. However, some FRDA patients are heterozygous for this triplet expansion and contain a deleterious point mutation on the other allele. In the present study, we investigated whether two particular FRDA-associated frataxin mutants, I154F and W155R, result in unfolded protein as a consequence of a severe structural modification. A detailed comparison of the conformational properties of the wild-type and mutant proteins combining biophysical and biochemical methodologies was undertaken. We show that the FRDA mutants retain the native fold under physiological conditions, but are differentially destabilized as reflected both by their reduced thermodynamic stability and a higher tendency towards proteolytic digestion. The I154F mutant has the strongest effect on fold stability as expected from the fact that the mutated residue contributes to the hydrophobic core formation. Functionally, the iron-binding properties of the mutant frataxins are found to be partly impaired. The apparently paradoxical situation of having clinically aggressive frataxin variants which are folded and are only significantly less stable than the wild-type form in a given adverse physiological stress condition is discussed and contextualized in terms of a mechanism determining the pathology of FRDA heterozygous.

[PMID: 20674094]
The neurotoxicity of aluminum (Al) - the most abundant metal element on earth - has been known for years. However, the mechanism of Al-induced neurodegeneration and its relationship to Alzheimer's disease are still controversial. In particular, in vivo functional data are lacking. In a Drosophila model with chronic dietary Al overloading, general neurodegeneration and several behavioral changes were observed. Al-induced neurodegeneration is independent of β-amyloid or tau-associated toxicity, suggesting they act in different molecular pathways. Interestingly, Drosophila frataxin (dfh), which causes Friedreich's ataxia if mutated in humans, displayed an interacting effect with Al, suggesting Friedreich's ataxia patients might be more susceptible to Al toxicity. Al-treated flies accumulated large amount of iron and reactive oxygen species (ROS), and exhibited elevated SOD2 activity. Genetic and pharmacological efforts to reduce ROS or chelate excess Fe significantly mitigated Al toxicity. Our results indicate that Al toxicity is mediated through ROS production and iron accumulation and suggest a remedial route to reduce toxicity due to Al exposure.