[PMID: 25533464]
Cytochrome P450 (P450) 17A enzymes play a critical role in the oxidation of the steroids progesterone (Prog) and pregnenolone (Preg) to glucocorticoids and androgens. In mammals, a single enzyme, P450 17A1, catalyzes both 17α-hydroxylation and a subsequent 17α,20-lyase reaction with both Prog and Preg. Teleost fish contain two 17A P450s; zebrafish P450 17A1 catalyzes both 17α-hydroxylation and lyase reactions with Prog and Preg, and P450 17A2 is more efficient in pregnenolone 17α-hydroxylation but does not catalyze the lyase reaction, even in the presence of cytochrome b5. P450 17A2 binds all substrates and products, although more loosely than P450 17A1. Pulse-chase and kinetic spectral experiments and modeling established that the two-step P450 17A1 Prog oxidation is more distributive than the Preg reaction, i.e. 17α-OH product dissociates more prior to the lyase step. The drug orteronel selectively blocked the lyase reaction of P450 17A1 but only in the case of Prog. X-ray crystal structures of zebrafish P450 17A1 and 17A2 were obtained with the ligand abiraterone and with Prog for P450 17A2. Comparison of the two fish P450 17A-abiraterone structures with human P450 17A1 (DeVore, N. M., and Scott, E. E. (2013) Nature 482, 116-119) showed only a few differences near the active site, despite only ∼50% identity among the three proteins. The P450 17A2 structure differed in four residues near the heme periphery. These residues may allow the proposed alternative ferric peroxide mechanism for the lyase reaction, or residues removed from the active site may allow conformations that lead to the lyase activity.

[PMID: 24759590]
Suppression of gonadal testosterone synthesis represents the standard first line therapy for treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. However, in the majority of patients who develop castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), it is possible to detect persistent activation of the androgen receptor (AR) through androgens produced in the adrenal gland or within the tumor itself. Abiraterone acetate was developed as an irreversible inhibitor of the dual functional cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP17 with activity as a 17α-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase. CYP17 is necessary for production of nongonadal androgens from cholesterol. Regulatory approval of abiraterone in 2011, based on a phase III trial showing a significant improvement in overall survival (OS) with abiraterone and prednisone versus prednisone, represented proof of principle that targeting AR is essential for improving outcomes in men with CRPC. Inhibition of 17α-hydroxylase by abiraterone results in accumulation of upstream mineralocorticoids due to loss of cortisol-mediated suppression of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), providing a rationale for development of CYP17 inhibitors with increased specificity for 17,20-lyase (orteronel, galeterone and VT-464) that can potentially be administered without exogenous corticosteroids. In this article, we review the development of abiraterone and other CYP17 inhibitors; recent studies with abiraterone that inform our understanding of clinical parameters such as drug effects on quality-of-life, potential early predictors of response, and optimal sequencing of abiraterone with respect to other agents; and results of translational studies providing insights into resistance mechanisms to CYP17 inhibitors leading to clinical trials with drug combinations designed to prolong abiraterone benefit or restore abiraterone activity.

[PMID: 24799061]
Orteronel (also known as TAK-700) is a novel hormonal therapy that is currently in testing for the treatment of prostate cancer. Orteronel inhibits the 17,20 lyase activity of the enzyme CYP17A1, which is important for androgen synthesis in the testes, adrenal glands and prostate cancer cells. Preclinical studies demonstrate that orteronel treatment suppresses androgen levels and causes shrinkage of androgen-dependent organs, such as the prostate gland. Early reports of clinical studies demonstrate that orteronel treatment leads to reduced prostate-specific antigen levels, a marker of prostate cancer tumor burden, and more complete suppression of androgen synthesis than conventional androgen deprivation therapies that act in the testes alone. Treatment with single-agent orteronel has been well tolerated with fatigue as the most common adverse event, while febrile neutropenia was the dose-limiting toxicity in a combination study of orteronel with docetaxel. Recently, the ELM-PC5 Phase III clinical trial in patients with advanced-stage prostate cancer who had received prior docetaxel was unblinded as the overall survival primary end point was not achieved. However, additional Phase III orteronel trials are ongoing in men with earlier stages of prostate cancer.

[PMID: 23856460]
Orteronel (TAK-700) is an investigational, non-steroidal inhibitor of CYP17A1 with preferential inhibition of 17,20-lyase in NCI-H295 cells. Estrogen is synthesized from androgen by aromatase activity, and the effect of orteronel on estrogen synthesis was therefore evaluated. First, it was confirmed that orteronel does not directly inhibit aromatase activity. Second, the specific decline of serum estradiol and androgen levels in hypophysectomized female rats by orteronel in comparison with aromatase inhibitor anastrozole was evaluated; orteronel at doses ≥3mg/kg significantly suppressed serum estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione and 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels, and increased progesterone levels in the estrogen-synthesis pathway. Orteronel, at a dose of 300mg/kg, suppressed serum estradiol concentrations to a similar degree as 0.1mg/kg anastrozole. In contrast, in the corticoid-synthesis pathway, serum aldosterone, corticosterone, and progesterone levels did not change significantly following administration of 300mg/kg of orteronel. Third, the effect of multiple oral administration of orteronel on serum estradiol levels in regularly cycling female cynomolgus monkeys was evaluated. Orteronel at 15mg/kg/day (7.5mg/kg/treatment, twice daily [bid]) continued to suppress the estradiol surge prior to the start of luteal phase for 1.5-times the average duration of three consecutive, pre-treatment menstrual cycles, while serum progesterone was maintained at levels almost equal to those in the luteal phase although a certain portion of this increased level of progesterone could be of adrenal-origin. This suppressive effect on estradiol surge was thought to be reversible since serum estradiol levels started to rise immediately after the discontinuation of orteronel. Estradiol surge was not abrogated by treatment with anastrozole 0.2mg/kg/day (0.1mg/kg/treatment, bid). In summary, orteronel can suppress serum estradiol concentrations in hypophysectomized female rats and monkeys through selective inhibition of CYP17A1 activity, suggesting that orteronel might be effective for hormone-dependent breast cancers and estrogen-dependent diseases.

[PMID: 24965748]
Orteronel (TAK-700) is an investigational, nonsteroidal, oral, inhibitor of androgen synthesis with greater specificity for 17,20-lyase than for 17α-hydroxylase. We investigated orteronel without steroids in patients with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC; M0). Patients with nmCRPC and rising prostate-specific antigen (PSA) received orteronel 300 mg twice daily until PSA progression, metastases, or unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was percentage of patients achieving PSA ≤0.2 ng/mL (undetectable levels) at 3 months. Secondary endpoints included safety, PSA response, time to metastases, and correlated endpoints. Thirty-nine patients with a median baseline PSA doubling time of 2.4 months (range, 0.9-9.2) received a median of fourteen 28-day treatment cycles. PSA decreased >30% in 35 patients and 6 (16%) achieved PSA ≤ 0.2 ng/mL at 3 months. Median times to PSA progression and metastasis were 13.8 and 25.4 months, respectively. Kaplan-Meier estimates of freedom from PSA progression were 57% and 42% at 12 and 24 months, and of freedom from metastasis were 94% and 62% at 12 and 24 months, respectively. At 3 months, median testosterone declined by 89% from baseline. Adverse events led to therapy discontinuation in 12 patients and grade ≥3/4 adverse events occurred in 22 patients. Most frequent all-cause adverse events included fatigue (64%), hypertension (44%), diarrhea (38%), and nausea (33%), which were primarily grade 1/2. Single-agent orteronel produced marked and durable declines in PSA in patients with nmCRPC. Orteronel has moderate but manageable toxicities and its chronic administration without steroids appears feasible.

[PMID: 25537627]
Orteronel (TAK-700) is a non-steroidal, selective, reversible inhibitor of 17,20-lyase. We evaluated the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and antitumor effect of orteronel with or without prednisolone in Japanese patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We conducted a phase 1 study in men with progressive and chemotherapy-naïve CRPC. Patients received orteronel orally at doses of 200-400 mg twice daily (BID) with or without oral prednisolone (5 mg BID). Dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) was assessed during Cycle 1 (28 days). Patients could continue study treatment until any of criteria for treatment discontinuation were met. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone therapy was continued in patients without prior orchidectomy. Fifteen patients were enrolled and administered at least one dose of orteronel. No DLTs were reported during Cycle 1 in this study. Adverse events (AEs) were reported in all 15 patients. Most common AEs (>30%) were hyperlipasemia (47%), hyperamylasemia (40%), and constipation (33%). Acute pancreatitis (Grades 2 and 3) and pancreatitis (Grade 1) were complicated in three patients during the study. Dose-dependent increase in plasma orteronel concentrations was indicated over the 200-400 mg BID dose range. Prednisolone coadministered did not alter PK of orteronel. Serum testosterone was rapidly suppressed below the lower limit of quantification across all doses. Of 15 subjects, 13 achieved at least a 50% reduction from baseline in prostate-specific antigen. Orteronel at doses up to 400 mg BID was tolerable in Japanese CRPC patients. The present results support further evaluation of orteronel with or without prednisolone.

[PMID: 24314737]
New drugs have recently been developed, through a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the progression of prostate cancer, including castration-resistant ones (CRPC). This article aims to describe the mechanisms of action of these new hormonal treatments and their major clinical outcomes and development programs. A bibliographic research in French and English using Medline(®) and Embase(®) using the keywords "castration-resistant prostate cancer", "abiraterone acetate", "orteronel", "enzalutamide", and "clinical trials" was performed. the androgen signaling pathway remains the cornerstone of advanced cancers management. Hence, some molecules target the androgen biosynthesis, as abiraterone acetate and orteronel, which are selective inhibitors of the enzyme CYP17. Others act as antagonists of the androgen receptor: the enzalutamide, RNA-509 and ODM201. Finally, galeterone combines the two effects. Progress conferred by these molecules in terms of overall survival and quality of life in patients with metastatic CRPC, suggest that their use at earlier stages of the disease could reduce morbidity and mortality from prostate cancer. Determining the best strategy for sequence or combination therapy to optimize the use of these new molecules should be investigated.

[PMID: 25264242]
Orteronel is a nonsteroidal, selective inhibitor of 17,20-lyase that was recently in phase 3 clinical development as a treatment for castration-resistant prostate cancer. In humans, the primary clearance route for orteronel is renal excretion. Human liver microsomal studies indicated that orteronel weakly inhibits CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C9 and 2C19, with IC50 values of 17.8, 27.7, 30.8 and 38.8 µm, respectively, whereas orteronel does not inhibit CYP2B6, 2D6 or 3A4/5 (IC50  > 100 µm). Orteronel also does not exhibit time-dependent inhibition of CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 or 3A4/5. The results of a static model indicated an [I]/Ki ratio >0.1 for CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C9 and 2C19. Therefore, a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model was developed to assess the potential for drug-drug interactions (DDIs) between orteronel and theophylline, repaglinide, (S)-warfarin and omeprazole, which are sensitive substrates of CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C9 and 2C19, respectively. Simulation of the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of these four CYP substrates in the presence and absence of orteronel revealed geometric mean AUC ratios <1.25. Therefore, in accordance with the 2012 US FDA Draft Guidance on DDIs, orteronel can be labeled a 'non-inhibitor' and further clinical DDI evaluation is not required. In PBPK models of moderate and severe renal impairment, the AUC of orteronel was predicted to increase by 52% and 83%, respectively. These results are in agreement with those of a clinical trial in which AUC increases of 38% and 87% were observed in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment, respectively.

[PMID: 21978946]
A novel naphthylmethylimidazole derivative 1 and its related compounds were identified as 17,20-lyase inhibitors. Based on the structure-activity relationship around the naphthalene scaffold and the results of a docking study of 1a in the homology model of 17,20-lyase, the 6,7-dihydro-5H-pyrrolo[1,2-c]imidazole derivative (+)-3c was synthesized and identified as a potent and highly selective 17,20-lyase inhibitor. Biological evaluation of (+)-3c at a dose of 1mg/kg in a male monkey model revealed marked reductions in both serum testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone concentrations. Therefore, (+)-3c (termed orteronel [TAK-700]) was selected as a candidate for clinical evaluation and is currently in phase III clinical trials for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer.

[PMID: 24844235]
It is now well established that hormonal pathways are involved in the development of prostate cancer towards the castration resistant (CRPC) stage and can be effective molecular targets for novel treatment strategies. Most CRPC are sensitive to androgens and this can be due to the intratumoral production of androgens, androgen receptor (AR) amplification/ mutations and epigenetic modifications of AR expression/signaling. Based on these observations, potent agents targeting the AR axis were developed: 1) inhibitors of CYP17 (a key enzyme in the production of androgens), such as abiraterone and orteronel; 2) AR antagonists that bind to AR and impair AR activation, such as enzalutamide and ARN-509. Moreover, gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptors (GnRH-R), associated with a strong antitumor activity, are expressed in CRPC cells, indicating that they might represent an important target for GnRH analog-based therapeutic strategies. In addition to GnRH agonists and antagonists (i.e., degarelix), cytotoxic GnRH-based bioconjugates, delivering chemotherapeutic drugs to cancer cells expressing the GnRH-R, were developed and reported to exert antitumor effects on CRPC cells; some of them (i.e., AN-152) have already entered clinical trials. This review discusses the most relevant patents and recent observations on the anti-cancer efficacy of novel drugs targeting the AR and the GnRH-R pathways in CRPC.

[PMID: 23146910]
Endogenous androgens play a role in the development and progression of prostate cancer (PC), thus androgen suppression may offer an effective therapeutic strategy for this disease. Orteronel (TAK-700), 6-[(7S)-7-hydroxy-6,7-dihydro-5H-pyrrolo[1,2-c]imidazol-7-yl]-N-methyl-2-naphthamide, is a novel, non-steroidal, selective inhibitor of the 17,20-lyase activity of CYP17A--a key enzyme in the production of steroidal hormones--and is being developed as a therapy for PC. The purpose of this study was to elucidate the inhibitory activity of orteronel, in particular its specificity for androgen synthesis enzymes, in male rats--an androgen-synthesis model that largely reflects this pathway in humans. Orteronel inhibited 17,20-lyase activity in rats with an IC(50) of 1200 nM but did not inhibit 17α-hydroxylase or 11β-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) activity in rats at concentrations up to 10 μM. In cellular steroidogenesis assays using rat testicular cells, orteronel suppressed testosterone and androstenedione production with an IC(50) of 640 nM and 210 nM, respectively, but did not suppress either corticosterone or aldosterone production in rat adrenal cells at concentrations up to 30 μM. In addition, serum testosterone and androstenedione levels in human chorionic gonadotropin-injected hypophysectomized rats were significantly reduced by single oral administration of orteronel at a dose of 30 mg/kg (both p ≤ 0.01); serum corticosterone and aldosterone levels in ACTH-injected hypophysectomized rats did not result in significant differences compared with controls, following orteronel administration at doses up to 300 mg/kg. Serum testosterone levels in intact male rats were significantly reduced by orteronel 4h after dosing at 100mg/kg (p ≤ 0.01); testosterone levels showed a tendency to recover afterward. In intact male rats, the weight of the prostate glands and seminal vesicles was decreased in a dose-dependent manner following multiple doses of orteronel at 37.5, 150, and 600 mg/kg, TID for 4 days. The reversibility of orteronel was further confirmed using a human adrenocortical tumor cell line. In summary, orteronel is a selective and reversible 17,20-lyase inhibitor, and decreases the weight of androgen-dependent organs in male rats. Our data suggests that orteronel would therefore be effective for androgen-dependent disorders such as PC.

[PMID: 25297456]
Orteronel (TAK-700) is a novel and selective inhibitor of CYP17A1, which is expressed in testicular, adrenal and prostate tumor tissues. Orteronel is currently in Phase-III clinical development for metastatic castration-resistant prostate patients. The objective of the study is to assess the permeability, metabolic stability (in various preclinical and human liver microsomes), identify the major CYPs involved in the metabolism of Orteronel. We have also studied the pharmacokinetics and excretion of Orteronel in Sprague-Dawley rats. Orteronel was found to be stable in various liver microsomes tested. The half-life (t ½) of Orteronel with intravenous (i.v.) route was found to be 1.65 ± 0.22 h. The clearance and volume of distribution by i.v. route for Orteronel were found to be 27.5 ± 3.09 mL/min/kg and 3.94 ± 0.85 L/kg, respectively. The absorption of Orteronel was rapid, with maximum concentrations of drug in plasma of 614 ± 76.4, 1,764 ± 166, 4,652 ± 300 and 17,518 ± 3,178 ng/mL attained at 0.38, 0.75, 0.50 and 0.83 h, respectively, after oral administration of Orteronel at 5, 10, 30 and 100 mg/kg as a suspension. In the dose proportional oral pharmacokinetic study, the mean t ½ by oral route was found to be ~3.5 h and bioavailability ranged between 69 and 89 %. The primary route of elimination for Orteronel is urine.

[PMID: 23788266]
A novel, simple, specific, sensitive and reproducible high-performance liquid chromatography assay method has been developed and validated for the estimation of Orteronel in rat plasma. The bioanalytical procedure involves extraction of Orteronel and phenacetin (internal standard) from rat plasma with a simple liquid-liquid extraction process. The chromatographic analysis was performed on a Waters Alliance system using a gradient mobile phase conditions at a flow rate of 1 mL/min and a C18 column maintained at ambient room temperature. The eluate was monitored using a photodiode array detector set at 242. Orteronel and internal standard eluted at 4.8 and 6.2 min, respectively and the total run time was 9 min. Method validation was performed as per US Food and Drug Administration guidelines and the results met the acceptance criteria. The calibration curve was linear over a concentration range of 100-3149 ng/mL (r(2) = 0.995). The intra- and inter-day precisions were in the ranges of 0.31-7.87 and 3.97-6.35, respectively, in rat plasma. The validated HPLC method was successfully applied to a pharmacokinetic study of Orteronel in rats.

[PMID: 23880851]
Since 2010, six drugs have been approved for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer, i.e., CYP17 inhibitor Abiraterone, androgen receptor antagonist Enzalutamide, cytotoxic agent Cabazitaxel, vaccine Sipuleucel-T, antibody Denosumab against receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand and radiopharmaceutical Alpharadin. All these drugs demonstrate improvement on overall survival, expect for Denosumab, which increases the bone mineral density of patients under androgen deprivation therapy and prolongs bone-metastasis-free survival. Besides further CYP17 inhibitors (Orteronel, Galeterone, VT-464 and CFG920), androgen receptor antagonists (ARN-509, ODM-201, AZD-3514 and EZN-4176) and vaccine Prostvac, more drug candidates with various mechanisms or new indications of launched drugs are currently under evaluation in different stages of clinical trials, including various kinase inhibitors and platinum complexes. Some novel strategies have also been proposed aimed at further potentiation of antitumor effects or reduction of side effects and complications related to treatments. Under these flourishing circumstances, more investigations should be performed on the optimal combination or the sequence of treatments needed to delay or reverse possible resistance and thus maximize the clinical benefits for the patients.

[PMID: 24276076]
As the first in class steroid 17α-hydroxylase/C17,20-lyase (CYP17) inhibitor, abiraterone acetate (of which the active metabolite is abiraterone) has been shown to improve overall survival in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)--in those who are chemotherapy-naive and those previously treated with docetaxel. Furthermore, the clinical success of abiraterone demonstrated that CRPC, which has previously been regarded as an androgen-independent disease, is still driven, at least in part, by androgens. More importantly, abiraterone is a 'promiscuous' drug that interacts with a number of targets, which dictate its clinical benefits and adverse effects profile. Besides CYP17 inhibition, abiraterone acts as an antagonist to the androgen receptor and inhibits 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase--two effects that potentially contribute to its antitumour effects. However, the inhibition of the 17α-hydroxylase activity of CYP17, CYP11B1 and a panel of hepatic CYP enzymes leads to adverse effects and toxicities that include secondary mineralocorticoid excess. Abiraterone is also associated with increased incidence of cardiac disorders. Under such circumstances, development of new CYP17 inhibitors as an additional line of defence is urgently needed. To achieve enhanced clinical benefits, new strategies are being explored that include selective inhibition of the C17,20-lyase activity of CYP17 and multi-targeting strategies that affect androgen synthesis and signalling at different points. Some of these strategies-including the drugs orteronel, VT-464 and galeterone--are supported by preclinical data and are being explored in the clinic.

[PMID: 24418642]
The androgen receptor pathway remains active in men with prostate cancer whose disease has progressed following surgical or medical castration. Orteronel (TAK-700) is an investigational, oral, nonsteroidal, selective, reversible inhibitor of 17,20-lyase, a key enzyme in the production of androgenic hormones. We conducted a phase I/II study in men with progressive, chemotherapy-naïve, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, and serum testosterone <50 ng/dL. In the phase I part, patients received orteronel 100 to 600 mg twice daily or 400 mg twice a day plus prednisone 5 mg twice a day. In phase II, patients received orteronel 300 mg twice a day, 400 mg twice a day plus prednisone, 600 mg twice a day plus prednisone, or 600 mg once a day without prednisone. In phase I (n = 26), no dose-limiting toxicities were observed and 13 of 20 evaluable patients (65%) achieved ≥50% prostate-specific antigen (PSA) decline from baseline at 12 weeks. In phase II (n = 97), 45 of 84 evaluable patients (54%) achieved a ≥50% decline in PSA and at 12 weeks, substantial mean reductions from baseline in testosterone (-7.5 ng/dL) and dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate (-45.3 μg/dL) were observed. Unconfirmed partial responses were reported in 10 of 51 evaluable phase II patients (20%). Decreases in circulating tumor cells were documented. Fifty-three percent of phase II patients experienced grade ≥3 adverse events irrespective of causality; most common were fatigue, hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, and diarrhea. 17,20-Lyase inhibition by orteronel was tolerable and results in declines in PSA and testosterone, with evidence of radiographic responses.

[PMID: 23371447]
Androgen and the androgen receptor (AR) pathway remain the key targets for emerging new therapies against castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Adrenal androgens and intratumoral testosterone production appear to be sufficient to activate AR in the castration-resistant setting. This process re-engages AR and allows it to continue to be the primary target responsible for prostate cancer progression. Adrenal androgen production can be blocked by inhibiting cytochrome P450 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17), a key enzyme for androgen synthesis in adrenal glands and peripheral tissues. Therapeutic CYP17 inhibition by ketoconazole or by the recently approved adrenal inhibitor abiraterone acetate is the only available choice to target this pathway in CRPC. A new CYP17 inhibitor, with more selective inhibition of 17,20-lyase over 17α-hydroxylase, orteronel (TAK-700), is currently undergoing phase III clinical trials in pre- and postchemotherapy CRPC. In a completed phase II trial in CRPC patients, orteronel demonstrated its efficacy by lowering the levels of circulating androgens, reducing prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, and decreasing the levels of circulating tumor cells. Ongoing studies evaluating orteronel in CRPC will further define its safety and role in the management of this disease.

[PMID: 22249003]
Surgical or pharmacologic methods to control gonadal androgen biosynthesis are effective approaches in the treatment of a variety of non-neoplastic and neoplastic diseases. For example, androgen ablation and its consequent reduction in circulating levels of testosterone is an effective therapy for advanced prostate cancers. Unfortunately, the therapeutic effectiveness of this approach is often temporary because of disease progression to the 'castration resistant' (CRPC) state, a situation for which there are limited treatment options. One mechanism thought to be responsible for the development of CRPC is extra-gonadal androgen synthesis and the resulting impact of these residual extra-gonadal androgens on prostate tumor cell proliferation. An important enzyme responsible for the synthesis of extra-gonadal androgens is CYP17A1 which possesses both 17,20-lyase and 17-hydroxylase catalytic activities with the 17,20-lyase activity being key in the androgen biosynthetic process. Orteronel (TAK-700), a novel, selective, and potent inhibitor of 17,20-lyase is under development as a drug to inhibit androgen synthesis. In this study, we quantified the inhibitory activity and specificity of orteronel for testicular and adrenal androgen production by evaluating its effects on CYP17A1 enzymatic activity, steroid production in monkey adrenal cells and human adrenal tumor cells, and serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), cortisol, and testosterone after oral dosing in castrated and intact male cynomolgus monkeys. We report that orteronel potently suppresses androgen production in monkey adrenal cells but only weakly suppresses corticosterone and aldosterone production; the IC(50) value of orteronel for cortisol was ~3-fold higher than that for DHEA. After single oral dosing, serum levels of DHEA, cortisol, and testosterone were rapidly suppressed in intact cynomolgus monkeys. In castrated monkeys treated twice daily with orteronel, suppression of DHEA and testosterone persisted throughout the treatment period. In both in vivo models and in agreement with our in vitro data, suppression of serum cortisol levels following oral dosing was less than that seen for DHEA. In terms of human CYP17A1 and human adrenal tumor cells, orteronel inhibited 17,20-lyase activity 5.4 times more potently than 17-hydroxylase activity in cell-free enzyme assays and DHEA production 27 times more potently than cortisol production in human adrenal tumor cells, suggesting greater specificity of inhibition between 17,20-lyase and 17-hydroxylase activities in humans vs monkeys. In summary, orteronel potently inhibited the 17,20-lyase activity of monkey and human CYP17A1 and reduced serum androgen levels in vivo in monkeys. These findings suggest that orteronel may be an effective therapeutic option for diseases where androgen suppression is critical, such as androgen sensitive and CRPC.