[PMID: 33098622]
The phenotype of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) has been changing with the recent availability of three FDA-approved treatments: intrathecal nusinersen, intravenous onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi, and enteral risdiplam. The degree of improvement in muscle strength and respiratory health varies with SMA genotype, severity of baseline neuromuscular and pulmonary impairment, medication used, and timing of the first dose. A spectrum of pulmonary outcomes has been reported with these novel medications when used early and in conjunction with proactive multidisciplinary management of comorbidities. In this review, we summarize the reported impact of these novel therapies on pulmonary well-being and the improving trajectory of pulmonary morbidity, compared to the natural history of SMA. The importance of ongoing clinical monitoring albeit the improved phenotype is reiterated. We also discuss the limitations of the current SMA-therapy trials and offer suggestions for future clinical-outcome studies and long-term monitoring.

[PMID: 33626251]
Type 1 spinal muscular atrophy is a rare, progressive neuromuscular disease that is caused by low levels of functional survival of motor neuron (SMN) protein. Risdiplam is an orally administered, small molecule that modifies <i>SMN2</i> pre-messenger RNA splicing and increases levels of functional SMN protein. We report the results of part 1 of a two-part, phase 2-3, open-label study of risdiplam in infants 1 to 7 months of age who had type 1 spinal muscular atrophy, which is characterized by the infant not attaining the ability to sit without support. Primary outcomes were safety, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics (including the blood SMN protein concentration), and the selection of the risdiplam dose for part 2 of the study. Exploratory outcomes included the ability to sit without support for at least 5 seconds. A total of 21 infants were enrolled. Four infants were in a low-dose cohort and were treated with a final dose at month 12 of 0.08 mg of risdiplam per kilogram of body weight per day, and 17 were in a high-dose cohort and were treated with a final dose at month 12 of 0.2 mg per kilogram per day. The baseline median SMN protein concentrations in blood were 1.31 ng per milliliter in the low-dose cohort and 2.54 ng per milliliter in the high-dose cohort; at 12 months, the median values increased to 3.05 ng per milliliter and 5.66 ng per milliliter, respectively, which represented a median of 3.0 times and 1.9 times the baseline values in the low-dose and high-dose cohorts, respectively. Serious adverse events included pneumonia, respiratory tract infection, and acute respiratory failure. At the time of this publication, 4 infants had died of respiratory complications. Seven infants in the high-dose cohort and no infants in the low-dose cohort were able to sit without support for at least 5 seconds. The higher dose of risdiplam (0.2 mg per kilogram per day) was selected for part 2 of the study. In infants with type 1 spinal muscular atrophy, treatment with oral risdiplam led to an increased expression of functional SMN protein in the blood. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02913482.).

[PMID: 34888619]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease caused by homozygous deletions or mutations in survival motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1). Currently, the primary therapeutic strategy for SMA is to increase the level of SMN via correcting SMN2 splicing (nusinersen and risdiplam). However, some patients with SMA do not respond to such treatments, thereby warranting a need to develop new therapeutic strategies. We have previously reported that SMN2 expression is epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation levels of the SMN2 promoter region. In the present study, we determined that methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) may bind to this critical promoter region (nt-167 to 43). Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO-P1 and ASO-P2) were designed to target the key methylation sites in the SMN2 promoter region, which enhanced the overall transcription and functional protein expression levels in the SMA cell lines. These results were similar to those observed in nusinersen-treated SMA cells. Moreover, a combined treatment of ASO-P1 and ASO-NUS in SMA cell lines further increases fl-SMN2 transcript and SMN protein levels. The delivery of ASO-P1 to the central nervous system of severe SMA mice corrected the molecular, pathological, and functional phenotypes of this disease and increased survival rates. Our findings suggest that the key methylation regions in the SMN2 promoter region may be a novel therapeutic target for SMA.

[PMID: 34745484]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the leading causes of death in infants related to the degeneration of neurons. Currently, there are no curative treatment options for SMA, and many options available may not be feasible. This review presents the background, clinical studies, and indications for the use of Risdiplam in treating SMA. SMA causes a decrease in the production of survival motor neuron proteins (SMN) and current treatments target to increase the expression of SMN. Risdiplam is the first and only oral medication to be approved to treat SMA. As an SMN2 splicing modifier, it has provided stronger systemic therapies than previous intrathecal and gene replacement therapies. There have been many efforts to treat SMA with multidisciplinary approaches. These include intrathecal injections to gene replacement therapies. However, these have been faced with limitations such as reaching a good therapeutic dose in systemic tissues, route of administration, and price. Risdiplam is currently the only orally administered drug approved by the FDA for the treatment of SMA. It not only provides a good therapeutic window to systemic tissues but allows for a non-invasive approach in infants. Further investigation and comparison on the safety profile of Risdiplam due to its broader systemic effect should be considered with other available therapies.

[PMID: 33231373]
Evaluation of ophthalmologic safety with focus on retinal safety in patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) treated with risdiplam (EVRYSDI®), a survival of motor neuron 2 splicing modifier associated with retinal toxicity in monkeys. Risdiplam was approved recently for the treatment of patients with SMA, aged ≥ 2 months in the United States, and is currently under Health Authority review in the EU. Subjects included patients with SMA aged 2 months-60 years enrolled in the FIREFISH, SUNFISH, and JEWELFISH clinical trials for risdiplam. Ophthalmologic assessments, including functional assessments (age-appropriate visual acuity and visual field) and imaging (spectral domain optical coherence tomography [SD-OCT], fundus photography, and fundus autofluorescence [FAF]), were conducted at baseline and every 2-6 months depending on study and assessment. SD-OCT, FAF, fundus photography, and threshold perimetry were evaluated by an independent, masked reading center. Adverse events (AEs) were reported throughout the study. A total of 245 patients receiving risdiplam were assessed. Comprehensive, high-quality, ophthalmologic monitoring assessing retinal structure and visual function showed no retinal structural or functional changes. In the youngest patients, SD-OCT findings of normal retinal maturation were observed. AEs involving eye disorders were not suggestive of risdiplam-induced toxicity and resolved with ongoing treatment. Extensive ophthalmologic monitoring conducted in studies in patients with SMA confirmed that risdiplam does not induce ophthalmologic toxicity in pediatric or adult patients with SMA at the therapeutic dose. These results suggest that safety ophthalmologic monitoring is not needed in patients receiving risdiplam, as also reflected in the United States Prescribing Information for risdiplam.

[PMID: 33044711]
Risdiplam (Evrysdi™) is an orally administered, survival motor neuron 2 (SMN2)-directed RNA splicing modifier being developed by Roche, PTC Therapeutics Inc and the SMA Foundation for the treatment of the spinal muscular atrophy. The small molecule is designed to treat spinal muscular atrophy caused by mutations in chromosome 5q leading to SMN protein deficiency. The drug boosts the ability of an alternative gene SMN2 to produce full-length and functional SMN protein. In August 2020, Evrysdi™ (risdiplam) received its first approval in the USA for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy in patients 2 months of age and older. Risdiplam is in pre-registration for this indication in numerous countries worldwide, including the European Union, Brazil, Chile, China, Indonesia, Russia, South Korea and Taiwan. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of risdiplam leading to this first approval for spinal muscular atrophy.

[PMID: 34183144]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a progressive neuromuscular disorder characterized by loss of motor neurons leading to muscle weakness and atrophy. The United States' Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) approval of nusinersen, onasemnogene abeparvovec, and risdiplam for SMA has challenged existing treatment paradigms with multiple treatment options, a new natural history of the disease, and an emerging understanding of the importance of early and pre-symptomatic treatment. The profound impact of early, pre-symptomatic treatment has led to the creation of a neurogenetics urgency for newly identified patients with SMA, a novel problem for neurologists more accustomed to a more methodical approach to diagnosis and care. Implementation of newborn screening programs has helped facilitate early diagnosis and treatment, but challenges remain in overcoming administrative and procedural hurdles that can lead to treatment delays. Herein I discuss 2 cases that highlight the importance of early treatment, as well as gaps in our understanding of the progression of SMA in pre-symptomatic infants.

[PMID: 33919699]
RNA splicing is an essential step in producing mature messenger RNA (mRNA) and other RNA species. Harnessing RNA splicing modifiers as a new pharmacological modality is promising for the treatment of diseases caused by aberrant splicing. This drug modality can be used for infectious diseases by disrupting the splicing of essential pathogenic genes. Several antisense oligonucleotide splicing modifiers were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Recently, a small-molecule splicing modifier, risdiplam, was also approved for the treatment of SMA, highlighting small molecules as important warheads in the arsenal for regulating RNA splicing. The cellular targets of these approved drugs are all mRNA precursors (pre-mRNAs) in human cells. The development of novel RNA-targeting splicing modifiers can not only expand the scope of drug targets to include many previously considered "undruggable" genes but also enrich the chemical-genetic toolbox for basic biomedical research. In this review, we summarized known splicing modifiers, screening methods for novel splicing modifiers, and the chemical space occupied by the small-molecule splicing modifiers.

[PMID: 34287987]
There are currently three medications approved for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), but the use of these medications in combination has not been well described. This is a retrospective report of four cases of SMA treated with dual onasemnogene and risdiplam therapy at our institution. Following onasemnogene therapy, all four patients experienced a perceived plateau of therapeutic benefit, at which time daily risdiplam was started. Transient fatigue and weakness was seen in two patients following risdiplam initiation, but this resolved within 1 mo. One patient was hospitalized with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) and post-viral pneumonia, weeks following risdiplam initiation. No other adverse effects related to onasemnogene and risdiplam combination therapy were identified and all patients experienced objective and subjective improvement. Combination therapy with onasemnogene and risdiplam in patients with SMA appears to be well-tolerated. Further large prospective trials are needed to determine whether dual therapy is more efficacious than monotherapy, and to identify rare adverse events that may occur with the use of combination therapy.

[PMID: 34141064]
Not too long ago, the concept of selectively targeting mRNA with small molecules was perceived as a formidable scientific challenge. The discovery of small molecule splicing modifiers and the development of risdiplam for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) have firmly established proof of concept for this exciting new platform and transformed a scientific curiosity into a viable technology to target disease. Today, several approaches to target mRNA with small molecules, supported by biophysical and screening methods, are in place to deliver new drugs with high therapeutic relevance.

[PMID: 30302786]
Risdiplam (RG7916, RO7034067) is an orally administered, centrally and peripherally distributed, survival of motor neuron 2 (SMN2) mRNA splicing modifier for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). The objectives of this entry-into-human study were to assess the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics of risdiplam, and the effect of the strong CYP3A inhibitor itraconazole on the PK of risdiplam in healthy male volunteers. Part 1 had a randomized, double-blind, adaptive design with 25 subjects receiving single ascending oral doses of risdiplam (ranging from 0.6-18.0 mg, n = 18) or placebo (n = 7). A Bayesian framework was applied to estimate risdiplam's effect on SMN2 mRNA. The effect of multiple doses of itraconazole on the PK of risdiplam was also assessed using a two-period cross-over design (n = 8). Risdiplam in the fasted or fed state was well tolerated. Risdiplam exhibited linear PK over the dose range with a multi-phasic decline with a mean terminal half-life of 40-69 h. Food had no relevant effect, and itraconazole had only a minor effect on plasma PK indicating a low fraction of risdiplam metabolized by CYP3A. The highest tested dose of 18.0 mg risdiplam led to approximately 41% (95% confidence interval 27-55%) of the estimated maximum increase in SMN2 mRNA. Risdiplam was well tolerated and proof of mechanism was demonstrated by the intended shift in SMN2 splicing towards full-length SMN2 mRNA. Based on these data, Phase 2/3 studies of risdiplam in patients with SMA are now ongoing.

[PMID: 34368854]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by the loss of the survival motor neuron 1 (SMN1) gene function. The related SMN2 gene partially compensates but produces insufficient levels of SMN protein due to alternative splicing of exon 7. Evrysdi™ (risdiplam), recently approved for the treatment of SMA, and related compounds promote exon 7 inclusion to generate full-length SMN2 mRNA and increase SMN protein levels. SMNΔ7 type I SMA mice survive without treatment for ~17 days. SMN2 mRNA splicing modulators increase survival of SMN∆7 mice with treatment initiated at postnatal day 3 (PND3). To define SMN requirements for adult mice, SMNΔ7 mice were dosed with an SMN2 mRNA splicing modifier from PND3 to PND40, then dosing was stopped. Mice not treated after PND40 showed progressive weight loss, necrosis, and muscle atrophy after ~20 days. Male mice presented a more severe phenotype than female mice. Mice dosed continuously did not show disease symptoms. The estimated half-life of SMN protein is 2 days indicating that the SMA phenotype reappeared after SMN protein levels returned to baseline. Although SMN protein levels decreased with age in mice and SMN protein levels were higher in brain than in muscle, our studies suggest that SMN protein is required throughout the life of the mouse and is especially essential in adult peripheral tissues including muscle. These studies indicate that drugs such as risdiplam will be optimally therapeutic when given as early as possible after diagnosis and potentially will be required for the life of an SMA patient.

[PMID: 34347881]
Risdiplam (Evrysdi) improves motor neuron function in patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and has been approved for the treatment of patients ≥2 months old. Risdiplam exhibits time-dependent inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A in vitro. While many pediatric patients receive risdiplam, a drug-drug interaction (DDI) study in pediatric patients with SMA was not feasible. Therefore, a novel physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model-based strategy was proposed to extrapolate DDI risk from healthy adults to children with SMA in an iterative manner. A clinical DDI study was performed in healthy adults at relevant risdiplam exposures observed in children. Risdiplam caused an 1.11-fold increase in the ratio of midazolam area under the curve with and without risdiplam (AUCR)), suggesting an 18-fold lower in vivo CYP3A inactivation constant compared with the in vitro value. A pediatric PBPK model for risdiplam was validated with independent data and combined with a validated midazolam pediatric PBPK model to extrapolate DDI from adults to pediatric patients with SMA. The impact of selected intestinal and hepatic CYP3A ontogenies on the DDI susceptibility in children relative to adults was investigated. The PBPK analysis suggests that primary CYP3A inhibition by risdiplam occurs in the intestine rather than the liver. The PBPK-predicted risdiplam CYP3A inhibition risk in pediatric patients with SMA aged 2 months-18 years was negligible (midazolam AUCR of 1.09-1.18) and included in the US prescribing information of risdiplam. Comprehensive evaluation of the sensitivity of predicted CYP3A DDI on selected intestinal and hepatic CYP3A ontogeny functions, together with PBPK model-based strategy proposed here, aim to guide and facilitate DDI extrapolations in pediatric populations.

[PMID: 33130193]
Many neuromuscular diseases are genetically inherited or caused by mutations in motor function proteins. Two of the most prevalent neuromuscular diseases are Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA), which are often diagnosed during the early years of life, contributing to life-long debilitation and shorter longevity. DMD is caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene resulting in critical muscle wasting, with cardiac or respiratory failure by age 30. Lack of dystrophin protein is the leading cause of degeneration of skeletal and cardiac muscle. Corticosteroids and artificial respirators remain as the gold-standard management of complications and have significantly extended the life span of these patients. Additionally, drug therapies including eteplirsen (EXONDYS 51®), golodirsen (VYONDYS 53™), and viltolarsen (VILTEPSO®) have been approved by the FDA to treat specific types of DMD. SMA is defined by the degeneration of the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and destruction of motor neuron nuclei in the lower brain-stem caused by SMN1 gene deletion. Loss of SMN1 protein is partly compensated by SMN2 protein synthesis with disease severity being affected by the success of SMN2 gene synthesis. Evidence-based recommendations for SMA are directed towards supportive therapy and providing adequate nutrition and respiratory assistance as needed. Treatment and prevention of complications of muscle weakness are crucial for reducing the phenotype expression of SMA. Furthermore, drug therapies including injectables such as onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi (ZOLGENSMA®), nusinersen (SPINRAZA®), and an oral-solution, risdiplam (EVRYSDI™), are medications that have been FDA-approved for the treatment of SMA. This review discusses the current and emerging therapeutic options for patients with DMD and SMA.

[PMID: 34283224]
Risdiplam is the first approved small-molecule splicing modulator for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Previous studies demonstrated that risdiplam analogues have two separate binding sites in exon 7 of the SMN2 pre-mRNA: (i) the 5'-splice site and (ii) an upstream purine (GA)-rich binding site. Importantly, the sequence of this GA-rich binding site significantly enhanced the potency of risdiplam analogues. In this report, we unambiguously determined that a known risdiplam analogue, SMN-C2, binds to single-stranded GA-rich RNA in a sequence-specific manner. The minimum required binding sequence for SMN-C2 was identified as GAAGGAAGG. We performed all-atom simulations using a robust Gaussian accelerated molecular dynamics (GaMD) method, which captured spontaneous binding of a risdiplam analogue to the target nucleic acids. We uncovered, for the first time, a ligand-binding pocket formed by two sequential GAAG loop-like structures. The simulation findings were highly consistent with experimental data obtained from saturation transfer difference (STD) NMR and structure-affinity-relationship studies of the risdiplam analogues. Together, these studies illuminate us to understand the molecular basis of single-stranded purine-rich RNA recognition by small-molecule splicing modulators with an unprecedented binding mode.

[PMID: 30044619]
SMA is an inherited disease that leads to loss of motor function and ambulation and a reduced life expectancy. We have been working to develop orally administrated, systemically distributed small molecules to increase levels of functional SMN protein. Compound 2 was the first SMN2 splicing modifier tested in clinical trials in healthy volunteers and SMA patients. It was safe and well tolerated and increased SMN protein levels up to 2-fold in patients. Nevertheless, its development was stopped as a precautionary measure because retinal toxicity was observed in cynomolgus monkeys after chronic daily oral dosing (39 weeks) at exposures in excess of those investigated in patients. Herein, we describe the discovery of 1 (risdiplam, RG7916, RO7034067) that focused on thorough pharmacology, DMPK and safety characterization and optimization. This compound is undergoing pivotal clinical trials and is a promising medicine for the treatment of patients in all ages and stages with SMA.

[PMID: 33458725]
Recent advances in our understanding of RNA biology have uncovered crucial roles for RNA in multiple disease states, ranging from viral and bacterial infections to cancer and neurological disorders. As a result, multiple laboratories have become interested in developing drug-like small molecules to target RNA. However, this development comes with multiple unique challenges. For example, RNA is inherently dynamic and has limited chemical diversity. In addition, promiscuous RNA-binding ligands are often identified during screening campaigns. This Tutorial Review overviews important considerations and advancements for generating RNA-targeted small molecules, ranging from fundamental chemistry to promising small molecule examples with demonstrated clinical efficacy. Specifically, we begin by exploring RNA functional classes, structural hierarchy, and dynamics. We then discuss fundamental RNA recognition principles along with methods for small molecule screening and RNA structure determination. Finally, we review unique challenges and emerging solutions from both the RNA and small molecule perspectives for generating RNA-targeted ligands before highlighting a selection of the "Greatest Hits" to date. These molecules target RNA in a variety of diseases, including cancer, neurodegeneration, and viral infection, in cellular and animal model systems. Additionally, we explore the recently FDA-approved small molecule regulator of RNA splicing, risdiplam, for treatment of spinal muscular atrophy. Together, this Tutorial Review showcases the fundamental role of chemical and molecular recognition principles in enhancing our understanding of RNA biology and contributing to the rapidly growing number of RNA-targeted probes and therapeutics. In particular, we hope this widely accessible review will serve as inspiration for aspiring small molecule and/or RNA researchers.

[PMID: 33283185]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is 1 of the leading causes of infant mortality. SMA is mostly caused by low levels of Survival Motor Neuron (SMN) protein due to deletion of or mutation in the <i>SMN1</i> gene. Its nearly identical copy, <i>SMN2</i>, fails to compensate for the loss of <i>SMN1</i> due to predominant skipping of exon 7. Correction of <i>SMN2</i> exon 7 splicing by an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO), nusinersen (Spinraza™), that targets the intronic splicing silencer N1 (ISS-N1) became the first approved therapy for SMA. Restoration of SMN levels using gene therapy was the next. Very recently, an orally deliverable small molecule, risdiplam (Evrysdi™), became the third approved therapy for SMA. Here we discuss how these therapies are positioned to meet the needs of the broad phenotypic spectrum of SMA patients.