[PMID: 15908750]
Hypospadias, when the urethra opens on the ventral side of the penis, is a common malformation seen in about 3 per 1,000 male births. It is a complex disorder associated with genetic and environmental factors and can be part of genetic syndromes. Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized by a distinct facial phenotype, Hirschsprung disease, microcephaly and mental retardation. It is caused by mutations in the zinc finger homeo box 1B gene, ZFHX1B (SIP1). To date, 68 deletion/mutation-positive cases have been reported. Genitourinary anomalies are common in MWS. Here we report that hypospadias is common in males with this syndrome. In 39 patients where this information was available, hypospadias was present in 46% of patients (18/39). In the 3 Italian male cases reported here, hypospadias was always present. MWS should be considered by endocrinologists in patients with hypospadias associated with developmental delays/mental retardation, in particular in the presence of a distinct facial phenotype.

[PMID: 21336163]
zfhz1b is the causative gene for Mowat-Wilson syndrome, in which patients demonstrate developmental delay and Hirschsprung disease, as well as other anomalies. We identified a patient with Mowat-Wilson syndrome who also developed cholestasis and histopathologic features consistent with biliary atresia, suggesting that mutations involving zfhz1b may lead to biliary developmental anomalies or injury to the biliary tract. We used the zebrafish model system to determine whether zfhx1b has a role in vertebrate biliary development. Using zebrafish we determined that zfhx1b was expressed in the developing liver during biliary growth and remodeling, and that morpholino antisense oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown of zfhx1b led to defects in biliary development. These findings were associated with decreased expression of vhnf1, a transcription factor known to be important in biliary development in zebrafish and in mammals. Our studies underscore the importance of genetic contributions in the etiology of infantile hepatobiliary disorders, including biliary atresia.

[PMID: 24282181]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome is a genetic disease caused by heterozygous mutations or deletions of the zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2) gene. The syndrome is characterized by typical facial features, moderate-to-severe mental retardation, epilepsy and variable congenital malformations, including Hirschsprung disease, genital anomalies, congenital heart disease, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and eye defects. The prevalence of Mowat-Wilson syndrome is currently unknown, but it seems that Mowat-Wilson syndrome is underdiagnosed, particularly in patients without Hirschsprung disease. We report here the first Egyptian case of Mowat-Wilson syndrome who was conceived by intracytoplasmic sperm injection. The patient manifested bilateral sensorineural hearing loss--a new feature not previously reported in cases of Mowat-Wilson syndrome. This report describes the first Egyptian patient of Mowat-Wilson syndrome who was conceived after intracytoplasmic sperm injection, and provides a new evidence for the inclusion of deafness among the congenital defects of the syndrome.

[PMID: 19842203]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by a recognizable facial phenotype in addition to moderate to severe cognitive disability with severe speech impairment and variable multiple congenital anomalies. The anomalies may include Hirschsprung disease, heart defects, structural eye anomalies including microphthalmia, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and urogenital anomalies. Microcephaly, seizure disorder and constipation are common. All typical cases result from haploinsufficiency of the ZEB2 (also known as ZFHX1B or SIP-1) gene, with over 100 distinct mutations now described. Approximately 80% of patients have a nonsense or frameshift mutation detectable by sequencing, with the rest having gross deletions necessitating a dosage sensitive assay. Here we report on the results of comprehensive molecular testing for 27 patients testing positive for MWS. Twenty-one patients had a nonsense, frameshift, or splice site mutation identified by sequencing; 14 of which localized to exon 8 and 17 of which are novel. Six patients had deletions in the ZEB2 gene, including two novel partial gene deletions. This report, the first such analysis in North American patients, adds to the growing list of both novel pathogenic mutations associated with MWS, as well as other variants in the ZEB2 gene. In addition, we suggest an economical testing strategy.

[PMID: 17932455]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a multiple congenital anomaly-mental retardation complex caused by mutations in the Zinc Finger Homeobox 1 B gene (ZFHX1B). MWS has been reported in association with Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). MWS is sometimes difficult to diagnose clinically, especially when HSCR is absent. Thus, it is necessary to detect gene abnormalities at the molecular level. Here we report two Japanese girls with MWS, who showed a distinct facial phenotype, severe intellectual disability and epileptic seizures. Major congenital anomalies of the patients were very different. Patient 1 suffered from severe congenital heart disease, but did not show apparent HSCR. Patient 2 suffered from typical HSCR and underwent surgical treatment, but did not have congenital heart disease. According to the gene analysis using white blood cells, they had nonsense mutations in ZFHX1B, R695X and Q433X, respectively. In conclusion, molecular genetic analysis of ZFHX1B is important for a definite diagnosis of MWS which has a wide phenotypic spectrum of congenital anomalies.

[PMID: 24092421]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a rare genetic condition where variable and multiple congenital anomalies including Hirschsprung's disease, intellectual disability, and prominent facial features are present. At molecular level, MWS is characterized by many different described mutations in the zinc finger E-box protein 2 (ZEB2) gene, ultimately leading to loss of gene function. This report is the first to describe the association of MWS with two different asynchronous malignant brain tumors (medulloblastoma and glioblastoma) occurring in a child.

[PMID: 17203459]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a recently delineated mental retardation (MR)-multiple congenital anomaly syndrome, characterized by typical facies, severe MR, epilepsy, and variable congenital malformations, including Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), genital anomalies, congenital heart disease (CHD), and agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC). It is caused by de novo heterozygous mutations or deletions of the ZFHX1B gene located at 2q22. ZFHX1B encodes Smad-interacting protein-1 (SMADIP1 or SIP1), a transcriptional corepressor involved in the transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway. It is a highly evolutionarily conserved gene, widely expressed in embryological development. Over 100 mutations have been described in patients with clinically typical MWS, who almost always have whole gene deletions or truncating mutations (nonsense or frameshift) of ZFHX1B, suggesting that haploinsufficiency is the basis of MWS pathology. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlation could be identified so far, but atypical phenotypes have been reported with missense or splice mutations in the ZFHX1B gene. In this work we describe 40 novel mutations and we summarize the various mutational reports published since the identification of the causative gene.

[PMID: 23523603]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a genetic disease caused by heterozygous mutations or deletions of the ZEB2 gene rarely diagnosed prenatally and with little fetal description reported. It is mainly characterized by moderate-to-severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, facial dysmorphism and various malformations including Hirschsprung disease and corpus callosum anomalies. Here we report a fetal case of MWS well described, suspected at standard autopsy. The association of a corpus callosum hypoplasia with a histological Hirschsprung disease and a typical facial gestalt allowed the guiding of genetic testing. Classical fetopathological examination still keeps indications in cases of syndromic association in the era of virtual autopsy.

[PMID: 16688751]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a rare mental retardation-multiple congenital anomalies syndrome associated with typical facial dysmorphism. Patients can show a variety of other anomalies like short stature, microcephaly, Hirschsprung disease, malformations of the brain, seizures, congenital heart defects and urogenital anomalies. Mutations leading to haploinsufficiency of the ZFHX1B gene have been described as the underlying cause of this condition. We report on the clinical findings in a 2(1/2)-year-old boy with some aspects out of the MWS-spectrum in addition to unusual anomalies and a novel missense mutation in the ZFHX1B gene.

[PMID: 24029077]
Individuals with Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS; OMIM#235730) have characteristic facial features, a variety of congenital anomalies such as Hirschsprung disease, and intellectual disabilities caused by mutation or deletion of ZEB2 gene. This deletion or cytogenetic abnormality has been reported primarily from Europe, Australia and the United States, but not in Korea. Here we report a patient with characteristic facial features of MWS, developmental delay and spasticity. High resolution microarray analysis revealed 0.9 Mb deletion of 2q22.3 involving two genes: ZEB2 and GTDC1. This case shows the important role of high resolution microarray in patients with unexplained psychomotor retardation and/or facial dysmorphism. Knowledge about the most striking clinical signs and implementation of effective molecular tests like microarray could significantly increase the detection rate of new cases of MWS in Korea. This is the first reported case of MWS in Korea.

[PMID: 17103451]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a relatively newly described multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome. Haploinsufficiency of a gene termed ZFHX1B (also known as SIP1) on chromosome 2 is responsible for this condition, and clinical genetic testing for MWS recently became available. The majority of reports in the literature originate from Northern Europe and Australia. Here we report our clinical experience with 12 patients diagnosed with MWS within a 2-year period of time in the United States, with particular emphasis on clinical characteristics and management strategies. Individuals with this condition have characteristic facial features, including microcephaly, hypertelorism, medially flared and broad eyebrows, prominent columella, pointed chin, and uplifted earlobes, which typically prompt the clinician to consider the diagnosis. Medical issues in our cohort of patients included seizures (75%) with no predeliction for any particular seizure type; agenesis of the corpus callosum (60% of our patients studied); congenital heart defects (75%), particularly involving the pulmonary arteries and/or valves; hypospadias (55% of males); severely impaired or absent speech (100% of individuals over 1 year of age) with relatively spared receptive language; and Hirschsprung disease (50%) or chronic constipation (25%). The incidence of MWS is unknown, but based on the number of patients identified in a short period of time within the US, it is likely greatly under recognized. MWS should be considered in any individual with severely impaired or absent speech, especially in the presence of seizures and anomalies involving the pulmonary arteries (particularly pulmonary artery sling) or pulmonary valves.

[PMID: 11891681]
Recently mutations in the gene ZFHX1B (SIP1) were shown in patients with "syndromic Hirschsprung disease" with mental retardation (MR) and multiple congenital anomalies (MCA), but it was unclear if Hirschsprung disease is an obligate symptom of these mutations and if the distinct facial phenotype delineated by Mowat et al. [1998: J Med Genet 35: 617-623] is specific for ZFHX1B mutations. In order to address these open questions we analyzed the ZFHX1B gene in five patients, three of whom had "syndromic Hirschsprung disease" two with and one without the facial phenotype described by Mowat et al. [1998], and two of whom had the distinct facial gestalt without Hirschsprung disease. Analyses of microsatellite markers and newly identified SNPs, and/or FISH with BACs from the ZFHX1B region excluded large deletions in all five patients. Direct sequencing demonstrated truncating ZFHX1B mutations in all four patients with the characteristic facial phenotype, but not in the patient with syndromic Hirschsprung disease without the distinct facial appearance. We demonstrate that there is a specific clinical entity with a recognizable facial gestalt, mental retardation and variable MCAs which we propose be called the "Mowat-Wilson syndrome."

[PMID: 23466526]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a severe intellectual disability (ID)-distinctive facial gestalt-multiple congenital anomaly syndrome, commonly associating microcephaly, epilepsy, corpus callosum agenesis, conotruncal heart defects, urogenital malformations and Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). MWS is caused by de novo heterozygous mutations in the ZEB2 gene. The majority of mutations lead to haplo-insufficiency through premature stop codons or large gene deletions. Only three missense mutations have been reported so far; none of which resides in a known functional domain of ZEB2. In this study, we report and analyze the functional consequences of three novel missense mutations, p.Tyr1055Cys, p.Ser1071Pro and p.His1045Arg, identified in the highly conserved C-zinc-finger (C-ZF) domain of ZEB2. Patients' phenotype included the facial gestalt of MWS and moderate ID, but no microcephaly, heart defects or HSCR. In vitro studies showed that all the three mutations prevented binding and repression of the E-cadherin promoter, a characterized ZEB2 target gene. Taking advantage of the zebrafish morphant technology, we performed rescue experiments using wild-type (WT) and mutant human ZEB2 mRNAs. Variable, mutation-dependent, embryo rescue, correlating with the severity of patients' phenotype, was observed. Our data provide evidence that these missense mutations cause a partial loss of function of ZEB2, suggesting that its role is not restricted to repression of E-cadherin. Functional domains other than C-ZF may play a role in early embryonic development. Finally, these findings broaden the clinical spectrum of ZEB2 mutations, indicating that MWS ought to be considered in patients with lesser degrees of ID and a suggestive facial gestalt, even in the absence of congenital malformation.

[PMID: 20125191]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterised by facial dysmorphisms, growth and psychomotor development delay, and skeletal defects. The known genetic causes are point mutations or deletions of the CREBBP (50-60%) and EP300 (5%) genes. To detect chromosomal rearrangements indicating novel positional candidate RSTS genes, we used a-CGH to study 26 patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for RSTS who were negative at fluorescence in situ hybridisation analyses of the CREBBP and EP300 regions, and direct sequencing analyses of the CREBBP gene. We found seven imbalances (27%): four de novo and three inherited rearrangements not reported among the copy number variants. A de novo 7p21.1 deletion of 500 kb included the TWIST1 gene, a suggested candidate for RSTS that is responsible for the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, an entity that enters in differential diagnosis with RSTS. A similar issue of differential diagnosis was raised by a large 4.3 Mb 2q22.3q23.1 deletion encompassing ZEB2, the gene responsible for the Mowat-Wilson syndrome, whose signs may overlap with RSTS. Positional candidate genes could not be sought in the remaining pathogenetic imbalances, because of the size of the involved region (a 9 Mb 2q24.3q31.1 deletion) and/or the relative paucity of suitable genes (a 5 Mb 3p13p12.3 duplication). One of the inherited rearrangements, the 17q11.2 379Kb duplication, represents the reciprocal event of the deletion underlying an overgrowth syndrome, both being mediated by the NF1-REP-P1 and REP-P2 sub-duplicons. The contribution of this and the other detected CNVs to the clinical RSTS phenotype is difficult to assess.

[PMID: 15006694]
ZFHX1B encodes Smad-interacting protein 1, a transcriptional corepressor involved in the transforming growth factors beta (TGFbeta) signaling pathway. ZFHX1B mutations cause a complex developmental phenotype characterized by severe mental retardation (MR) and multiple congenital defects. We compared the distribution of ZFHX1B transcripts during mouse and human embryogenesis as well as in adult mice and humans. This showed that this gene is strongly transcribed at an early stage in the developing peripheral and central nervous systems of both mice and humans, in all neuronal regions of the brains of 25-week human fetuses and adult mice, and at varying levels in numerous nonneural tissues. Northern blot analysis suggested that ZFHX1B undergoes tissue-specific alternative splicing in both species. These results strongly suggest that ZFHX1B determines the transcriptional levels of target genes in various tissues through the combinatorial interactions of its isoforms with different Smad proteins. Thus, as well as causing neural defects, ZFHX1B mutations may also cause other malformations.

[PMID: 14681759]
We report a girl who had Hirschsprung disease in association with distinct facial appearance, microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum and mental retardation (Mowat-Wilson syndrome). Mutation analysis of the zinc finger homeo box 1 B (ZFHX1 B) gene revealed a de novo 7 bp deletion (TGGCCCC) at nucleotide 1773 (1773 delTGGCCCC) resulting in a frameshift and leading to a termination codon at amino acid residue 604 (604 X) in exon 8 C. The zinc finger homeo box 1 B (Smad interacting protein-1) is a transcription corepressor of Smad target genes with functions in the patterning of neural crest derived cells, CNS, and midline structures. Mutations in ZFHX1 B can lead to neurological disorders in addition to dysmorphic features, megacolon, and other malformations.

[PMID: 23427518]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is characterized by severe mental retardation with seizures, specific facial dysmorphism, Hirschsprung disease, anomalies of the corpus callosum, and genitourinary and cardiac malformations. The cause of MWS is a de novo mutation in the ZEB2 gene. This report describes a Turkish boy who was clinically diagnosed with MWS and had his diagnosis confirmed by molecular analysis of the ZEB2 gene. The investigation identified a heterozygous complex rearrangement in exon 8 of ZEB2, specifically a 48-nucleotide deletion and a 44-nucleotide insertion that caused a frameshift. MWS is a relatively newly identified disorder, and even MWS patients without Hirschsprung disease can be diagnosed easily based on clinical findings alone.

[PMID: 17478475]
Mowat-Wilson syndrome is a recently delineated autosomal dominant developmental anomaly, whereby heterozygous mutations in the ZFHX1B gene cause mental retardation, delayed motor development, epilepsy and a wide spectrum of clinically heterogeneous features, suggestive of neurocristopathies at the cephalic, cardiac and vagal levels. However, our understanding of the etiology of this condition at the cellular level remains vague. This study presents the Zfhx1b protein expression domain in mouse embryos and correlates this with a novel mouse model involving a conditional mutation in the Zfhx1b gene in neural crest precursor cells. These mutant mice display craniofacial and gastrointestinal malformations that show resemblance to those found in human patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. In addition to these clinically recognized alterations, we document developmental defects in the heart, melanoblasts and sympathetic and parasympathetic anlagen. The latter observations in our mouse model for Mowat-Wilson suggest a hitherto unknown role for Zfhx1b in the development of these particular neural crest derivatives, which is a set of observations that should be acknowledged in the clinical management of this genetic disorder.