[PMID: 27662874]
Transcriptional enhancers are DNA regulatory elements that are bound by transcription factors and act to positively regulate the expression of nearby or distally located target genes. Enhancers have many features that have been discovered using genomic analyses. Recent studies have shown that active enhancers recruit RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and are transcribed, producing enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). GRO-seq, a method for identifying the location and orientation of all actively transcribing RNA polymerases across the genome, is a powerful approach for monitoring nascent enhancer transcription. Furthermore, the unique pattern of enhancer transcription can be used to identify enhancers in the absence of any information about the underlying transcription factors. Here, we describe the computational approaches required to identify and analyze active enhancers using GRO-seq data, including data pre-processing, alignment, and transcript calling. In addition, we describe protocols and computational pipelines for mining GRO-seq data to identify active enhancers, as well as known transcription factor binding sites that are transcribed. Furthermore, we discuss approaches for integrating GRO-seq-based enhancer data with other genomic data, including target gene expression and function. Finally, we describe molecular biology assays that can be used to confirm and explore further the function of enhancers that have been identified using genomic assays. Together, these approaches should allow the user to identify and explore the features and biological functions of new cell type-specific enhancers.

[PMID: 30448228]
Enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) are a group of lncRNAs transcribed from enhancers, whose regulatory effects on gene expression are an emerging area of interest. However, the role of eRNAs in regulating trophoblast cells and unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss (URPL) remains elusive. We profiled eRNAs in villi from URPL patients and matched controls by RNA-seq. Functions of URPL-related eRNAs were further investigated in vitro. We identified lnc-SLC4A1-1, which was transcribed from an active enhancer marked with H3K27ac and H3K4me1 and so-called eRNA, highly expressed in URPL patients. Gain-of-function experiments indicated that lnc-SLC4A1-1 facilitated trophoblast cell migration and apoptosis. Mechanistically, as an eRNA, lnc-SLC4A1-1 was retained in the nuclei and recruited transcription factor NF-κB to bind to CXCL8, resulting in increased H3K27ac in the CXCL8 promoter and subsequent elevation of CXCL8 expression. Activation of CXCL8 exacerbated inflammatory reactions in trophoblast cells by inducing TNF-α and IL-1β, which could be blocked by an antagonist of lnc-SLC4A1-1. These findings indicate that an eRNA, lnc-SLC4A1-1, alters trophoblast function via activation of immune responses and by regulating the NF-κB/CXCL8 axis. Our study provides new insights in understanding lncRNA/eRNA function in pathological pregnancy, potentially informing on therapeutic strategies for URPL. FUND: National Natural Science Foundation of China, Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, National Key Research and Development Program, the Priority Academic Program for the Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.

[PMID: 28533025]
Enhancer-derived RNAs (eRNAs) are a group of RNAs transcribed by RNA polymerase II from the domain of transcription enhancers, a major type of cis-regulatory elements in the genome. The correlation between eRNA production and enhancer activity has stimulated studies on the potential role of eRNAs in transcriptional regulation. Additionally, eRNA has also served as a marker for global identification of enhancers. Here I review the brief history and fascinating properties of eRNAs.

[PMID: 27662872]
Recent work has shown that RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription at distal cis-regulatory elements serves as a mark of highly active enhancers. Production of noncoding RNAs at enhancers, termed eRNAs, correlates with higher expression of genes that the enhancer interacts with; hence, eRNAs provide a new tool to model gene activity in normal and disease tissues. Moreover, this unique class of noncoding RNA has diverse roles in transcriptional regulation. Transcribed enhancers can be identified by a common signature of epigenetic marks by overlaying a series of genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation and RNA sequencing datasets. A computational approach to filter non-enhancer elements and other classes of noncoding RNAs is essential to not cloud downstream analysis. Here we present a protocol that combines wet and dry bench methods to accurately identify transcribed enhancers genome-wide as well as an experimental procedure to validate these datasets.

[PMID: 32060325]
Inhibition of transcription caused by DNA damage-impaired RNA polymerase II (Pol II) elongation conceals a local increase in de novo transcription, slowly progressing from Transcription Start Sites (TSSs) to gene ends. Although associated with accelerated repair of Pol II-encountered lesions and limited mutagenesis, it is still unclear how this mechanism is maintained during genotoxic stress-recovery. Here we uncover a widespread gain in chromatin accessibility and preservation of the active H3K27ac mark after UV-irradiation. The concomitant increase in Pol II escape from promoter-proximal pause (PPP) sites of most active genes, PROMPTs and enhancer RNAs favors unrestrained initiation, as evidenced by the synthesis of nascent RNAs including start RNAs. Accordingly, drug-inhibition of PPP-release replenishes levels of pre-initiating Pol II at TSSs after UV. Our data show that such continuous engagement of Pol II molecules ensures maximal transcription-driven repair throughout expressed genes and regulatory loci. Importantly, revealing this unanticipated regulatory layer of UV-response provides physiological relevant traction to the emerging concept that Pol II initiation rate is determined by pause-release dynamics.

[PMID: 3299107]
U RNAs are highly abundant small nuclear RNAs involved in the processing of messenger RNA. Most U RNA genes are thought to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II (pol II). However, evidence has recently been presented that U6 RNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (pol III). In the light of these results it was surprising to find that the 5' flanking region of a mouse U6 RNA gene includes a perfect copy of the octamer sequence motif, ATTTGCAT, found in many RNA polymerase II transcription enhancer elements. In the present study we show that deletion of mouse U6 gene sequences upstream of nucleotide position -217, including the octanucleotide motif, reduces U6 transcription by 90% when assayed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, suggesting the presence of a distant control element. DNase I footprinting of the 5' flanking region of the U6 gene shows protection of the octanucleotide sequence. Moreover, the 5' flanking sequence from -217 to -315 can replace the enhancer of a human U2 RNA gene. We therefore conclude that although U6 RNA genes appear to be transcribed by pol III, they are preceeded by an enhancer-like element which can functionally substitute for the enhancer of a pol II-transcribed U RNA gene.

[PMID: 26319018]
Gene regulatory programs in different cell types are largely defined through cell-specific enhancers activity. The histone variant H2A.Z has been shown to play important roles in transcription mainly by controlling proximal promoters, but its effect on enhancer functions remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate by genome-wide approaches that H2A.Z is present at a subset of active enhancers bound by the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα). We also determine that H2A.Z does not influence the local nucleosome positioning around ERα enhancers using ChIP sequencing at nucleosomal resolution and unsupervised pattern discovery. We further highlight that H2A.Z-enriched enhancers are associated with chromatin accessibility, H3K122ac enrichment and hypomethylated DNA. Moreover, upon estrogen stimulation, the enhancers occupied by H2A.Z produce enhancer RNAs (eRNAs), and recruit RNA polymerase II as well as RAD21, a member of the cohesin complex involved in chromatin interactions between enhancers and promoters. Importantly, their recruitment and eRNAs production are abolished by H2A.Z depletion, thereby revealing a novel functional link between H2A.Z occupancy and enhancer activity. Taken together, our findings suggest that H2A.Z acts as an important player for enhancer functions by establishing and maintaining a chromatin environment required for RNA polymerase II recruitment, eRNAs transcription and enhancer-promoters interactions, all essential attributes of enhancer activity.

[PMID: 29378668]
The estrogen receptor (ER) is a ligand-dependant transcription factor expressed in many breast cancers and is the target of many endocrine-based cancer therapies. Genome-wide studies have shown that the ER binds to gene-specific enhancer regions in response to β-estradiol (E2) which undergo transcription producing noncoding enhancer RNA (eRNA). While eRNAs are important for transcriptional activation of neighboring genes, the mechanism remains poorly understood. Using ChIP-Seq we generate a global profile of thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG), an ER coactivator that plays an essential role in DNA demethylation, in response to E2 in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. Remarkably, we found that in response to E2 TDG localized to enhancers which also recruit ERα, RNA Pol II and other coregulators and which are marked by histone modifications indicative of active enhancers. Importantly, depletion of TDG inhibits E2-mediated transcription of eRNAs and transcription of ER-target genes. Functionally, we find that TDG both sensitizes MCF7 cells to tamoxifen-mediated cytostasis and increases migration and invasion of MCF7 cells. Taken together we find that TDG plays a central role in mediating transcription at a subset of enhancers and governs how MCF7 cells respond to both estrogenic and anti-estrogenic compounds and may be an effective therapeutic target.

[PMID: 3462718]
To examine the RNA polymerase (EC 2.7.7.6) specificity of RNA maturation/utilization and transcriptional enhancement, we constructed a chimeric plasmid (pPolI-CAT) in which a promoter for mouse rRNA gene transcription was placed adjacent the coding sequences for chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT; EC 2.3.1.28). A number of other constructs, including plasmids also containing a murine sarcoma virus enhancer or lacking any natural eukaryotic promoter sequences, were also prepared. In apparent agreement with earlier conclusions that an RNA polymerase I transcript can act as a messenger RNA, transient transfection of mouse L cells with pPolI-CAT yielded both high levels of transcription from the RNA polymerase I promoter and enzymatically active CAT protein. However, further examination revealed that CAT protein is not translated from RNA that begins at the normal rRNA transcription initiation site. Polysomal RNA is devoid of such RNA and instead consists of CAT-encoding transcripts that begin elsewhere in the mouse ribosomal DNA (rDNA) region. Since transcription of these aberrant RNAs is stimulated by the addition of a murine sarcoma virus enhancer segment, they are probably transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Transcripts that map to the authentic rRNA start site are not similarly enhanced. Moreover, unlike the RNAs deriving from the rRNA initiation site, these aberrant RNAs are more stable and the level of translatable CAT transcripts is suppressed by inclusion of larger segments of the rDNA promoter regions. Fortuitously initiated mRNAs are also formed in the absence of any natural eukaryotic promoter sequence. From these data we conclude that there is no evidence that normal RNA polymerase I transcription yields functional mRNA and that transcriptional enhancement appears to be RNA polymerase specific.

[PMID: 26864944]
The human DHRS4 gene cluster consists of DHRS4 and two immediately downstream homologous genes, DHRS4L2 and DHRS4L1, generated by evolutionarily gene-duplication events. We previously demonstrated that a head-to-head natural antisense transcript (NAT) of DHRS4, denoted DHRS4-AS1, regulates all three genes of the DHRS4 gene cluster. However, it is puzzling that DHRS4L2 and DHRS4L1 did not evolve their own specific NATs to regulate themselves, as it seems both have retained sequences highly homologous to DHRS4-AS1. In a search of the DHRS4-AS1 region for nearby enhancers, we identified an enhancer located 13.8 kb downstream of the DHRS4-AS1 transcriptional start site. We further showed, by using a chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay, that this enhancer is capable of physically interacting with the DHRS4-AS1 promoter through chromosomal looping. The enhancer produced an eRNA, termed AS1eRNA, that enhanced DHRS4-AS1 transcription by mediating the spatial interactions of the enhancer and DHRS4-AS1 promoter in cooperation with RNA polymerase II and p300/CBP. Moreover, the distributions of activating acetyl-H3 and H3K4me3 modifications were found to be greater at the DHRS4-AS1 promoter than at the homologous duplicated regions. We propose that AS1eRNA-driven DNA looping and activating histone modifications promote the expression of DHRS4-AS1 to economically control the DHRS4 gene cluster.

[PMID: 2218723]
Enhancers stimulate transcription of RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes in an orientation-independent manner and over long distances. This stimulation is known to be associated with an increased polymerase density over the linked gene. However, many aspects of the exact mechanism of remote gene control remain to be elucidated. Based on some reports on RNA polymerase I transcription, we wanted to test whether RNA polymerase II enters at the enhancer and from there proceeds towards the promoter while synthesizing unstable transcripts ("scanning/readthrough transcription" model). For this, we have inserted a complete terminator region from the mouse beta-globinmaj gene between the SV40 enhancer and the rabbit beta-globin promoter. In contrast to what the model predicts, insertion of the terminator had no affect on remote enhancer action. Furthermore, we have determined the RNA polymerase density over the spacer DNA between enhancer and promoter, and over the reporter gene, by means of the so-called run-on transcription assay. We find very low transcription of the spacer, but high transcription of the globin reporter gene. Thus, our data are not consistent with a scanning/readthrough transcription mechanism where RNA polymerase II would move from the enhancer to the promoter while transcribing the intervening spacer DNA. These and other findings are compatible with a model where enhancer and promoter are brought into close proximity, perhaps with concomitant looping out of the intervening DNA.

[PMID: 31824865]
Super-enhancers (SEs) are clusters of enhancers that play a key role in regulating genes that determine cell identity. Enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) are non-coding RNAs transcribed from enhancers that function to promote the enhancer's functions via multiple mechanisms, such as recruiting transcription factors to specific enhancers, promoting enhancer-promoter looping, directing chromatin accessibility, interacting with RNA polymerase II and facilitating histone acetylation. Understanding how super-enhancer RNAs (seRNAs) contribute to specific gene regulation has thus become an area of active interest. Immune checkpoint deregulation is one of the key characteristics of tumors and autoimmune diseases, and is also closely related to cell identity. Recent studies revealed a potential pathway for seRNA's involvement in regulating the expression of immune checkpoints. The present study reviews the current knowledge of eRNA function, immune checkpoint blockage mechanism, and its effect. In addition, for the first time, we explore the direct and indirect roles of seRNAs in regulating immune checkpoint expression in cancer and autoimmune diseases.

[PMID: 26219400]
Enhancers play a crucial role in gene regulation but the participation of enhancer transcripts (i.e. enhancer RNA, eRNAs) in regulatory systems remains unclear. We provide a computational analysis on eRNAs using genome-wide data across 12 mouse tissues. The expression of genes targeted by transcribing enhancer is positively correlated with eRNA expression and significantly higher than expression of genes targeted by non-transcribing enhancers. This result implies eRNA transcription indicates a state of enhancer that further increases gene expression. This state of enhancer is tissue-specific, as the same enhancer differentially transcribes eRNAs across tissues. Therefore, the presence of eRNAs describes a tissue-specific state of enhancer that is generally associated with higher expressed target genes, surmising as to whether eRNAs have gene activation potential. We further found a large number of eRNAs contain regions in which sequences and secondary structures are similar to microRNAs. Interestingly, an increasing number of recent studies hypothesize that microRNAs may switch from their general repressive role to an activating role when targeting promoter sequences. Collectively, our results provide speculation that eRNAs may be associated with the selective activation of enhancer target genes.

[PMID: 20393465]
We used genome-wide sequencing methods to study stimulus-dependent enhancer function in mouse cortical neurons. We identified approximately 12,000 neuronal activity-regulated enhancers that are bound by the general transcriptional co-activator CBP in an activity-dependent manner. A function of CBP at enhancers may be to recruit RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), as we also observed activity-regulated RNAPII binding to thousands of enhancers. Notably, RNAPII at enhancers transcribes bi-directionally a novel class of enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) within enhancer domains defined by the presence of histone H3 monomethylated at lysine 4. The level of eRNA expression at neuronal enhancers positively correlates with the level of messenger RNA synthesis at nearby genes, suggesting that eRNA synthesis occurs specifically at enhancers that are actively engaged in promoting mRNA synthesis. These findings reveal that a widespread mechanism of enhancer activation involves RNAPII binding and eRNA synthesis.

[PMID: 3031599]
We have cloned and sequenced a 977bp DNA fragment, pXTU6-2, that represents the transcription unit for a Xenopus tropicalis U6 RNA gene. This basic repeating unit is reiterated ca.500-fold per haploid genome. Oocyte injections of pXTU6-2 led to the transcription of a mature-sized U6 RNA that, however, lacked internal 2'-O-methylations. These posttranscriptional modifications of U6 RNA might be cytoplasmic and could require its association with U4 RNA to be accomplished. The low alpha- amanitin sensitivity of U6 RNA synthesis in oocytes suggested that U6 RNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase III, consistent with features of the U6 RNA molecule which also contains a Box A- like intragenic control region. Inspection of X. tropicalis, mouse and human U6 DNA upstream sequences revealed the presence of a TATA box as well as of the proximal and enhancer (octamer motif) elements contained in snRNA genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II. We propose that U6 RNAs are synthesized by a specialized transcription complex consisting of RNA polymerase III and transcription factors, some of which are very likely shared with RNA polymerase II promoters.

[PMID: 25578728]
The RNA exosome complex constitutes the major nuclear eukaryotic 3'-5' exonuclease. Outside of nucleoli, the human nucleoplasmic exosome is directed to some of its substrates by the nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT) complex. How NEXT targets RNA has remained elusive. Using an in vivo crosslinking approach, we report global RNA binding sites of RBM7, a key component of NEXT. RBM7 associates broadly with RNA polymerase II-derived RNA, including pre-mRNA and short-lived exosome substrates such as promoter upstream transcripts (PROMPTs), enhancer RNAs (eRNAs), and 3'-extended products from snRNA and replication-dependent histone genes. Within pre-mRNA, RBM7 accumulates at the 3' ends of introns, and pulse-labeling experiments demonstrate that RBM7/NEXT defines an early exosome-targeting pathway for 3'-extended snoRNAs derived from such introns. We propose that RBM7 is generally loaded onto newly synthesized RNA to accommodate exosome action in case of available unprotected RNA 3' ends.

[PMID: 24599251]
Enhancers are cis-regulatory elements that enable precise spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression during development and are notable for being able to function at large distances from their target genes. Such regulatory elements often bypass intervening genes and typically comprise binding sites for multiple transcription factors that can also be transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to produce noncoding enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). Genome-wide analyses have revealed chromatin signatures of enhancers, such as the enrichment for monomethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me1) and the acetylation or methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27). Enhancer signatures have been used to describe the transitions of these regulatory elements from inactive to primed and from activated to decommissioned states during development. New mutations of enhancer sequences and of the protein factors regulating enhancer function in human disease continue to be identified, contributing to a growing class of 'enhanceropathies'.

[PMID: 2986013]
Since the discovery of transcription enhancer sequences in the genomes of the DNA viruses simian virus 40(SV40) and polyoma virus, these elements have been shown to play an important part in the control of both viral and cellular gene expression. Enhancer elements act in cis to increase the amount of RNA produced from linked genes in a manner largely independent of distance and orientation. The mechanisms by which enhancers act are not understood; in particular, it is not known whether the enhancer-dependent increase in the level of stable RNA reflects an increase in the rate of transcription. To address this question, we have used an in vitro nuclear transcription assay to examine the effect of the SV40 enhancer on transcription of cloned human beta-globin genes transiently introduced into HeLa cells. We show here that the SV40 enhancer acts at least in part to increase the number of RNA polymerase II molecules transcribing the linked gene.