[PMID: 11391041]
Since the first human heart transplantation was performed in 1967, the field of heart transplantation has advanced to the point where survival and acceptable quality of life are commonplace. Despite remarkable progress in the clinical management of rejection, rejection continues to limit survival and quality of life in the heart transplant population. This review will discuss the biologic processes involved in hyperacute rejection, acute rejection, and humoral (vascular) rejection. The development of endomyocardial biopsy techniques represented a significant advancement in the diagnosis of cardiac rejection, and endomyocardial biopsy remains the 'gold standard' in the diagnosis of cellular rejection. To date, no noninvasive parameters will diagnose rejection with adequate sensitivity and specificity. Biopsy frequency and immunosuppressive therapies may be tailored to the risk of rejection. Immunosuppression for cardiac transplantation can be divided into three major phases: 1) perioperative immunosuppression; 2) maintenance immunosuppression, and; 3) treatment of rejection. The strategy for treating transplant rejection should be influenced by several variables: 1) Histologic grade of rejection; 2) Evidence of hemodynamic compromise by ejection fraction or right heart catheterization; 3) Severity of previous rejection episodes and types of immunosuppressives used; and 4) Risk factors for rejection, including time after transplantation. Future rejection therapy will involve more sophisticated attempts to alter host responses toward the donor organ in a more specific and selective way. Despite considerable advances in the care of the heart transplant recipient, long-term survival is limited by cardiac allograft vasculopathy. The final section of this chapter will review the pathology, immunopathology, nonimmunologic risk factors, diagnosis, prevention and treatment of allograft vasculopathy.

[PMID: 18702960]
It has been 40 years since the first human-to-human heart transplant performed in South Africa by Christiaan Barnard in December 1967. This achievement did not come as a surprise to the medical community but was the result of many years of early pioneering experimental work by Alexis Carrel, Frank Mann, Norman Shumway, and Richard Lower. Since then, refinement of donor and recipient selection methods, better donor heart management, and advances in immunosuppression have significantly improved survival. In this article, we hope to give a perspective on the changing face of heart transplantation. Topics that will be covered in this review include the changing patient population as well as recent advances in transplantation immunology, organ preservation, allograft vasculopathy, and immune tolerance.

[PMID: 15056065]
In 1967, Christian Barnard performed the first successful human-to-human heart transplant. Following this triumph, the ensuing decade saw a waning interest in heart transplantation given the complications related to rejection and immunosuppression. With the introduction of cyclosporine immunotherapy in the early 1980s, however, success was more the rule than the exception, and cardiac transplantation became an acceptable therapy. Currently, heart transplantation is considered the gold standard therapy for end-stage heart failure refractory to medical treatment. One-year survival is now approximately 85%, and 10-year survival approaches 60%. While the main obstacles in the early years of heart transplantation were immunosuppression, the current issue at hand is organ availability. Approximately 2500 heart transplants are done yearly, but the list of candidates exceeds 50,000. What is perhaps even more alarming is the fact that while the number of heart transplants performed in the United States has dropped every year since 1994, the prevalence of heart failure increases every year and is predicted to do so into the year 2030. Nevertheless, the last 20 years has seen dramatic improvements in the ways we diagnose rejection, the fine-tuning of immunosuppressive regimens, and the advent of better preservation techniques. We have a better understanding of the causes of acute and chronic rejection and ways to treat these problems. Undoubtedly, we will continue to fine-tune the therapy in the years to come. This article is a review of the current indications, techniques, and medical therapies involved with cardiac transplantation.

[PMID: 15726762]
The Human Tissue Act of 1983 had its origin in the first successful heart transplant operation performed by Professor Christiaan Barnard and his team in December 1967. Under the new constitution, however, the Act needs to be reviewed, because different ethical and legal demands. The Act is in some instances very controversial. For instance it is stated in the Act that the eyes of the deceased may be removed without the consent of the relatives. Although this may be allowable by law, it would be considered to be highly unethical and against the constitutional right of the individual. Regulations relating to the general control human bodies, the use of tissue, blood and gametes of living person and other issues currently covered by the Human Tissue Act will be revised and addressed in the proposed National Health Bill.

[PMID: 32493185]
Heart transplantation is the standard of therapy for patients with end-stage heart disease. Since the first human-to-human heart transplantation, performed in 1967, advances in organ donation, surgical techniques, organ preservation, perioperative care, immunologic risk assessment, immunosuppression agents, monitoring of graft function and surveillance of long-term complications have drastically increased recipient survival. However, there are yet many challenges in the modern era of heart transplantation in which immunosuppression may play a key role in further advances in the field. A fine-tuning of immune modulation to prevent graft rejection while avoiding side effects from over immunosuppression has been the vital goal of basic and clinical research. Individualization of drug choices and strategies, taking into account the recipient's clinical characteristics, underlying heart failure diagnosis, immunologic risk and comorbidities seem to be the ideal approaches to improve post-transplant morbidity and survival while preventing both rejection and complications of immunosuppression. The aim of the present review is to provide a practical, comprehensive overview of contemporary immunosuppression in heart transplantation. Clinical evidence for immunosuppressive drugs is reviewed and practical approaches are provided. Cardiac allograft rejection classification and up-to-date management are summarized. Expanding therapies, such as photophoresis, are outlined. Drug-to-drug interactions of immunosuppressive agents focused on cardiovascular medications are summarized. Special situations involving heart transplantation such as sarcoidosis, Chagas diseases and pediatric immunosuppression are also reviewed. The evolution of phamacogenomics to individualize immunosuppressive therapy is described. Finally, future perspectives in the field of immunosuppression in heart transplantation are highlighted.

[PMID: 15061629]
The experimental investigation of heart transplantation began almost 100 years ago, but it was not until the studies at Stanford Medical School in the late 1950s and early 1960s that clinical transplantation became a realistic possibility. Barnard performed the 1st human-to-human orthotopic heart transplantation in 1967 and followed this by introducing the technique of heterotopic heart transplantation in 1974. Reitz and colleagues at Stanford performed the 1st successful clinical transplantation of the heart and both lungs in 1981. Two years later, at the Toronto General Hospital, successful single-lung transplantation was performed, followed by bilateral lung transplantation in 1986. Aspects of the surgical techniques of these various experimental and clinical procedures are discussed.

[PMID: 19287813]
Christiaan (Chris) Barnard was born in 1922 and qualified in medicine at the University of Cape Town in 1946. Following surgical training in South Africa and the USA, Barnard established a successful open-heart surgery programme at Groote Schuur Hospital and the University of Cape Town in 1958. In 1967, he led the team that performed the world's first human-to-human heart transplant. The article describing this remarkable achievement was published in the South African Medical Journal just three weeks after the event and is one of the most cited articles in the cardiovascular field. In the lay media as well, this first transplant remains the most publicised event in world medical history. Although the first heart transplant patient survived only 18 days, four of Groote Schuur Hospital's first 10 patients survived for more than one year, two living for 13 and 23 years, respectively. This relative success amid many failures worldwide did much to generate guarded optimism that heart transplantation would eventually become a viable therapeutic option. This first heart transplant and subsequent ongoing research in cardiac transplantation at the University of Cape Town and in a few other dedicated centres over the subsequent 15 years laid the foundation for heart transplantation to become a well-established form of therapy for end-stage cardiac disease. During this period from 1968 to 1983, Chris Barnard and his team continued to make major contributions to organ transplantation, notably the development of the heterotopic ( 'piggy-back') heart transplants; advancing the concept of brain death, organ donation and other related ethical issues; better preservation and protection of the donor heart (including hypothermic perfusion storage of the heart; studies on the haemodynamic and metabolic effects of brain death; and even early attempts at xenotransplantation.

[PMID: 30083541]
In 2017, we celebrated the 50th anniversary of the first human heart transplant that had been carried out by the South African surgeon, Christiaan ('Chris') Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town on December 3<sup>rd</sup>, 1967. The daring operation and the charismatic surgeon received immense public attention around the world. The patient's progress was covered by the world's media on an almost hourly basis. Although the patient, Mr. Louis Washansky, died after only 18 days, Barnard soon carried out a second transplant, and this patient led an active life for almost 19 months. Remarkably, Barnard's fifth and sixth patients lived for almost 13 and 24 years, respectively. Barnard subsequently introduced the operation of heterotopic heart transplantation in which the donor heart acted as an auxiliary pump, with some advantages in that early era. It took great courage to carry out the first heart transplant, and this is why Barnard is remembered as a pioneer in cardiac surgery.

[PMID: 29191294]
It has been 50 years since Dr. Christiaan Barnard performed the first human-to-human heart transplant in December 1967 in South Africa. Remarkable progress has been made since that time, including changes in surgical techniques, immunosuppression, donor and recipient selection, and post-transplant care. In this paper, we provide a perspective on the changing face of heart transplantation and highlight key evolving areas. Topics that are covered include advances in immunosuppression, screening for acute and chronic rejection, cardiac allograft vasculopathy, and ongoing advancements in cardiac replacement therapy, including xenotransplantation, stem-cell research, tissue engineering, and the total artificial heart.

[PMID: 31102725]
The gold standard and sole curative therapy for advanced stage heart failure is cardiac transplantation. As the population ages, the number of patients diagnosed with advanced heart failure and listed for transplant steadily increases annually. However, there remains a paucity of eligible donation after brain death (DBD) donor hearts which severely limits access to cardiac transplantation and leads to increasing wait-list times and avoidable patient mortalities. Though the first human heart transplant in 1967 was performed using a deceased donor heart, the advent of brain death criteria and the ability to avoid long warm ischemic times led donation after cardiac death (DCD) transplantation to fall out of favor. Due the current state of cardiac transplantation, there has been a resurgence in interest in DCD heart transplantation leading to the development of DCD heart transplantation programs in the UK and Australia after positive reports of successful DCD cardiac transplantation in the pediatric literature. These programs have demonstrated favorable post-transplantation outcomes equivalent to matched traditional DBD transplants with current techniques and strict donor criteria. This technique has been proven safe with favorable outcomes and has been demonstrated to significantly increase transplant volumes and decrease patient mortality. Given these outcomes and the high patient benefit to risk ratio, DCD donor heart transplantation is necessary to expand the donor pool and decrease patient mortality and should be developed in high volume experienced cardiac transplant centers.

[PMID: 6378042]
The world's first human-to-human heart transplant was performed at Groote Schuur Hospital on the 2nd December 1967. Between 1967 and 1973, 10 patients underwent orthotopic heart transplantation. Four lived for more than 1 year. The longest survivor died after 12 1/2 years, and one patient remains alive and fully employed 11 1/2 years after transplantation. Since 1974, 44 patients have undergone heterotopic heart transplantation, whereby the donor heart is inserted in parallel with the recipient's own heart. Four of these patients have undergone retransplantation for acute or chronic rejection. Survival has been almost 60% for 1 year, falling to 21% by 5 years. The major complications of heart transplantation have been early acute and late chronic rejection; immunosuppression has been complicated by a high incidence of infection, particularly during the first year, and by a 10% incidence of the development of malignant tumors. A portable hypothermic perfusion system has been developed to store and transport donor hearts for periods of up to 24 hours.

[PMID: 25795463]
Regenerating the human heart is a challenge that has engaged researchers and clinicians around the globe for nearly a century. From the repair of the first septal defect in 1953, followed by the first successful heart transplant in 1967, and later to the first infusion of bone marrow-derived cells to the human myocardium in 2002, significant progress has been made in heart repair. However, chronic heart failure remains a leading pathological burden worldwide. Why has regenerating the human heart been such a challenge, and how close are we to achieving clinically relevant regeneration? Exciting progress has been made to establish cell transplantation techniques in recent years, and new preclinical studies in large animal models have shed light on the promises and challenges that lie ahead. In this review, we will discuss the history of cell therapy approaches and provide an overview of clinical trials using cell transplantation for heart regeneration. Focusing on the delivery of human stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes, current experimental strategies in the field will be discussed as well as their clinical translation potential. Although the human heart has not been regenerated yet, decades of experimental progress have guided us onto a promising path. Previous work in clinical cell therapy for heart repair using bone marrow mononuclear cells, mesenchymal stem cells, and cardiac-derived cells have overall demonstrated safety and modest efficacy. Recent advancements using human stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes have established them as a next generation cell type for moving forward, however certain challenges must be overcome for this technique to be successful in the clinics.

[PMID: 29664541]
50 years have passed since the first human to human heart transplantation, performed by Christiaan Barnard in Cape Town December 3rd 1967. Over the years there has been a dramatic improvement in postoperative survival, mainly due to numerous diagnostic and therapeutic advances. Today, heart transplantation constitutes the treatment of choice among suitable patients with severe heart failure who worsen despite medical and surgical optimization. The world average 10-year survival has now reached more than 58 %. This text summarizes the past, present and future.

[PMID: 29262951]
Article on the first heart transplant, performed at Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, on 3 December 1967. Reprinted from the SAMJ of 30 December 1967 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the transplant.

[PMID: 10272755]
For centuries, the medical community has known that human cadavers and human organs are invaluable to medical science for transplantations. On December 3, 1967, in Cape Town, South Africa, Dr. Christian Barnard revolutionized organ transplantation with the first successful human heart transplant. With it came the dawning of a new era--life for one preserved through the death of another. But with this advancement came great demands. Patients waited, hoping sometimes in vain, that a kidney transplant would end their long hours of suffering on dialysis, or that a heart transplant would prolong their otherwise shortened existence. Expectations grew, but the supply of organs did not. It became clear that the full and continued benefit of such medical advances depended on an increased supply of human organs for transplantation. This article focuses on the issues surrounding the procurement of human organs for transplantation. A brief history of transplantation and the benefits of transplantation are presented, as well as the present means of supplying organs for transplantation and how this supply could be enhanced by alternate procurement methods.

[PMID: 16009314]
The field of heart transplantation was built upon the discoveries of immunity and tolerance by Landsteiner, Medawar, Burnet, and others, as well as technical advancements in surgical technique by Carrel. Since the first successful human heart transplant performed by Christiaan Barnard in 1967, there has been substantial progress in the field of heart transplantation, especially over the last several decades. With advances in immunosuppression and surgical techniques, the rates of acute rejection and infection leading to graft failure have declined. However, the detection of acute and chronic allograft rejection remains one of the most important yet unsettled matters. As such, many new horizons exist for further advancement of the field of heart transplantation and for improving the outcomes of the patients we serve.

[PMID: 29492391]
The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed 50 years ago in 1967. Heart transplantation has now entered an era of tremendous growth and innovation. The future of heart transplantation is bright with the advent of newer immunosuppressive medications and strategies that may even result in tolerance. Much of this progress in heart transplant medicine is predicated on a better understanding of acute and chronic rejection pathways through basic science studies. The future will also include personalized medicine where genomics and molecular science will dictate customized treatment for optimal outcomes. The introduction of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices has changed the landscape for patients with severe heart failure to stabilize the most ill patient and make them better candidates for heart transplant. As <i>ex vivo</i> preservation takes hold, we may witness an expansion of the donor pool through the use of donation after cardiac death (DCD) donors. In addition, further geographical donor heart sharing through <i>ex vivo</i> preservation may further decrease waitlist mortality by enabling longer distance donor hearts to be allocated for the sickest waitlist patient. It is no doubt an exciting time to be involved in the field of heart transplantation. In this perspective, we will summarize the present state of heart transplantation and discuss various innovations that are being pursued.

[PMID: 32065475]
The first successful human heart transplantation was reported on 3 December 1967, by Christiaan Barnard in South Africa. Since then this life-saving procedure has been performed in over 120 000 patients. A limitation to the performance of this procedure is the availability of donor hearts with as many as 20% of patients dying before a donor's heart is available for transplant. Today, hearts for transplantation are procured from individuals experiencing donation after brain death (DBD). Interestingly, this, however, was not always the case as the first heart transplants occurred after circulatory death. Revisiting the availability of hearts for transplant from those experiencing donation after circulatory death (DCD) could further expand the number of hearts suitable for transplantation. There are several considerations pertinent to transplanting hearts from those undergoing circulatory death. In this review, we summarize the main distinctions between DBD and DCD heart donation and discuss the research relevant to increasing the number of hearts available for transplantation by including individual's hearts that experience circulatory death.