[PMID: 27200222]
Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is a ubiquitous epigenetic factor that represses gene expression by modifying chromatin. Mutations in the MeCP2 gene cause Rett syndrome, a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder. Recent studies also have shown that MeCP2 plays a role in carcinogenesis. Specifically, functional ablation of MeCP2 suppresses cell growth and leads to the proliferation of cancer cells. However, MeCP2's function in adult tissues remains poorly understood. We utilized a weight matrix-based comparison software to identify transcription factor binding site (TFBS) of MeCP2-regulated genes, which were recognized by cDNA microarray analysis. MeCP2 expression was silenced using annealed siRNA in HEK293 cells, and then a cDNA microarray analysis was performed. Functional analysis was carried out, and transcriptional levels in target genes regulated by MeCP2 were investigated. TFBS analysis was done within genes selected by the cDNA microarray analysis, using a weight matrix-based program and the TRANSFAC 6.0 database. Among the differentially expressed genes with a change in expression greater than two-fold, 189 genes were up-regulated and 91 genes were down-regulated. Genes related to apoptosis and cell proliferation (JUN, FOSL2, CYR61, SKIL, ATF3, BMABI, BMPR2, RERE, and FALZ) were highly up-regulated. Genes with anti-apoptotic and anti-proliferative functions (HNRPA0, HIS1, and FOXC1) were down-regulated. Using TFBS analysis within putative promoters of novel candidate target genes of MeCP2, disease-related transcription factors were identified. The present results provide insights into the new target genes regulated by MeCP2 under epigenetic control. This information will be valuable for further studies aimed at clarifying the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome and neoplastic diseases.

[PMID: 28337123]
Mutations in the transcription factor methyl-CpG-binding-protein 2 (MeCP2) cause a delayed-onset neurodevelopmental disorder known as Rett syndrome (RTT). Although alteration in serotonin levels have been reported in RTT patients, the molecular mechanisms underlying these defects are not well understood. Therefore, we chose to investigate the serotonergic system in hippocampus and brainstem of male <i>Mecp2<sup>-/y</sup></i> knock-out mice in the B6.129P2(C)-Mecp2(tm1.1Bird) mouse model of RTT. The serotonergic system in mouse is comprised of 16 genes, whose mRNA expression profile was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. <i>Mecp2<sup>-/y</sup></i> mice are an established animal model for RTT displaying most of the cognitive and physical impairments of human patients and the selected areas receive significant modulation through serotonin. Using anatomically and functional characterized areas, we found region-specific differential expression between wild type and <i>Mecp2<sup>-/y</sup></i> mice at post-natal day 40. In brainstem, we found five genes to be dysregulated, while in hippocampus, two genes were dysregulated. The one gene dysregulated in both brain regions was dopamine decarboxylase, but of special interest is the serotonin receptor 5b (5-ht<sub>5b</sub>), which showed 75-fold dysregulation in brainstem of <i>Mecp2<sup>-/y</sup></i> mice. This dysregulation was not due to upregulation, but due to failure of down-regulation in <i>Mecp2<sup>-/y</sup></i> mice during development. Detailed analysis of 5-ht<sub>5b</sub> revealed a receptor that localizes to endosomes and interacts with G<sub>αi</sub> proteins.

[PMID: 29431277]
Mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 gene (MECP2) are commonly associated with Rett syndrome. However, it has long been appreciated that there exists a spectrum of neuropsychiatric phenotypes associated with MECP2 variants. The most frequent Rett missense mutations are located in either the methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) or transcription repression domain (TRD). Clinical roles for mutations in other domains such as the intervening domain (ID) or AT-Hook domains have yet to be determined. Here, we report functional analysis of MECP2 missense mutations, located in AT-Hook1 within the ID, in a large Pakistani family with childhood onset cognitive decline and schizophrenia (SCZ), de novo in a girl with atypical Rett syndrome, and de novo in a woman with SCZ. We show that both p.Arg190His and p.Arg190Cys affect the ability of MeCP2 to bind to AT-rich DNA, also the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promoter, with the more drastic effects seen for p.Arg190Cys. Both mutations also affect nuclear chromatin clustering in vitro. These data support a possible molecular link between MECP2 AT-Hook1 mutations and psychosis. Given the ongoing large-scale whole exome and whole genome sequencing projects for psychiatric disorders, our findings suggest that rare missense variants in MECP2 be carefully evaluated for molecular consequences.

[PMID: 27782879]
Mutations in the <i>MECP2</i> gene cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome (RTT). Previous studies have shown that altered MeCP2 levels result in aberrant neurite outgrowth and glutamatergic synapse formation. However, causal molecular mechanisms are not well understood since MeCP2 is known to regulate transcription of a wide range of target genes. Here, we describe a key role for a constitutive BDNF feed forward signaling pathway in regulating synaptic response, general growth and differentiation of glutamatergic neurons. Chronic block of TrkB receptors mimics the MeCP2 deficiency in wildtype glutamatergic neurons, while re-expression of BDNF quantitatively rescues MeCP2 deficiency. We show that BDNF acts cell autonomous and autocrine, as wildtype neurons are not capable of rescuing growth deficits in neighboring MeCP2 deficient neurons <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. These findings are relevant for understanding RTT pathophysiology, wherein wildtype and mutant neurons are intermixed throughout the nervous system.

[PMID: 25769649]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder due to mutations affecting the neural transcription factor MeCP2. Approximately 50% of affected females have decreased bone mass. We studied osteoblast function using a murine model of RTT. Female heterozygote (HET) and male Mecp2-null mice were compared to wild type (WT) mice. Micro-CT of tibia from 5 week-old Mecp2-null mice showed significant alterations in trabecular bone including reductions in bone volume fraction (-29%), number (-19%), thickness (-9%) and connectivity density (-32%), and increases in trabecular separation (+28%) compared to WT. We also found significant reductions in cortical bone thickness (-18%) and in polar moment of inertia (-45%). In contrast, cortical and trabecular bone from 8 week-old WT and HET female mice were not significantly different. However, mineral apposition rate, mineralizing surface and bone formation rate/bone surface were each decreased in HET and Mecp2-null mice compared to WT mice. Histomorphometric analysis of femurs showed decreased numbers of osteoblasts but similar numbers of osteoclasts compared to WT, altered osteoblast morphology and decreased tissue synthesis of alkaline phosphatase in Mecp2-null and HET mice. Osteoblasts cultured from Mecp2-null mice, which unlike WT osteoblasts did not express MeCP2, had increased growth rates, but reductions in mRNA expression of type I collagen, Runx2 and Osterix compared to WT osteoblasts. These results indicate that MeCP2 deficiency leads to altered bone growth. Osteoblast dysfunction was more marked in Mecp2-null male than in HET female mice, suggesting that expression of MeCP2 plays a critical role in bone development.

[PMID: 28143937]
Rett syndrome (RS) is a debilitating neurological disorder affecting mostly girls with heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 on the X chromosome. Because restoration of MeCP2 expression in a mouse model reverses neurologic deficits in adult animals, reactivation of the wild-type copy of MeCP2 on the inactive X chromosome (Xi) presents a therapeutic opportunity in RS. To identify genes involved in MeCP2 silencing, we screened a library of 60,000 shRNAs using a cell line with a MeCP2 reporter on the Xi and found 30 genes clustered in seven functional groups. More than half encoded proteins with known enzymatic activity, and six were members of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/TGF-β pathway. shRNAs directed against each of these six genes down-regulated X-inactive specific transcript (XIST), a key player in X-chromosome inactivation that encodes an RNA that coats the silent X chromosome, and modulation of regulators of this pathway both in cell culture and in mice demonstrated robust regulation of XIST. Moreover, we show that Rnf12, an X-encoded ubiquitin ligase important for initiation of X-chromosome inactivation and XIST transcription in ES cells, also plays a role in maintenance of the inactive state through regulation of BMP/TGF-β signaling. Our results identify pharmacologically suitable targets for reactivation of MeCP2 on the Xi and a genetic circuitry that maintains XIST expression and X-chromosome inactivation in differentiated cells.

[PMID: 15345242]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with features of autism that results from mutation of the gene encoding the transcriptional repressor methyl-CpG binding protein (MECP2). The consequences of loss of a transcription factor may be complex, affecting the expression of many proteins, thus limiting understanding of this class of diseases and impeding therapeutic strategies. This is true for RTT. Neither the cell biological mechanism(s) nor the developmental stage affected by MECP2 deficiency is known. In vivo analysis of the olfactory system demonstrates that Mecp2 deficiency leads to a transient delay in the terminal differentiation of olfactory neurons. This delay in maturation disrupts axonal targeting in the olfactory bulb, resulting in abnormal axonal projections, subglomerular disorganization, and a persistent reduction in glomerular size. These results indicate a critical cell biological function for Mecp2 in mediating the final stages of neuronal development.

[PMID: 25634725]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disease caused by mutations in methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), which encodes a transcriptional modulator of many genes including BDNF. BDNF comprises nine distinct promoter regions, each triggering the expression of a specific transcript. The role of this diversity of transcripts remains unknown. MeCP2 being highly expressed in neurons, RTT was initially considered as a neuronal disease. However, recent studies have shown that MeCP2 was also expressed in astrocytes. Though several studies explored Bdnf IV expression in Mecp2-deficient mice, the differential expression of Bdnf isoforms in Mecp2-deficient neurons and astrocytes was never studied. By using TaqMan technology and a mouse model expressing a truncated Mecp2 (Mecp2(308/y)), we firstly showed in neurons that Bdnf transcripts containing exon I, IIb, IIc, IV, and VI are prominently expressed, whereas in astrocytes, Bdnf transcript containing exon VI is preferentially expressed, suggesting a specific regulation of Bdnf expression at the cellular level. Secondly, we confirmed the repressive role of Mecp2 only on the expression of Bdnf VI in neurons. Our data suggested that the truncated Mecp2 protein maintains its function on Bdnf expression regulation in neurons and in astrocytes. Interestingly, we observed that Bdnf transcripts (I and IXA), regulated by neural activity induced by bicuculline in Mecp2(308/y) neurons, were not affected by histone deacetylase inhibition. In contrast, Bdnf transcripts (IIb, IIc, and VI), regulated by histone deacetylation, were not affected by bicuculline treatment in wild-type and Mecp2(308/y) neurons. All these results reflect the complexity of regulation of Bdnf gene.

[PMID: 20504995]
Rett syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder mainly caused by mutations in the transcriptional regulator MeCP2. Although there is no effective therapy for Rett syndrome, the recently discovered disease reversibility in mice suggests that there are therapeutic possibilities. Identification of MeCP2 targets or modifiers of the phenotype can facilitate the design of curative strategies. To identify possible novel MeCP2 interactors, we exploited a bioinformatic approach and selected Ying Yang 1 (YY1) as an interesting candidate. We demonstrate that MeCP2 interacts in vitro and in vivo with YY1, a ubiquitous zinc-finger epigenetic factor regulating the expression of several genes. We show that MeCP2 cooperates with YY1 in repressing the ANT1 gene encoding a mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocase. Importantly, ANT1 mRNA levels are increased in human and mouse cell lines devoid of MeCP2, in Rett patient fibroblasts and in the brain of Mecp2-null mice. We further demonstrate that ANT1 protein levels are upregulated in Mecp2-null mice. Finally, the identified MeCP2-YY1 interaction, together with the well-known involvement of YY1 in the regulation of D4Z4-associated genes at 4q35, led us to discover the anomalous depression of FRG2, a subtelomeric gene of unknown function, in Rett fibroblasts. Collectively, our data indicate that mutations in MeCP2 might cause the aberrant overexpression of genes located at a specific locus, thus providing new candidates for the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome. As both ANT1 mutations and overexpression have been associated with human diseases, we consider it highly relevant to address the consequences of ANT1 deregulation in Rett syndrome.

[PMID: 17997046]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is associated with mutations in the transcriptional repressor gene MeCP2. Although the clinical and neuropathological signs of RTT suggest disrupted synaptic function, the specific role of methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) in postmitotic neurons remains relatively unknown. We examined whether MeCP2 deficiency in central neurons contributes to the neuropathogenesis in RTT. Primary cerebellar granule neuronal cultures from wild-type (WT) and MeCP2-/- mice were exposed to N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) and AMPA-induced excitotoxicity and hypoxic-ischemic insult. The magnitude of cell death in MeCP2-/- cells after excitotoxicity and hypoxia was greater than in the WT littermate control cultures and occurred after shorter exposures that usually, in the WT, would not cause cell death. Pretreatment with the growth factor fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF-1) under conditions at which WT cells showed complete neuroprotection, only partially protected MeCP2-/- cells. To elucidate specifically the effects of MeCP2 knockout (KO) on cell death, we examined two death cascade pathways. MeCP2-/- neurons exposed to 6 h of hypoxia exhibited enhanced activation of the proapoptotic caspase-3 and increased mitochondrial release of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) compared with WT neurons, which did not show significant changes. However, pretreatment with the caspase inhibitor ZVAD-FMK had little or no effect on AIF release and its subcellular translocation to the nucleus, suggesting caspase-independent AIF release and their independent contribution to hypoxia-induced cell death. Reintroduction of intact MeCP2 gene in MeCP2-/- cells or MeCP2 gene silencing by MeCP2siRNA in WT cells further confirmed the differential sensitivity of the WT and MeCP2-/- cells and suggest a direct role of MeCP2 in cell death. These results clearly demonstrate increased cell death occurred in neurons lacking MeCP2 expression via both caspase- and AIF-dependent apoptotic mechanisms. Our findings suggest a novel, yet unknown, role for MeCP2 in central neurons in the control of neuronal response to cell death.

[PMID: 22297041]
Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2). One of its targets is the gene encoding brain-derived neurotrophic factor (bdnf). In vitro studies using cultured neurons have produced conflicting results with respect to the role of MeCP2 in BDNF expression. Acute intermittent hypoxia (AIH) induces plasticity in the respiratory system characterized by long-term facilitation of phrenic nerve amplitude. This paradigm induces an increase in BDNF protein. We hypothesized that AIH leads to augmentation of BDNF transcription in respiratory-related areas of the brainstem and that MeCP2 is necessary for this process. Wild-type and mecp2 null (mecp2(-/y)) mice were subjected to three 5-min episodes of exposure to 8% O(2)/4% CO(2)/88% N(2), delivered at 5-min intervals. Normoxia control wild-type and mecp2 null mice were exposed to room air for the total length of time, that is, 30 min. Following a recovery in room air, the pons and medulla were rapidly removed. Expression of BDNF protein and transcripts were determined by ELISA and quantitative PCR, respectively. AIH induced a significant increase in BDNF protein in the pons and medulla, and in mRNA transcript levels in the pons of wild-type animals. In contrast, there were no significant changes in either BDNF protein or transcripts in the pons or medulla of mice lacking MeCP2. The results indicate that MeCP2 is required for regulation of BDNF expression by acute intermittent hypoxia in vivo.

[PMID: 29078406]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a debilitating neurological disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor Methyl CpG Binding Protein 2 (MECP2). A distinct disorder results from <i>ME</i><i>CP2</i> gene duplication, suggesting that therapeutic approaches must restore close to normal levels of MECP2. Here, we apply the approach of site-directed RNA editing to repair, at the mRNA level, a disease-causing guanosine to adenosine (G > A) mutation in the mouse MeCP2 DNA binding domain. To mediate repair, we exploit the catalytic domain of Adenosine Deaminase Acting on RNA (ADAR2) that deaminates A to inosine (I) residues that are subsequently translated as G. We fuse the ADAR2 domain, tagged with a nuclear localization signal, to an RNA binding peptide from bacteriophage lambda. In cultured neurons from mice that harbor an RTT patient G > A mutation and express engineered ADAR2, along with an appropriate RNA guide to target the enzyme, 72% of <i>Mecp2</i> mRNA is repaired. Levels of MeCP2 protein are also increased significantly. Importantly, as in wild-type neurons, the repaired MeCP2 protein is enriched in heterochromatic foci, reflecting restoration of normal MeCP2 binding to methylated DNA. This successful use of site-directed RNA editing to repair an endogenous mRNA and restore protein function opens the door to future in vivo applications to treat RTT and other diseases.

[PMID: 24916645]
Rett syndrome is a monogenic disease due to de novo mutations in either MECP2 or CDKL5 genes. In spite of their involvement in the same disease, a functional interaction between the two genes has not been proven. MeCP2 is a transcriptional regulator; CDKL5 encodes for a kinase protein that might be involved in the regulation of gene expression. Therefore, we hypothesized that mutations affecting the two genes may lead to similar phenotypes by dysregulating the expression of common genes. To test this hypothesis we used induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells derived from fibroblasts of one Rett patient with a MECP2 mutation (p.Arg306Cys) and two patients with mutations in CDKL5 (p.Gln347Ter and p.Thr288Ile). Expression profiling was performed in CDKL5-mutated cells and genes of interest were confirmed by real-time RT-PCR in both CDKL5- and MECP2-mutated cells. The only major change in gene expression common to MECP2- and CDKL5-mutated cells was for GRID1, encoding for glutamate D1 receptor (GluD1), a member of the δ-family of ionotropic glutamate receptors. GluD1 does not form AMPA or NMDA glutamate receptors. It acts like an adhesion molecule by linking the postsynaptic and presynaptic compartments, preferentially inducing the inhibitory presynaptic differentiation of cortical neurons. Our results demonstrate that GRID1 expression is downregulated in both MECP2- and CDKL5-mutated iPS cells and upregulated in neuronal precursors and mature neurons. These data provide novel insights into disease pathophysiology and identify possible new targets for therapeutic treatment of Rett syndrome.

[PMID: 27428650]
Mutations in MECP2 cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome (RTT). The RTT missense MECP2<sup>R306C</sup> mutation prevents MeCP2 from interacting with the NCoR/histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) complex; however, the neuronal function of HDAC3 is incompletely understood. We found that neuronal deletion of Hdac3 in mice elicited abnormal locomotor coordination, sociability and cognition. Transcriptional and chromatin profiling revealed that HDAC3 positively regulated a subset of genes and was recruited to active gene promoters via MeCP2. HDAC3-associated promoters were enriched for the FOXO transcription factors, and FOXO acetylation was elevated in Hdac3 knockout (KO) and Mecp2 KO neurons. Human RTT-patient-derived MECP2<sup>R306C</sup> neural progenitor cells had deficits in HDAC3 and FOXO recruitment and gene expression. Gene editing of MECP2<sup>R306C</sup> cells to generate isogenic controls rescued HDAC3-FOXO-mediated impairments in gene expression. Our data suggest that HDAC3 interaction with MeCP2 positively regulates a subset of neuronal genes through FOXO deacetylation, and disruption of HDAC3 contributes to cognitive and social impairment.

[PMID: 22865604]
Mutations in the gene encoding the methyl-CpG-binding protein MECP2 are the major cause of Rett syndrome, an autism spectrum disorder mainly affecting young females. MeCP2 is an abundant chromatin-associated protein, but how and when its absence begins to alter brain function is still far from clear. Using a stem cell-based system allowing the synchronous differentiation of neuronal progenitors, we found that in the absence of MeCP2, the size of neuronal nuclei fails to increase at normal rates during differentiation. This is accompanied by a marked decrease in the rate of ribonucleotide incorporation, indicating an early role of MeCP2 in regulating total gene transcription, not restricted to selected mRNAs. We also found that the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were decreased in mutant neurons, while those of the presynaptic protein synaptophysin increased at similar rates in wild-type and mutant neurons. By contrast, nuclear size, transcription rates, and BDNF levels remained unchanged in astrocytes lacking MeCP2. Re-expressing MeCP2 in mutant neurons rescued the nuclear size phenotype as well as BDNF levels. These results reveal a new role of MeCP2 in regulating overall RNA synthesis in neurons during the course of their maturation, in line with recent findings indicating a reduced nucleolar size in neurons of the developing brain of mice lacking Mecp2.

[PMID: 24399845]
Rett syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental disorder that primarily affects girls, is characterised by a period of apparently normal development until 6-18 months of age when motor and communication abilities regress. More than 95% of individuals with RTT have mutations in methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), whose protein product modulates gene transcription. Surprisingly, although the disorder is caused by mutations in a single gene, disease severity in affected individuals can be quite variable. To explore the source of this phenotypic variability, we propose that specific MECP2 mutations lead to different degrees of disease severity. Using a database of 1052 participants assessed over 4940 unique visits, the largest cohort of both typical and atypical RTT patients studied to date, we examined the relationship between MECP2 mutation status and various phenotypic measures over time. In general agreement with previous studies, we found that particular mutations, such as p.Arg133Cys, p.Arg294X, p.Arg306Cys, 3° truncations and other point mutations, were relatively less severe in both typical and atypical RTT. In contrast, p.Arg106Trp, p.Arg168X, p.Arg255X, p.Arg270X, splice sites, deletions, insertions and deletions were significantly more severe. We also demonstrated that, for most mutation types, clinical severity increases with age. Furthermore, of the clinical features of RTT, ambulation, hand use and age at onset of stereotypies are strongly linked to overall disease severity. We have confirmed that MECP2 mutation type is a strong predictor of disease severity. These data also indicate that clinical severity continues to become progressively worse regardless of initial severity. These findings will allow clinicians and families to anticipate and prepare better for the needs of individuals with RTT.

[PMID: 19349604]
Rett syndrome (RTT) is caused by mutations in the transcriptional repressor methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a neurotrophic factor playing a major role in neuronal survival, neurogenesis, and plasticity, and it has been shown that BDNF expression is regulated by MeCP2 through a complex interaction. A common polymorphism of BDNF (Val66Met [p.V66M]) has been found to correlate with severity and course of several neuropsychiatric disorders. We examined the association between disease severity score, assessed by the modified Percy score, and BDNF polymorphism, using regression methods, in 125 mutation-positive patients with RTT from the Australian Rett Syndrome Database and an Israeli cohort. Those who were heterozygous (Val/Met) had slightly more severe disease than those who were homozygous for the wild-type (Val/Val) BDNF polymorphism (increased severity score 2.1, p = 0.09). In those with p.R168X, a commonly occurring MECP2 mutation in RTT, there was a 6-point increase in severity score for those who were heterozygous for the BDNF polymorphism, both unadjusted (p = 0.02) and adjusted for age (p = 0.03). Individuals with the p.R168X mutation and heterozygous for the BDNF polymorphism were also at an increased risk of seizure onset (hazard ratio 5.3, 95% confidence interval 1.6-17.7) compared with those homozygous for the wild-type BDNF allele. In addition to mutation type and degree of X-chromosome skewing, the common brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) polymorphism appears to be another genetic modifier of Rett syndrome (RTT) severity. This suggests that BDNF function may play a significant role in the pathogenesis of RTT.

[PMID: 15549394]
Rett syndrome (RTT), the second most common cause of mental retardation in females, has been associated with mutations in MeCP2, the archetypical member of the methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) family of proteins. MeCP2 additionally possesses a transcriptional repression domain (TRD). We have compared the gene expression profiles of RTT- and normal female-derived lymphoblastoid cells by using cDNA microarrays. Clustering analysis allowed the classification of RTT patients according to the localization of the MeCP2 mutation (MBD or TRD) and those with clinically diagnosed RTT but without detectable MeCP2 mutations. Numerous genes were observed to be overexpressed in RTT patients compared with control samples, including excellent candidate genes for neurodevelopmental disease. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that binding of MeCP2 to corresponding promoter CpG islands was lost in RTT-derived cells harboring a mutation in the region of the MECP2 gene encoding the MBD. Bisulfite genomic sequencing demonstrated that the majority of MeCP2 binding occurred in DNA sequences with methylation-associated silencing. Most importantly, the finding that these genes are also methylated and bound by MeCP2 in neuron-related cells suggests a role in this neurodevelopmental disease. Our results provide new data of the underlying mechanisms of RTT and unveil novel targets of MeCP2-mediated gene repression.