[PMID: 22698187]
Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (BBE), together with Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS) and Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) were considered to form a continuous clinical spectrum. An anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome has been proposed to underlie the common pathophysiology for the three disorders; however, other studies have found a positive anti-GM1 instead of anti-GQ1b antibody. Here we report a 20-year-old male patient with overlapping BBE, MFS and GBS. The patient had a positive family history of bronchial asthma and had suffered from the condition for over 15 years. He developed BBE symptoms nine days after an asthma exacerbation. During the course of illness, he had significantly elevated IgE levels in both serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Serologic analysis of antibodies against ganglioside complexes (anti-GDIa, anti-GDIb, anti-GM1, anti-GM2, anti-GM3, anti-GQIb and anti-GTIb antibodies) showed negative results. Since asthma has recently been related to autoimmune disease, our case supports an autoimmune mechanism underlying the clinical spectrum composed of BBE, MFS and GBS. However, contrary to a proposed anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome, we would suggest that pathogenesis of this clinical spectrum is not limited to anti-ganglioside antibodies.

[PMID: 18717185]
A 39-year-old man acutely developed diplopia, vertigo, unsteady gait, and disturbance of consciousness following an upper respiratory infection. Neurological examination showed ophthalmoplegia, facial paralysis, tetraplegia and loss of deep tendon reflexes. Babinski reflex was positive on the left and there were bilateral flexor withdrawal reflexes. He also developed ballism-like involuntary movements in all extremities, loss of proprioception predominantly on the left, and severe truncal ataxia. Anti-GQ1b IgG antibody was selectively elevated in serum, and CSF protein was elevated to 53 mg/dl with cell count of 12/mm3. Nerve conduction study showed decreased amplitude of compound motor action potentials in all extremities, and no response in facial muscles. Cranial MRI showed no abnormalities whereas EEG was severely abnormal with lack of posterior dominant rhythm and the presence of continuous diffuse theta-waves. This case presented clinical characteristics of three syndromes concurrently-Fisher syndrome, Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome-that may be collectively called 'anti-GQ1b IgG antibody syndrome'. The unique feature of the present case was development of deep coma and ballism-like movements, associated with selective increase of serum anti-GQ1b IgG antibody. It is thus conceivable that anti-GQ1b IgG antibody might underlie the pathogenesis of all three conditions.

[PMID: 25379047]
A flaccid tetraparesis in Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (BBE) is presumed to be a sign of overlapping Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). In addition, BBE and Fisher syndrome, which are clinically similar and are both associated with the presence of the immunoglobulin G anti-GQ1b antibody, represent a specific autoimmune disease with a wide spectrum of symptoms that include ophthalmoplegia and ataxia. A 2-year-old boy presented with rapidly progressive ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, hyporeflexia, weakness of the lower extremities, and, subsequently, disturbance of consciousness. He experienced bronchitis with watery diarrhea and had laboratory evidence of recent infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). He was diagnosed as having overlapping GBS and BBE associated with EBV and received treatment with a combination of immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone, as well as acyclovir, and had recovered completely after 3 months. In addition, he has not experienced any relapse over the past year. We suggest that combinations of symptoms and signs of central lesions (disturbance of consciousness) and peripheral lesions (ophthalmoplegia, facial weakness, limb weakness, and areflexia) are supportive of a diagnosis of overlapping GBS and BBE and can be helpful in achieving an early diagnosis, as well as for the administration of appropriate treatments.

[PMID: 24853856]
This is the case of a 79-year-old man with chronic lymphocytic leukemia who presented with Guillain-Barré syndrome with features overlapping with the Miller Fisher syndrome and Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis and positive antiganglioside GQ1b antibody about 6 months after treatment with bendamustine and rituximab. His clinical and neurologic condition continued to deteriorate despite sequential treatment with corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis, but in the end, he had a complete and durable response to treatment with alemtuzumab.

[PMID: 16844234]
The authors reported the neurological disease spectrum associated with autoantibodies against minor gangliosides GM1b and GalNAc-GD1a. IgG and IgM antibody reactivity against gangliosides GM1, GM2, GM1b, GD1a, GalNAc-GD1a and GQ1b was investigated in sera from 7000 consecutive patients who had various neurological conditions. The clinical diagnoses for 456 anti-GM1b-positive patients were Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS, 71%), atypical GBS with preserved deep tendon reflexes (12%), Fisher syndrome (10%), Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (2%), ataxic GBS (2%) and acute ophthalmoparesis (1%). For 193 anti-GalNAc-GD1a-positive patients, the diagnoses were GBS (70%), atypical GBS (16%), Fisher syndrome (10%) and Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (3%). Of the patients with GBS or atypical GBS, 28% of 381 anti-GM1b-positive and 31% of 166 anti-GalNAc-GD1a-positive patients had neither anti-GM1 nor anti-GD1a antibodies. Of those patients with Fisher syndrome, Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis, ataxic GBS or acute ophthalmoparesis, 33% of 67 anti-GM1b-positive, and 52% of 25 anti-GalNAc-GD1a-positive patients had no anti-GQ1b antibodies. Autoantibodies against GM1b and GalNAc-GD1a are associated with GBS, Fisher syndrome and related conditions. These antibodies should provide useful serological markers for identifying patients who have atypical GBS with preserved deep tendon reflexes, ataxic GBS, Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis or acute ophthalmoparesis, especially for those who have no antibodies to GM1, GD1a or GQ1b. A method to prepare GM1b was developed.

[PMID: 8194267]
We presented a case of probable Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis. A 39-year-old woman developed easy falling, progressive consciousness disturbance, total ophthalmoplegia, and bilateral pyramida tract sign. In serum anti-ganglioside antibody assay using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, high anti-GQ1b antibody was found. Electroencephalography was dominated by alpha activity, superimposed with occasional theta wave bursts. Brain MRI showed abnormal signal hyperintensities in the tegmentum of the midbrain to the upper pons on T2 weighted images and swelling of the midbrain and pons on T1 weighted images. Five days after the onset of the disease, she had respiratory arrest, which necessitated artificial ventilation for a few days. Then, she began to recover. However, she gained only partial recovery, leaving upward gaze palsy, right abducens nerve palsy, pseudbulbar palsy and quadriplegia.

[PMID: 18678825]
Anti-GQ1b antibody has been found in Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) with ophthalmoplegia, Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis (BBE), and acute ophthalmoplegia without ataxia (AO). The aim of this study was to determine the clinical features of AO associated with anti-GQ1b antibody. We retrospectively collected 34 patients with anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome. Of these patients, 31 patients had ophthalmoplegia. The patients with ophthalmoplegia were classified into MFS (n = 13), AO (n = 11), GBS with ophthalmoplegia (n = 6), and BBE (n = 1). We analyzed clinical features and patterns of external and internal ophthalmoplegia of AO, and neuro-ophthalmologic findings were compared with those of other anti-GQ1b syndromes with ophthalmoplegia. AO was observed in 11 (32.4%) of the 34 patients with anti-GQ1b antibody. External ophthalmoparesis was present in all the patients and included mixed horizontal-vertical (n = 7), pure horizontal (n = 3), and pure vertical gaze palsy (n = 1). Binocular involvement was common, but unilateral ophthalmoparesis was also observed in 27.3%. Other findings included ptosis (n = 5, 45.5%) and internal ophthalmoplegia (n = 6, 54.5%). Other anti-GQ1b antibody syndromes had prominent neurologic signs including ataxia, weakness, and facial palsy in addition to ophthalmoplegia. The patterns of neuro-ophthalmologic findings did not differ between AO and other anti-GQ1b antibody syndromes with ophthalmoplegia. Acute ophthalmoplegia (AO) commonly occurs in anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome and manifests as various combinations of external and internal ophthalmoplegia. Internal ophthalmoplegia is fairly common and unilateral involvement may occur in AO.

[PMID: 23275783]
We report a 72-year-old woman with overlapping Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (BBE). She developed diplopia and unsteady gait a week after an upper respiratory infection on day 1. She had weakness of both upper limbs on day 3 and became drowsy, and her respiratory status worsened on day 5. Neurologic examination revealed ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, symmetrical weakness, areflexia, and consciousness disturbance. We diagnosed her with MFS on day 1, GBS on day 3 and overlapping BBE on day 5. She underwent immunoadsorption therapy and two courses of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy. Ten months after onset, her symptoms had fully recovered. Anti-GM1 IgG, GD1a IgG, GQ1b IgG, and GT1a IgG antibodies were positive. Our case supports the notion that MFS, GBS, and BBE are all part of a continuous clinical spectrum, which is an antibody-mediated process.

[PMID: 22984203]
In the 1950s, Bickerstaff and Fisher independently described cases with a unique presentation of ophthalmoplegia and ataxia. The neurological features were typically preceded by an antecedent infection and the majority of patients made a spontaneous recovery. In the cases with Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis, there was associated altered consciousness and in some, hyperreflexia, in support of a central pathology whereas in Fisher syndrome, patients were areflexic in keeping with a peripheral aetiology. However, both authors recognised certain similarities to Guillain-Barré syndrome such as the presence of peripheral neuropathy and cerebrospinal fluid albuminocytological dissociation. The discovery of immunoglobulin G anti-GQ1b antibodies in patients with Fisher syndrome and later in Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis was crucial in providing the necessary evidence to conclude that both conditions were in fact part of the same spectrum of disease by virtue of their common clinical and immunological profiles. Following this, other neurological presentations that share anti-GQ1b antibodies emerged in the literature. These include acute ophthalmoparesis and acute ataxic neuropathy, which represent the less extensive spectrum of the disease whereas pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness and Fisher syndrome overlap with Guillain-Barré syndrome represent the more extensive end of the spectrum. The conditions can be referred to as the 'anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome'. In this review, we look back at the historical descriptions and describe how our understanding of Fisher syndrome and Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis has evolved from their initial descriptions more than half a century ago.

[PMID: 16948943]
Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis is a clinical syndrome of ophthalmoplegia, cerebellar ataxia, and central nervous system signs and is associated with the presence of anti-GQ1b antibodies. There is a clinical continuum between Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis and Miller Fisher syndrome. We describe the case of an 11-year-old boy with encephalopathy, external ophthalmoplegia, brainstem signs, and ataxia with raised titers of anti-GQ1b antibodies. He presented following a respiratory illness and had laboratory evidence of recent infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae. M pneumoniae infection has been associated with both Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis and Miller Fisher syndrome. This is only the second case in the literature of Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis with raised titers of anti-GQ1b antibodies described in association with M pneumoniae infection. The patient responded to intravenous immunoglobulin administration.

[PMID: 16099076]
Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis represents a differential diagnostic that must be discuss with meningoencephalitis with ophtalmoplegia, ataxia and confusion. A 26 year-old woman presented a Bickerstaff syndrome. A severe disturbance of consciousness had lead to admission in intensive care unit with mechanical ventilation. Electrophysiological tests and the brain magnetic resonance were normal. We have not observed systemic anti-G1Qb antibody in our patient. Nevertheless, 66% of patients with Bickerstaff syndrome have anti-GQ1b antibody during the acute phase period. We observed a beneficial effect of IV Ig treatment although no significant improvement was observed with corticosteroids. Controlled clinical trials are needed to established the efficacy of IV Ig or plasmapheresis as a specific therapy for this pathology.

[PMID: 19664367]
The discovery of the association of the anti-GQ1b IgG antibody with the postinfectious clinical syndromes of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and areflexia helped house the phenotypes of the Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), atypical MFS, Guillain-Barré syndrome with ophthalmoplegia, and Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis under one roof. The neuro-ophthalmologic signs classically predominate and may vary from case to case, but they maintain clinically recognizable patterns that assist with the diagnosis. The identification of a common lipopolysaccharide on the plasma membrane in human cranial and peripheral nerves at the GQ1b epitope and on infectious particles of bacteria and viruses (ie, Campylobacter jejuni) demonstrates molecular mimicry. The high frequency of oculomotor dysfunction is partially explained by the tissue ganglioside concentration and distribution and the attraction of antibody-stimulating complement activation. Current experimental treatment targets antibody removal and neutralization and prevents membrane attack complex formation through deactivation of complement. This article aims to bring together the historically disparate opinions on the origins of these syndromes as either a purely peripheral nervous system or central nervous system dysfunction, highlight the clinical neuro-ophthalmologic signs, discuss some of the biology of the anti-GQ1b antibody, and review imaging abnormalities and treatment of this fascinating disorder.

[PMID: 12451613]
We describe a 27-year-old woman who showed the clinical triad of Fisher syndrome (ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and areflexia), a disturbance of consciousness, facial diplegia, and hemisensory loss. Her serum was positive for anti-GQ1b immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody. The electroencephalographic findings (diffuse slow activity), median somatosensory evoked potential (absent cortical N20 with normal cervical N13), and blink reflex studies (absent R2) suggested central dysfunction, whereas results of facial nerve conduction studies (low amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials), F-wave and H-reflex studies (absent F-waves and soleus H-reflexes), and brainstem auditory evoked potentials (prolongation of wave I latency) suggested peripheral abnormalities. This case supports the hypothesized continuity between Fisher syndrome and Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis. These two conditions may represent a single autoimmune disease mediated by anti-GQ1b antibody, usually involving the peripheral and occasionally the central nervous systems.

[PMID: 11002482]
Patient was an 18-year-old female student. After she had symptoms of common cold for 3 days, she developed somnolence, diplopia, dysarthria, urinary disturbance and ataxia. On admission neurological examination revealed coma with mydriasis, ophthalmoplegia, ptosis and weakness of the upper limbs. Light reflex, corneal reflex and oculocephalic test were all negative. Deep tendon reflexes were brisk and extensor toe signs were positive bilaterally. She did not have nuchal rigidity. Laboratory test revealed normal cerebrospinal fluid with negative myelin basic protein. Brain MRI, brainstem evoked potentials presented no abnormality. EMG revealed normal conduction velocity and no conduction block. EEG had diffuse theta and delta slowing. Culture of the stool represented no Campylobacter jejuni. At the fifth day of admission consciousness level improved, and other neurological findings disappeared in about 6 weeks. She had anti GQ 1 b, GT 1 a(IgG, IgM) and anti GM 1(IgM) antibodies in the serum. We made a diagnosis of Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis from these neurological symptoms and clinical course. The main lesion was present in the brainstem from midbrain to medulla oblongata in the midline. High titer of anti GT 1a antibody may be related to the ophthalmoplegia as noted in Miller Fisher syndrome. As a result of EMG and stool culture, it denied the complication of Guillain-Barré syndrome. We had no proof of the reason of the presentation of anti GM 1 antibody.

[PMID: 11442445]
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a rare, antecedent infectious agent in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). We report a patient with overlapping GBS and Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (BBE). The patient had a vesicular lesion on her nose. Antecedent HSV type 1 (HSV-1) infection was confirmed by isolation of the virus and detection of the presence of serum anti-HSV-1 IgM antibody during the acute phase. Her serum IgG had high anti-GQ1b antibody titer. External ophthalmoplegia has been noted in 2 of 4 reported cases of HSV-associated GBS. Herpetic brainstem encephalitis cases of poor prognosis are known, but only 2 cases of benign brainstem encephalitis secondary to HSV infection, in which there was acute ophthalmoplegia and clinical features consistent with those of BBE have been reported.

[PMID: 21631649]
Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), a variant of the Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), is characterized by ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and areflexia. The annual incidence is around one patient per one million population. The antiganglioside anti-GQ1b IgG antibody has a role in the pathogenesis of the syndrome, especially of ophthalmoplegia. The presence of this antibody in the serum can be identified in over 80% of the patients, peaking in the first week, whereas albuminocytological dissociation in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) appears later. The most consistent electrophysiological findings in MFS are reduced sensory nerve action potentials and absent H reflexes. More variability is seen with F waves and various investigations involving cranial structures. Although there are usually no abnormalities in MFS by routine neuroimaging, in a few cases, contrast enhancement of nerve roots and signs of central nervous system involvement were described supporting the hypothesis of an anti-GQ1b-syndrome, a continuum involving GBS, MFS, and Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis. Owing to the lack of randomized trials, treatments used for GBS (intravenous immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis) are usually applied, although from retrospective analyses, the outcome was similar between treated and untreated subjects. The outcome of MFS is usually good with case fatality of < 5%. In the few autopsy cases, macroscopic abnormalities were generally not seen in the nervous system. Microscopic examination of the peripheral nervous system (including cranial nerves) showed segmental demyelination with minimal perivascular infiltration with normal spinal cord and brain stem.

[PMID: 18406474]
Twenty-eight patients suffered Campylobacter jejuni enteritis after eating raw chicken. Among them, only one patient developed Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis, who carried anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies. In contrast, none of the others did the autoantibodies. C. jejuni was cultured from all stool samples from five patients with enteritis alone. All the isolates had the same genotype, cst-II (Asn51), which are characteristic of strains isolated from Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis. These findings suggest that host susceptibility may play a role in inducing the production of anti-ganglioside antibodies and the development of Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis.

[PMID: 23927937]
Edwin Bickerstaff and Philip Cloake reported in the 1950's three cases of reversible encephalitis. The concept of antibody associated encephalitis had not been proposed at the time they astutely recognized the importance of disease pattern recognition and postulated a potential immune based mechanism. The syndrome defined by Bickerstaff of progressive, external ophthalmoplegia and ataxia, with disturbance of consciousness or hyperreflexia, has subsequently been associated with anti-GQ1b antibodies. Interestingly one of the three original cases, a young woman who developed seizures, an eye movement disorder and acute psychosis while awaiting ovarian cystectomy, has features that may be more consistent with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.