[PMID: 20392737]
The centriole and basal body (CBB) structure nucleates cilia and flagella, and is an essential component of the centrosome, underlying eukaryotic microtubule-based motility, cell division and polarity. In recent years, components of the CBB-assembly machinery have been identified, but little is known about their regulation and evolution. Given the diversity of cellular contexts encountered in eukaryotes, but the remarkable conservation of CBB morphology, we asked whether general mechanistic principles could explain CBB assembly. We analysed the distribution of each component of the human CBB-assembly machinery across eukaryotes as a strategy to generate testable hypotheses. We found an evolutionarily cohesive and ancestral module, which we term UNIMOD and is defined by three components (SAS6, SAS4/CPAP and BLD10/CEP135), that correlates with the occurrence of CBBs. Unexpectedly, other players (SAK/PLK4, SPD2/CEP192 and CP110) emerged in a taxon-specific manner. We report that gene duplication plays an important role in the evolution of CBB components and show that, in the case of BLD10/CEP135, this is a source of tissue specificity in CBB and flagella biogenesis. Moreover, we observe extreme protein divergence amongst CBB components and show experimentally that there is loss of cross-species complementation among SAK/PLK4 family members, suggesting species-specific adaptations in CBB assembly. We propose that the UNIMOD theory explains the conservation of CBB architecture and that taxon- and tissue-specific molecular innovations, gained through emergence, duplication and divergence, play important roles in coordinating CBB biogenesis and function in different cellular contexts.

[PMID: 22898782]
Cilia and flagella are involved in a variety of processes and human diseases, including ciliopathies and sterility. Their motility is often controlled by a central microtubule (MT) pair localized within the ciliary MT-based skeleton, the axoneme. We characterized the formation of the motility apparatus in detail in Drosophila spermatogenesis. We show that assembly of the central MT pair starts prior to the meiotic divisions, with nucleation of a singlet MT within the basal body of a small cilium, and that the second MT of the pair only assembles much later, upon flagella formation. BLD10/CEP135, a conserved player in centriole and flagella biogenesis, can bind and stabilize MTs and is required for the early steps of central MT pair formation. This work describes a genetically tractable system to study motile cilia formation and provides an explanation for BLD10/CEP135's role in assembling highly stable MT-based structures, such as motile axonemes and centrioles.

[PMID: 16240430]
Lecudina tuzetae is a parasitic protozoan (Gregarine, Apicomplexa) living in the intestine of a marine polychaete annelid, Nereis diversicolor. Using electron and fluorescence microscopy, we have characterized the dynamic changes in microtubule organization during the sexual phase of the life cycle. The gametocyst excreted from the host worm into seawater consists of two (one male and one female) gamonts in which cortical microtubule arrays are discernible. Each gamont undergoes multiple nuclear divisions without cytokinesis, resulting in the formation of large multinucleate haploid cells. After cellularization, approximately 1000 individual gametes are produced from each gamont within 24 h. Female gametes are spherical and contain interphase cytoplasmic microtubule arrays emanating from a gamma-tubulin-containing site. In male gametes, both interphase microtubules and a flagellum with "6 + 0" axonemal microtubules extend from the same microtubule-organizing site. At the beginning of spore formation, each zygote secretes a wall to form a sporocyst. Following meiotic and mitotic divisions, each sporocyst gives rise to eight haploid cells that ultimately differentiate into sporozoites. The ovoid shaped sporocyst is asymmetric and forms at least two distinctive microtubule arrays: spindle microtubules and microtubule bundles originating from the protruding apical end corresponding to the dehiscence pole of the sporocyst. Because antibodies raised against mammalian centrosome components, such as gamma-tubulin, pericentrin, Cep135, and mitosis-specific phosphoproteins, react strongly with the microtubule-nucleating sites of Lecudina, this protozoan is likely to share common centrosomal antigens with higher eukaryotes.

[PMID: 17681131]
We show that overexpression of Polo-like kinase 4 (Plk4) in human cells induces centrosome amplification through the simultaneous generation of multiple procentrioles adjoining each parental centriole. This provided an opportunity for dissecting centriole assembly and characterizing assembly intermediates. Critical components were identified and ordered into an assembly pathway through siRNA and localized through immunoelectron microscopy. Plk4, hSas-6, CPAP, Cep135, gamma-tubulin, and CP110 were required at different stages of procentriole formation and in association with different centriolar structures. Remarkably, hSas-6 associated only transiently with nascent procentrioles, whereas Cep135 and CPAP formed a core structure within the proximal lumen of both parental and nascent centrioles. Finally, CP110 was recruited early and then associated with the growing distal tips, indicating that centrioles elongate through insertion of alpha-/beta-tubulin underneath a CP110 cap. Collectively, these data afford a comprehensive view of the assembly pathway underlying centriole biogenesis in human cells.

[PMID: 18851962]
A proteomic study predicted that about one hundred kinds of proteins constitute a basic structure of the centrosome. Most of the core centrosomal proteins contain extensive coiled-coil domains, suggesting that the protein-protein interaction is a critical force for the core centrosome configuration. In the present study, we investigated a novel interaction between CEP135 and C-NAP1, two core centriolar proteins. Depletion of CEP135 caused a premature centrosome splitting. Reduction of the centrosomal C-NAP1 level was accompanied in a specific manner. Ectopic expression of the CEP135 mutant proteins also caused centrosome splitting in association with the reduction of the centrosomal C-NAP1 levels. Based on these results, we propose that CEP135 acts as a platform protein for C-NAP1 at the centriole.

[PMID: 23213374]
Centrioles are essential for the formation of cilia and flagella. They also form the core of the centrosome, which organizes microtubule arrays important for cell shape, polarity, motility and division. Here, we have used super-resolution 3D-structured illumination microscopy to analyse the spatial relationship of 18 centriole and pericentriolar matrix (PCM) components of human centrosomes at different cell cycle stages. During mitosis, PCM proteins formed extended networks with interspersed γ-Tubulin. During interphase, most proteins were arranged at specific distances from the walls of centrioles, resulting in ring staining, often with discernible density masses. Through use of site-specific antibodies, we found the C-terminus of Cep152 to be closer to centrioles than the N-terminus, illustrating the power of 3D-SIM to study protein disposition. Appendage proteins showed rings with multiple density masses, and the number of these masses was strongly reduced during mitosis. At the proximal end of centrioles, Sas-6 formed a dot at the site of daughter centriole assembly, consistent with its role in cartwheel formation. Plk4 and STIL co-localized with Sas-6, but Cep135 was associated mostly with mother centrioles. Remarkably, Plk4 formed a dot on the surface of the mother centriole before Sas-6 staining became detectable, indicating that Plk4 constitutes an early marker for the site of nascent centriole formation. Our study provides novel insights into the architecture of human centrosomes and illustrates the power of super-resolution microscopy in revealing the relative localization of centriole and PCM proteins in unprecedented detail.

[PMID: 19321663]
Cilia and flagella play multiple essential roles in animal development and cell physiology. Defective cilium assembly or motility represents the etiological basis for a growing number of human diseases. Therefore, how cilia and flagella assemble and the processes that drive motility are essential for understanding these diseases. Here we show that Drosophila Bld10, the ortholog of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Bld10p and human Cep135, is a ubiquitous centriolar protein that also localizes to the spermatid basal body. Mutants that lack Bld10 assemble centrioles and form functional centrosomes, but centrioles and spermatid basal bodies are short in length. bld10 mutant flies are viable but male sterile, producing immotile sperm whose axonemes are deficient in the central pair of microtubules. These results show that Drosophila Bld10 is required for centriole and axoneme assembly to confer cilium motility.

[PMID: 22976301]
Cep135/Bld10 is a conserved centriolar protein required for the formation of the central cartwheel, an early intermediate in centriole assembly. Surprisingly, Cep135/Bld10 is not essential for centriole duplication in Drosophila, suggesting either that Cep135/Bld10 is not essential for cartwheel formation, or that the cartwheel is not essential for centriole assembly in flies. Using electron tomography and super-resolution microscopy we show that centrioles can form a cartwheel in the absence of Cep135/Bld10, but centriole width is increased and the cartwheel appears to disassemble over time. Using 3D structured illumination microscopy we show that Cep135/Bld10 is localized to a region between inner (SAS-6, Ana2) and outer (Asl, DSpd-2 and D-PLP) centriolar components, and the localization of all these component is subtly perturbed in the absence of Cep135/Bld10, although the ninefold symmetry of the centriole is maintained. Thus, in flies, Cep135/Bld10 is not essential for cartwheel assembly or for establishing the ninefold symmetry of centrioles; rather, it appears to stabilize the connection between inner and outer centriole components.

[PMID: 21766470]
To study the mechanism of centrosome duplication in cycling cells, we established a novel system of multiple centrosome formation in two types of cells: CHO cells treated with RO3306, a Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) inhibitor and DT40 cells, in which Cdks were knocked out by chemical genetics. Cdk1-inactivated cells initiated DNA replication and centrosome duplication at the onset of S phase. They became arrested at the end of G2, but the centrosome cycle continued to produce supernumerary centrioles/centrosomes without DNA endoreplication in those cells. Centrosomes were amplified in a highly synchronous and reproducible manner: all of them were located next to the nucleus and spread widely apart from each other with several μm in distance. Double knockout of Cdk1 and Cdk2 caused cell cycle arrest at G1/S and centrosomes were no longer duplicated. However, cells continued to grow and increased their volume over 10-fold during 48 hr of culture. Centrosome components, including γ-tubulin and Cep135, were synthesized and accumulated during the arrest, allowing rapid centrosome multiplication upon recovery from the cell cycle arrest or expression of exogenous Plk4 in G1/S cells. Thus centrosome amplification results from the discoordination of the centrosome cycle from the progression of other cell cycle events, which is controlled by different levels of Cdk activities.

[PMID: 22261722]
Centrosomes are composed of a centriole pair surrounded by an intricate proteinaceous matrix referred to as pericentriolar material. Although the mechanisms underpinning the control of centriole duplication are now well understood, we know relatively little about the control of centrosome size and shape. Here we used interaction proteomics to identify the E3 ligase HERC2 and the neuralized homologue NEURL4 as novel interaction partners of the centrosomal protein CP110. Using high resolution imaging, we find that HERC2 and NEURL4 localize to the centrosome and that interfering with their function alters centrosome morphology through the appearance of aberrant filamentous structures that stain for a subset of pericentriolar material proteins including pericentrin and CEP135. Using an RNA interference-resistant transgene approach in combination with structure-function analyses, we show that the association between CP110 and HERC2 depends on nonoverlapping regions of NEURL4. Whereas CP110 binding to NEURL4 is dispensable for the regulation of pericentriolar material architecture, its association with HERC2 is required to maintain normal centrosome integrity. NEURL4 is a substrate of HERC2, and together these results indicate that the NEURL4-HERC2 complex participates in the ubiquitin-dependent regulation of centrosome architecture.

[PMID: 23115304]
Basal bodies nucleate, anchor, and organize cilia. As the anchor for motile cilia, basal bodies must be resistant to the forces directed toward the cell as a consequence of ciliary beating. The molecules and generalized mechanisms that contribute to the maintenance of basal bodies remain to be discovered. Bld10/Cep135 is a basal body outer cartwheel domain protein that has established roles in the assembly of nascent basal bodies. We find that Bld10 protein first incorporates stably at basal bodies early during new assembly. Bld10 protein continues to accumulate at basal bodies after assembly, and we hypothesize that the full complement of Bld10 is required to stabilize basal bodies. We identify a novel mechanism for Bld10/Cep135 in basal body maintenance so that basal bodies can withstand the forces produced by motile cilia. Bld10 stabilizes basal bodies by promoting the stability of the A- and C-tubules of the basal body triplet microtubules and by properly positioning the triplet microtubule blades. The forces generated by ciliary beating promote basal body disassembly in bld10Δ cells. Thus Bld10/Cep135 acts to maintain the structural integrity of basal bodies against the forces of ciliary beating in addition to its separable role in basal body assembly.

[PMID: 10842375]
A novel 135 kDa centrosomal component (Cep135) was identified by immunoscreening of a mammalian expression library with monoclonal antibodies raised against clam centrosomes. It is predicted to be a highly coiled-coil protein with an extensive alpha-helix, suggesting that Cep135 is a structural component of the centrosome. To evaluate how the protein is arranged in the centrosomal structure, we overexpressed Cep135 polypeptides in CHO cells by transient transfection. HA- or GFP-tagged full (amino acids 1-1144) as well as truncated (#10, 29-1144; Delta3, 29-812) polypeptides become localized at the centrosome and induce cytoplasmic dots of various size and number in CHO cells. Centrosomes are associated with massive approximately 7 nm filaments and dense particles organized in a whorl-like arrangement in which parallel-oriented dense lines appear with a regular approximately 7 nm periodicity. The same filamentous aggregates are also detected in cytoplasmic dots, indicating that overexpressed Cep135 can assemble into elaborate higher-ordered structures in and outside the centrosome. Sf9 cells infected with baculovirus containing Cep135 sequences induce filamentous polymers which are distinctive from the whorl seen in CHO cells; #10 forms highly packed spheroids, but the Delta3-containing structure looks loose. Both structures show an internal repeating unit of dense and less dense stripes. Although the distance between the outer end of two adjacent dense lines is similar between two types of polymers ( approximately 120 nm), the dense stripe of Delta3 polymers ( approximately 40 nm) is wider than #10 ( approximately 30 nm). The light band of Delta3 ( approximately 40 nm) is thus narrower than #10 ( approximately 60 nm). Since thin fibers are frequently seen to extend from one dense line to the next, the coiled-coil rod of Cep135 may span the light band. These results suggest that overexpressed Cep135 assemble into distinctive polymers in a domain-specific manner.

[PMID: 19454482]
Cancer cells frequently induce aberrant centrosomes, which have been implicated in cancer initiation and progression. Human colorectal cancer cells, HCT116, contain aberrant centrioles composed of disorganized cylindrical microtubules and displaced appendages. These cells also express unique centrosome-related structures associated with a subset of centrosomal components, including gamma-tubulin, centrin and PCM1. During hydroxyurea treatment, these abnormal structures become more abundant and undergo a change in shape from small dots to elongated fibers. Although gamma-tubulin seems to exist as a ring complex, the abnormal structures do not support microtubule nucleation. Several lines of evidence suggest that the fibers correspond to a disorganized form of centriolar microtubules. Plk4, a mammalian homolog of ZYG-1 essential for initiation of centriole biogenesis, is not associated with the gamma-tubulin-specific abnormal centrosomes. The amount of Plk4 at each centrosome was less in cells with abnormal centrosomes than cells without gamma-tubulin-specific abnormal centrosomes. In addition, the formation of abnormal structures was abolished by expression of exogenous Plk4, but not SAS6 and Cep135/Bld10p, which are downstream regulators required for the organization of nine-triplet microtubules. These results suggest that HCT116 cells fail to organize the ninefold symmetry of centrioles due to insufficient Plk4.

[PMID: 22521416]
Autosomal-recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by intellectual disability, reduced brain and head size, but usually without defects in cerebral cortical architecture, and other syndromic abnormalities. MCPH is heterogeneous. The underlying genes of the seven known loci code for centrosomal proteins. We studied a family from northern Pakistan with two microcephalic children using homozygosity mapping and found suggestive linkage for regions on chromosomes 2, 4, and 9. We sequenced two positional candidate genes and identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the gene encoding the 135 kDa centrosomal protein (CEP135), located in the linkage interval on chromosome 4, in both affected children. Post hoc whole-exome sequencing corroborated this mutation's identification as the causal variant. Fibroblasts obtained from one of the patients showed multiple and fragmented centrosomes, disorganized microtubules, and reduced growth rate. Similar effects were reported after knockdown of CEP135 through RNA interference; we could provoke them also by ectopic overexpression of the mutant protein. Our findings suggest an additional locus for MCPH at HSA 4q12 (MCPH8), further strengthen the role of centrosomes in the development of MCPH, and place CEP135 among the essential components of this important organelle in particular for a normal neurogenesis.

[PMID: 14983524]
Cep135 is a 135-kDa, coiled-coil centrosome protein important for microtubule organization in mammalian cells [Ohta et al., 2002: J. Cell Biol. 156:87-99]. To identify Cep135-interacting molecules, we screened yeast two-hybrid libraries. One clone encoded dynamitin, a p50 dynactin subunit, which localized at the centrosome and has been shown to be involved in anchoring microtubules to centrosomes. The central domain of p50 binds to the C-terminal sequence of Cep135; this was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation and immunostaining of CHO cells co-expressing the binding domains for Cep135 and p50. Exogenous p50 lacking the Cep 135-binding domain failed to locate at the centrosome, suggesting that Cep135 is required for initial targeting of the centrosome. Altered levels of Cep135 and p50 by RNAi and protein overexpression caused the release of endogenous partner molecules from centrosomes. This also resulted in dislocation of other centrosomal molecules, such as gamma-tubulin and pericentrin, ultimately leading to disorganization of microtubule patterns. These results suggest that Cep135 and p50 play an important role in assembly and maintenance of functional microtubule-organizing centers.

[PMID: 11781336]
By using monoclonal antibodies raised against isolated clam centrosomes, we have identified a novel 135-kD centrosomal protein (Cep135), present in a wide range of organisms. Cep135 is located at the centrosome throughout the cell cycle, and localization is independent of the microtubule network. It distributes throughout the centrosomal area in association with the electron-dense material surrounding centrioles. Sequence analysis of cDNA isolated from CHO cells predicted a protein of 1,145-amino acid residues with extensive alpha-helical domains. Expression of a series of deletion constructs revealed the presence of three independent centrosome-targeting domains. Overexpression of Cep135 resulted in the accumulation of unique whorl-like particles in both the centrosome and the cytoplasm. Although their size, shape, and number varied according to the level of protein expression, these whorls were composed of parallel dense lines arranged in a 6-nm space. Altered levels of Cep135 by protein overexpression and/or suppression of endogenous Cep135 by RNA interference caused disorganization of interphase and mitotic spindle microtubules. Thus, Cep135 may play an important role in the centrosomal function of organizing microtubules in mammalian cells.

[PMID: 19293139]
Most animals have two centrioles in spermatids (the distal and proximal centrioles), but insect spermatids seem to contain only one centriole (Fuller 1993), which functionally resembles the distal centriole. Using fluorescent centriolar markers, we identified a structure near the fly distal centriole that is reminiscent of a proximal centriole (i.e., proximal centriole-like, or PCL). We show that the PCL exhibits several features of daughter centrioles. First, a single PCL forms near the proximal segment of the older centriole. Second, the centriolar proteins SAS-6, Ana1, and Bld10p/Cep135 are in the PCL. Third, PCL formation depends on SAK/PLK4 and SAS-6. Using a genetic screen for PCL defect, we identified a mutation in the gene encoding the conserved centriolar protein POC1, which is part of the daughter centriole initiation site (Kilburn et al. 2007) in Tetrahymena. We conclude that the PCL resembles an early intermediate structure of a forming centriole, which may explain why no typical centriolar structure is observed under electron microscopy. We propose that, during the evolution of insects, the proximal centriole was simplified by eliminating the later steps in centriole assembly. The PCL may provide a unique model to study early steps of centriole formation.

[PMID: 23456457]
Centrosome forms the backbone of cell cycle progression mechanism. Recent debates have occurred regarding the essentiality of centrosome in cell cycle regulation. CEP family protein is the active component of centrosome and plays a vital role in centriole biogenesis and cell cycle progression control. A total of 31 proteins have been categorized into CEP family protein category and many more are under candidate evaluation. Furthermore, by the recent advancements in genomics and proteomics researches, several new CEP proteins have also been characterized. Here we have summarized the importance of CEP family proteins and their regulation mechanism involved in proper cell cycle progression. Further, we have reviewed the detailed molecular mechanism behind the associated pathological phenotypes and the possible therapeutic approaches. Proteins such as CEP57, CEP63, CEP152, CEP164, and CEP215 have been extensively studied with a detailed description of their molecular mechanisms, which are among the primary targets for drug discovery. Moreover, CEP27, CEP55, CEP70, CEP110, CEP120, CEP135, CEP192, CEP250, CEP290, and CEP350 also seem promising for future drug discovery approaches. Since the overview implicates that the overall researches on CEP proteins are not yet able to present significant details required for effective therapeutics development, thus, it is timely to discuss the importance of future investigations in this field.