[PMID: 29256901]
The review will highlight recent advances in development of ALK-TKIs and management of patients with ALK-positive nonsmall cell lung cancer. There has been rapid progress in the use of targeted therapies for ALK-positive NSCLC. Since the discovery, development and approval of crizotinib in 2011, three second-generation ALK-TKIs, ceritinib, alectinib and brigatinib have been approved by the FDA. A range of newer generation ALK inhibitors with improved potency against ALK and against mutations that confer resistance to crizotinib are in clinical development. Our review will discuss the recent phase III data with ceritinib and alectinib as well as clinical trials with other ALK inhibitors. We will also address two important issues in the management of ALK-positive NSCLC, prevention and treatment of brain metastases and management of emergent ALK-TKI resistance mechanisms.

[PMID: 29174221]
Lung toxicity is a potential fatal effect involving non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients exposed to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Moving from our experience regarding a patient who developed lung toxicity while receiving 2 different anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-TKIs, we performed a systematic review to assess the epidemiologic magnitude and the clinical significance of such toxicity in NSCLC patients treated with ALK-TKIs. Studies were identified using MEDLINE and additional sources (European Society for Medical Oncology, American Society of Clinical Oncology, and World Conference on Lung Cancer abstracts) in agreement with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses and Cochrane guidelines. Lung toxicity was reported in 105 of 4943 NSCLC patients (2.1%). Crizotinib was responsible for pulmonary adverse events (AEs) in 1.8% of exposed patients (49 of 2706). With the limit of a lower number of treated patients (n = 359), brigatinib resulted as the most frequently involved in lung toxicity (7%; n = 25). Pulmonary AEs during therapy with ceritinib, alectinib, and lorlatinib occurred in 1.1%, 2.6%, and 1.8% of the patients, respectively. Sixty-five percent of cases accounted for Grade 3 or 4 events, with a mortality rate of 9%. Radiological patterns of pneumonia were reported in 25 patients, whereas imaging evocative of interstitial lung disease in 37. Overall, 26 of 105 patients (25%) permanently discontinued treatment because of lung toxicity. Lung toxicity is a rare albeit potentially severe side effect in NSCLC patients receiving ALK-TKIs, apparently more frequent with brigatinib. Its early recognition and treatment are crucial for the best outcome of this subgroup of patients, whose overall prognosis is being improved by the availability of several targeted agents.

[PMID: 28475456]
Purpose Most crizotinib-treated patients with anaplastic lymphoma kinase gene ( ALK)-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer (ALK-positive NSCLC) eventually experience disease progression. We evaluated two regimens of brigatinib, an investigational next-generation ALK inhibitor, in crizotinib-refractory ALK-positive NSCLC. Patients and Methods Patients were stratified by brain metastases and best response to crizotinib. They were randomly assigned (1:1) to oral brigatinib 90 mg once daily (arm A) or 180 mg once daily with a 7-day lead-in at 90 mg (180 mg once daily [with lead-in]; arm B). Investigator-assessed confirmed objective response rate (ORR) was the primary end point. Results Of 222 patients enrolled (arm A: n = 112, 109 treated; arm B: n = 110, 110 treated), 154 (69%) had baseline brain metastases and 164 of 222 (74%) had received prior chemotherapy. With 8.0-month median follow-up, investigator-assessed confirmed ORR was 45% (97.5% CI, 34% to 56%) in arm A and 54% (97.5% CI, 43% to 65%) in arm B. Investigator-assessed median progression-free survival was 9.2 months (95% CI, 7.4 to 15.6) and 12.9 months (95% CI, 11.1 to not reached) in arms A and B, respectively. Independent review committee-assessed intracranial ORR in patients with measurable brain metastases at baseline was 42% (11 of 26 patients) in arm A and 67% (12 of 18 patients) in arm B. Common treatment-emergent adverse events were nausea (arm A/B, 33%/40%), diarrhea (arm A/B, 19%/38%), headache (arm A/B, 28%/27%), and cough (arm A/B, 18%/34%), and were mainly grades 1 to 2. A subset of pulmonary adverse events with early onset (median onset: day 2) occurred in 14 of 219 treated patients (all grades, 6%; grade ≥ 3, 3%); none occurred after escalation to 180 mg in arm B. Seven of 14 patients were successfully retreated with brigatinib. Conclusion Brigatinib yielded substantial whole-body and intracranial responses as well as robust progression-free survival; 180 mg (with lead-in) showed consistently better efficacy than 90 mg, with acceptable safety.

[PMID: 29119148]
Brigatinib (AP-26113, Alunbrig) is a second-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that is highly active in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring ALK translocation. Brigatinib was found to be very active against different ALK resistance mutations that mediate acquired resistance biology processes, particularly G1269A ALK C1156Y, I1171S/T, V1180L and others. Different clinical trials evaluated the activity of brigatinib in crizotinib-resistant patients, confirming high activity with durable response not only in parenchymal disease, but also in intracranial disease. Nowadays, brigatinib is under evaluation in different clinical trials exploring TKI-naive patients in the first-line setting. On the basis of its significant activity results, brigatinib received approval by the FDA for the treatment of patients with ALK-positive metastatic NSCLC who have progressed on or are intolerant to crizotinib.

[PMID: 30394941]
We describe recent developments in the rapidly evolving field of anaplastic lymphoma kinase-targeting agents. Five targeted drugs are currently available in the clinic via regular approval or named patient programs, including crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib and lorlatinib. Further drugs are tested in clinical trials. This review summarizes published data, together with drug-specific information on dosing and toxicity. Moreover, we discuss different clinical scenarios and potential treatment options in patients with tumor progression, based on current literature and our own experience. Patients with metastatic, anaplastic lymphoma kinase-rearranged nonsmall cell lung cancer should be managed by interdisciplinary expert teams. New drugs with enhanced brain activity are available, and some patients may benefit from local therapies.

[PMID: 27780853]
Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) harboring ALK gene rearrangements (ALK<sup>+</sup>) typically become resistant to the first-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) crizotinib through development of secondary resistance mutations in ALK or disease progression in the brain. Mutations that confer resistance to second-generation ALK TKIs ceritinib and alectinib have also been identified. Here, we report the structure and first comprehensive preclinical evaluation of the next-generation ALK TKI brigatinib. A kinase screen was performed to evaluate the selectivity profile of brigatinib. The cellular and in vivo activities of ALK TKIs were compared using engineered and cancer-derived cell lines. The brigatinib-ALK co-structure was determined. Brigatinib potently inhibits ALK and ROS1, with a high degree of selectivity over more than 250 kinases. Across a panel of ALK<sup>+</sup> cell lines, brigatinib inhibited native ALK (IC<sub>50</sub>, 10 nmol/L) with 12-fold greater potency than crizotinib. Superior efficacy of brigatinib was also observed in mice with ALK<sup>+</sup> tumors implanted subcutaneously or intracranially. Brigatinib maintained substantial activity against all 17 secondary ALK mutants tested in cellular assays and exhibited a superior inhibitory profile compared with crizotinib, ceritinib, and alectinib at clinically achievable concentrations. Brigatinib was the only TKI to maintain substantial activity against the most recalcitrant ALK resistance mutation, G1202R. The unique, potent, and pan-ALK mutant activity of brigatinib could be rationalized by structural analyses. Brigatinib is a highly potent and selective ALK inhibitor. These findings provide the molecular basis for the promising activity being observed in ALK<sup>+</sup>, crizotinib-resistant patients with NSCLC being treated with brigatinib in clinical trials. Clin Cancer Res; 22(22); 5527-38. ©2016 AACR.

[PMID: 29403310]
Despite the advances in new targeted therapies in ALK positive population, most patients progress under ALK inhibitors within first 2 years; being the brain the most frequent site of relapse. ALK mutations, in ~30% of patients, are the main known mechanism of resistance. Classically, second-generation ALK inhibitors have been the standard of care in the crizotinib-resistant population; however, each ALK inhibitor has a different spectrum of sensitivity to ALK mutations, complicating the optimal treatment strategy for the resistant population. Brigatinib (AP26113) is a novel highly selective and potent inhibitor of ALK and ROS1 with a high degree of selectivity. In vitro, brigatinib not only inhibited ALK with 12-fold higher potency compared to crizotinib, but also inhibited <i>IGF-1R</i>, <i>FLT3</i> and <i>EGFR</i> mutants, with some activity against the <i>EGFR</i>T790M resistance mutation. In xenograft models, brigatinib overcomes resistance to ALK inhibitors, including the <i>ALK</i> G1202R mutation, which is resistant to first- and second-generation inhibitors. The efficacy of brigatinib in crizotinib-resistant, <i>ALK</i>-positive patients has been demonstrated in two early studies, which led to its approval in this setting, and it is currently being investigated as the first-line therapy versus crizotinib in tyrosine kinase inhibitor-naïve patients. Brigatinib demonstrates not only promising whole-body activity, but also an impressive improvement of intracranial outcomes in terms of both objective response rate and progression-free survival in the crizotinib-resistant population, with optimal efficacy at 180 mg (following a 90 mg run-in for 7 days) and good tolerance. These data confirm brigatinib as an excellent therapeutic strategy after crizotinib failure, particularly in the setting of central nervous system involvement. In this review, we summarize the two main clinical studies reported to date with brigatinib in <i>ALK</i>-positive advanced NSCLC patients, in particular, in the crizotinib-resistant population. We also address the mechanism of action for development of resistance and the challenging issues of optimal implementation for sequences of administration for ALK inhibitors.

[PMID: 28435288]
Brigatinib (AP26113) is a dimethylphosphine oxide group-containing tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) constructed around a bisanilinopyrimidine scaffold with potent activity against the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and several other targets. Despite the activity of first- and second-generation ALK inhibitors in advanced <i>ALK</i>-rearranged lung cancers, the development of acquired resistance represents an ongoing challenge. Later generation ALK inhibitors such as brigatinib are important potential tools in the management of patients with acquired resistance characterized by continued dependency on ALK. Brigatinib is active in vitro against many <i>ALK</i> kinase domain mutations that may mediate acquired resistance to other ALK TKIs, with reported activity (IC<sub>50</sub> <50 nM) against <i>ALK</i> C1156Y, I1171S/T, V1180L, L1196M, L1152R/P, E1210K, and G1269A. In patients with <i>ALK</i>-rearranged lung cancers who receive brigatinib after crizotinib, substantial and durable responses and intracranial disease control can be achieved based on early-phase clinical trial data. The drug is also being explored in TKI-naïve patients. From a safety perspective, early pulmonary toxicity has been observed, prompting the decision to pursue lead-in dosing for the drug. Early data point to <i>ALK</i> G1202R and <i>ALK</i> E1210K as potential mechanisms of clinical resistance to brigatinib.

[PMID: 29935304]
The second-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor alectinib recently showed superior efficacy compared to the first-generation ALK inhibitor crizotinib in advanced ALK-rearranged NSCLC, establishing alectinib as the new standard first-line therapy. Brigatinib, another second-generation ALK inhibitor, has shown substantial activity in patients with crizotinib-refractory ALK-positive NSCLC; however, its activity in the alectinib-refractory setting is unknown. A multicenter, retrospective study was performed at three institutions. Patients were eligible if they had advanced, alectinib-refractory ALK-positive NSCLC and were treated with brigatinib. Medical records were reviewed to determine clinical outcomes. Twenty-two patients were eligible for this study. Confirmed objective responses to brigatinib were observed in 3 of 18 patients (17%) with measurable disease. Nine patients (50%) had stable disease on brigatinib. The median progression-free survival was 4.4 months (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.8-5.6 months) with a median duration of treatment of 5.7 months (95% CI: 1.8-6.2 months). Among 9 patients in this study who underwent post-alectinib/pre-brigatinib biopsies, 5 had an ALK I1171X or V1180L resistance mutation; of these, 1 had a confirmed partial response and 3 had stable disease on brigatinib. One patient had an ALK G1202R mutation in a post-alectinib/pre-brigatinib biopsy, and had progressive disease as the best overall response to brigatinib. Brigatinib has limited clinical activity in alectinib-refractory ALK-positive NSCLC. Additional studies are needed to establish biomarkers of response to brigatinib and to identify effective therapeutic options for alectinib-resistant ALK-positive NSCLC patients.

[PMID: 30191596]
As a potent and selective drug, brigatinib exhibits high efficacy against wild-type and mutant anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) proteins to treat non-small cell lung cancer. In this work, the mechanisms of brigatinib binding to wild type and four mutant ALKs were investigated to gain insight into the dynamic energetic and structural information with respect to the design of novel inhibitors. Comparison between ALK-brigatinib and ALK-crizotinib suggests that the scaffold of brigatinib is well anchored to the residue Met1199 of hinge region by two hydrogen bonds, and the residue Lys1150 has the strong electrostatic interaction with the dimethylphosphine oxide moiety in brigatinib. These ALK mutations have significant influences on the flexibility of P-loop region and DFG sequences, but do not impair the hydrogen bonds between brigatinib and the residue Met1199 of hinge region. And mutations (L1196M, G1269A, F1174L, and R1275Q) induce diverse conformational changes of brigatinib and the obvious energy variation of residues Glu1167, Arg1209, Asp1270, and Asp1203. Together, the detailed explanation of mechanisms of those mutations with brigatinib further provide several guidelines for the development of more effective ALK inhibitors.

[PMID: 30251885]
The medical treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has radically changed over the last 10 years thanks to new molecular-targeted drugs able to act on biological mechanisms involved in tumor development. One such mechanism is the aberrant anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) activation: patients with ALK-driven NSCLC benefit from treatments that selectively inhibit its pathogenetic mechanism. Areas covered: The first-generation ALK inhibitor is crizotinib, initially used in Europe as second-line treatment for ALK-positive metastatic NSCLC patients, then approved as the standard first-line (already approved in the USA as front-line therapy). However, most patients eventually experience disease progression due to the emergence of secondary resistance, partly linked to ALK-dependent mechanisms, hence the development of second- and third-generation ALK inhibitors: ceritinib, alectinib, and brigatinib are approved for ALK-positive NSCLC, lorlatinib is currently being evaluated while others are under development. Expert opinion: Despite the considerable responses to these new inhibitors, however, resistance mechanisms are described. Thus, while the therapeutic scenario of NSCLC has been soon revolutionized introducing next-generation ALK inhibitors in the first-line setting, future research should identify combined therapies or new generation drugs overcoming resistance in pretreated patients.

[PMID: 30253203]
Brigatinib is an FDA-approved oral anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor for treatment of metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Using genetically modified mouse models, we investigated the roles of the multidrug efflux transporters ABCB1 and ABCG2, and the multispecific drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP3 A in plasma pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of brigatinib. In vitro, brigatinib was exceptionally well transported by human ABCB1 and mouse Abcg2, and efficiently by human ABCG2. Following oral brigatinib administration (10 mg/kg), brain accumulation was dramatically increased in Abcb1a/1b<sup>-/-</sup> (19.3-fold) and Abcb1a/1b;Abcg2<sup>-/-</sup>(41.8-fold), but not in single Abcg2<sup>-/-</sup> mice compared to wild-type mice. Brigatinib testis accumulation showed qualitatively similar behavior. mAbcb1a/1b and mAbcg2 together restricted systemic exposure of brigatinib: with both systems absent oral availability increased 1.9-fold. Coadministration of elacridar, an ABCB1/ABCG2 inhibitor, caused a pronounced increase (36-fold) in brain-to-plasma ratios of brigatinib, approaching the levels seen in Abcb1a/1b;Abcg2<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Unexpectedly, lethal toxicity of oral brigatinib was observed in mice with genetic knockout or pharmacological inhibition of mAbcb1a/1b and mAbcg2, indicating a pronounced protective role for these transporters. In Cyp3a<sup>-/-</sup> mice, brigatinib plasma exposure increased 1.3-fold, and was subsequently 1.8-fold reduced by transgenic overexpression of human CYP3 A4 in liver and intestine. The relative tissue distribution of brigatinib, however, remained unaltered. ABCB1 and ABCG2 thus limit brain accumulation, toxicity, and systemic exposure of brigatinib, whereas CYP3 A also markedly restricts its oral availability. Unexpected toxicities should therefore be carefully monitored when brigatinib is coadministered with ABCB1/ABCG2 inhibitors in patients. Collectively, these insights may support the clinical application of brigatinib.

[PMID: 29856687]
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) currently only has one FDA-approved cancer intrinsic targeted therapy, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor cetuximab, to which only approximately 10% of tumors are sensitive. In order to extend therapy options, we subjected patient-derived HNSCC cells to small-molecule inhibitor and siRNA screens, first, to find effective combination therapies with an EGFR inhibitor, and second, to determine a potential mechanistic basis for repurposing the FDA approved agents for HNSCC. The combinations of EGFR inhibitor with anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors demonstrated synergy at the highest ratio in our cohort, 4/8 HNSCC patients' derived tumor cells, and this corresponded with an effectiveness of siRNA targeting ALK combined with the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib. Co-targeting EGFR and ALK decreased HNSCC cell number and colony formation ability and increased annexin V staining. Because ALK expression is low and ALK fusions are infrequent in HNSCC, we hypothesized that gefitinib treatment could induce ALK expression. We show that ALK expression was induced in HNSCC patient-derived cells both in 2D and 3D patient-derived cell culture models, and in patient-derived xenografts in mice. Four different ALK inhibitors, including two (ceritinib and brigatinib) FDA approved for lung cancer, were effective in combination with gefitinib. Together, we identified induction of ALK by EGFR inhibitor as a novel mechanism potentially relevant to resistance to EGFR inhibitor, a high ratio of response of HNSCC patient-derived tumor cells to a combination of ALK and EGFR inhibitors, and applicability of repurposing ALK inhibitors to HNSCC that lack ALK aberrations.

[PMID: 29187012]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and ROS1 rearrangements define important molecular subgroups of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The identification of these genetic driver alterations created new potential for highly active therapeutic interventions. After discovery of ALK rearrangements in NSCLC, it was recognized that these confer sensitivity to ALK inhibition. Areas covered: Crizotinib, the first-in-class ALK/ROS1/MET inhibitor, was initially approved as second-line treatment of ALK-positive advanced NSCLC but after this, it was firmly established as the standard first-line therapy for advanced ALK-positive NSCLC. After initial response to crizotinib, tumors inevitably relapse. Next-generation ALK inhibitors, more potent and brain-penetrable than crizotinib, may be effective in re-inducing remissions when cancers are still addicted to ALK. Ceritinib and alectinib are approved for metastatic ALK positive NSCLC patients, while brigatinib received granted accelerated approval by the United States Food and Drug Administration. Regarding ROS1 rearrangement, to date crizotinib is the only ALK-tyrosine kinase inhibitor receiving indication as treatment of ROS1 positive advanced NSCLC. Expert commentary: Although novel ALK-inhibitors are under clinical investigation compared to crizotinib as front-line treatment for ALK-positive NSCLC, nowadays the current standard first-line therapy for these patients is crizotinib. Further research will clarify the best management of ALK-positive NSCLC, above all who progress on first-line crizotinib.

[PMID: 27144831]
In the treatment of echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-anaplastic lymphoma kinase positive (ALK+) non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), secondary mutations within the ALK kinase domain have emerged as a major resistance mechanism to both first- and second-generation ALK inhibitors. This report describes the design and synthesis of a series of 2,4-diarylaminopyrimidine-based potent and selective ALK inhibitors culminating in identification of the investigational clinical candidate brigatinib. A unique structural feature of brigatinib is a phosphine oxide, an overlooked but novel hydrogen-bond acceptor that drives potency and selectivity in addition to favorable ADME properties. Brigatinib displayed low nanomolar IC50s against native ALK and all tested clinically relevant ALK mutants in both enzyme-based biochemical and cell-based viability assays and demonstrated efficacy in multiple ALK+ xenografts in mice, including Karpas-299 (anaplastic large-cell lymphomas [ALCL]) and H3122 (NSCLC). Brigatinib represents the most clinically advanced phosphine oxide-containing drug candidate to date and is currently being evaluated in a global phase 2 registration trial.

[PMID: 28597393]
Brigatinib (ALUNBRIG™) is a small molecule antineoplastic anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor being developed by ARIAD Pharmaceuticals (a wholly-owned subsidiary of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company). In April 2017 brigatinib received accelerated approval in the USA for the treatment of patients with ALK-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who have progressed on or are intolerant to crizotinib. The development of resistance to crizotinib is a therapeutic challenge that has led to the development of second-generation ALK-inhibitors such as brigatinib, which have activity against treatment-resistant ALK mutants. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of brigatinib leading to this first global approval for the treatment of patients with ALK-positive metastatic NSCLC who have progressed on or are intolerant to crizotinib.

[PMID: 28536155]
The FDA has approved the ALK inhibitor brigatinib for patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer who cannot take crizotinib or whose disease worsened despite its use. The decision was based upon results of a phase II study that assessed two drug doses, with overall response rates of 45% and 56% respectively. The drug's effect on overall survival remains unclear, as does the optimal sequence of brigatinib and the three other ALK inhibitors.

[PMID: 29032042]
Brigatinib is the second-generation anaplastic lymphoma kinase - inhibitor in non-small cell lung cancer and it can overcome the crizotinib-resistance. Chromatographic separation was carried out on an Acquity Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) unit with a BEH C18 column (2.1mm×50mm, 1.7μm). The mobile phase was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. No endogenous interfering compounds was discovered at retention time of brigatinib (0.56min) and imatinib (IS, 1.41min). MS/MS detection was performed in positive mode. And the MRM transitions were m/z 584.09→484.08 and m/z 494.3→394.2 for brigatinib and IS, respectively. This method was assessed to be stable, specificity, and no matrix effect in three concentrations (0.004, 0.4, 4μg/mL). The intra-day and inter-day precisions were less than 11.09% and 6.43%. And intra-day and inter-day accuracies were ranged from -3.88% to 5.44%. The recovery of brigatinib was from 85.26% to 96.05%. Additionally, the method had a good linearity in the range of 0.002-5μg/mL. The presented method was effectively implemented to determine the concentration of brigatinib in rat plasma.