[PMID: 24113186]
Cerebellar granule cell (CGC) apoptosis by trophic/potassium (TK) deprivation is a model of election to study the interplay of pro-apoptotic and pro-survival signaling pathways in neuronal cell death. In this model, the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) induces pro-apoptotic genes through the c-Jun/activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor. On the other side, a survival pathway initiated by lithium leads to repression of pro-apoptotic c-Jun/AP-1 target genes without interfering with JNK activity. Yet, the mechanism by which lithium inhibits c-Jun activity remains to be elucidated. Here, we used this model system to study the regulation and function of site-specific c-Jun phosphorylation at the S63 and T91/T93 JNK sites in neuronal cell death. We found that TK-deprivation led to c-Jun multiphosphorylation at all three JNK sites. However, immunofluorescence analysis of c-Jun phosphorylation at single cell level revealed that the S63 site was phosphorylated in all c-Jun-expressing cells, whereas the response of T91/T93 phosphorylation was more sensitive, mirroring the switch-like apoptotic response of CGCs. Conversely, lithium prevented T91T93 phosphorylation and cell death without affecting the S63 site, suggesting that T91T93 phosphorylation triggers c-Jun pro-apoptotic activity. Accordingly, a c-Jun mutant lacking the T95 priming site for T91/93 phosphorylation protected CGCs from apoptosis, whereas it was able to induce neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells. Vice versa, a c-Jun mutant bearing aspartate substitution of T95 overwhelmed lithium-mediate protection of CGCs from TK-deprivation, validating that inhibition of T91/T93/T95 phosphorylation underlies the effect of lithium on cell death. Mass spectrometry analysis confirmed multiphosphorylation of c-Jun at T91/T93/T95 in cells. Moreover, JNK phosphorylated recombinant c-Jun at T91/T93 in a T95-dependent manner. On the basis of our results, we propose that T91/T93/T95 multiphosphorylation of c-Jun functions as a sensitivity amplifier of the JNK cascade, setting the threshold for c-Jun pro-apoptotic activity in neuronal cells.

[PMID: 24300195]
Previous reports suggested that protoapigenone showed remarkable antitumor activities against a broad spectrum of human cancer cell lines, but had no effect on human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cell. The lack of effective remedies had necessitated the application of new therapeutic scheme. A novel compound RY10-4 which has the similar structure close to protoapigenone showed better antitumor activity. Treatment with RY10-4 inhibited the expression of pro-caspase-3, pro-caspase-9, Bcl-2 as well as phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (p-STAT3). It also reduced the expressions of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and increases the expressions of reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with kazal motifs (RECK), as well as tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) via inhibiting STAT3 by activating the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases (the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), the p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)) in A549 cells treated with RY10-4. Moreover, the cytotoxic effect of RY10-4 was induction of apoptosis in A549 cells by enhancing production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Taken together, the observations suggested that RY10-4 had affected Bcl-2 family members, caspases, MMPs, TIMPs expressions and ROS production via inhibiting STAT3 activities through ERK and p38 pathways in A549 cells.

[PMID: 24272171]
Bone degradation is a serious complication of chronic inflammatory diseases such as septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and infected orthopedic implant failure. Up to date, effective therapeutic treatments for bacteria-caused bone destruction are limited. In our previous study, we found that LPS promoted osteoclast differentiation and activity through activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) pathway such as c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) and extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK1/2). The current study was to evaluate the mechanism of LPS on the apoptosis and osteoblast differentiation in MC3T3-E1 cells. MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts were non-treated, treated with LPS. After treatment, the cell viability, the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and caspase-3 were measured. The expressions of osteoblast-specific genes and Bax, Bcl-2, and caspase-3 were determined by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Protein levels of Bax, Bcl-2, caspase-3, and phosphorylation of MAPKs were measured using Western blotting assays. The MAPK signaling pathway was blocked by pretreatment with JNK inhibitor SP600125. LPS treatment induced a significant decrease in cell metabolism, viability, and ALP activity in MC3T3-E1 cells. LPS also significantly decreased mRNA expressions of osteoblast-related genes in MC3T3-E1 cells. On the other hand, LPS significantly upregulated mRNA expressions and protein levels of Bax and caspase-3 as well as activation of caspase-3, whereas decreased Bcl-2 expression in MC3T3-E1 cells. Furthermore, LPS significantly promoted MAPK pathway including the phosphorylation of JNK and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2; moreover, pretreatment with JNK inhibitor not only attenuated both of phosphorylation-JNK and ERK1/2 enhanced by LPS in MC3T3-E1 cells, but also reversed the downregulated expressions of osteoblast-specific genes including ALP and BSP induced by LPS. In conclusion, LPS could induce osteoblast apoptosis and inhibit osteoblast differentiation via activation of JNK pathway.

[PMID: 24291243]
We previously reported that jellyfish collagen stimulates both the acquired and innate immune responses. In the acquired immune response, jellyfish collagen enhanced immunoglobulin production by lymphocytes in vitro and in vivo. Meanwhile, in the innate immune response jellyfish collagen promoted cytokine production and phagocytotic activity of macrophages. The facts that jellyfish collagen plays several potential roles in stimulating cytokine production by macrophages have further attracted us to uncover its mechanisms. We herein describe that the cytokine production-stimulating activity of jellyfish collagen was canceled by a Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) inhibitor. Moreover, jellyfish collagen stimulated phosphorylation of inhibitor of κBα (IκBα), promoted the translocation of nucleus factor-κB (NF-κB), and activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). A JNK inhibitor also abrogated the cytokine production-stimulating activity of jellyfish collagen. These results suggest that jellyfish collagen may facilitate cytokine production by macrophages through activation of NF-κB and JNK via the TLR4 signaling pathways.

[PMID: 24252081]
The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) is thought to be involved in inflammation, proliferation and apoptosis. To examine the role of JNK isoforms in metastasis, proliferation, migration and invasion of the malignant melanoma (MM) cell lines SK-MEL-28, SK-MEL-3 and WM164, using a kinase-specific inhibitor or isoform-specific small interfering (si)RNAs. SK-MEL-3, a cell line established from metastatic MM, showed slightly increased phosphorylation of both JNK1 and JNK2, whereas WM164, a cell line derived from primary MM, showed significant phosphorylation of JNK1. A JNK inhibitor, SP600125, inhibited cell proliferation of SK-MEL-3 but not SK-MEL-28 or WM164. Transfection of JNK1-specific siRNA reduced the migratory activity of WM164 cells, while silencing of either JNK1 or JNK2 strongly suppressed the invasive activity of SK-MEL-3. Our study suggests that JNK isoforms have different roles in MM. Metastasis of MM may be regulated by JNK2, while invasion is regulated by both JNK1 and JNK2. JNK1 and JNK2 respectively mediate cell migration and cell proliferation. Further understanding of the specific roles of JNK isoforms in the pathogenesis of MM may lead to the development of therapies targeting specific isoforms.

[PMID: 15228586]
In the CNS, astrocytes are significant sources of RANTES/CCL5 (regulated upon activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted), a CC-chemokine with important biological function. Astrocyte RANTES/CCL5 has been shown to be induced by interleukin-1 (IL-1), with interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) as a primer, but whether type I interferons play any role in the expression of RANTES/CCL5 is not known. In this report, we studied the detailed mechanism of RANTES/CCL5 induction in primary human astrocytes activated with IL-1 and IFNbeta. Ribonuclease protection assay and ELISA showed that IFNbeta, although not effective alone, increased IL-1-induced RANTES/CCL5 expression, but did not antagonize IFNgamma. IL-1 or IL-1/IFNbeta-induced RANTES/CCL5 expression was inhibited by the super-repressor IkappaBalpha or inhibitors of p38 or c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases), but not by extracellular signal regulated kinases (ERK) inhibitors. IFNbeta enhanced IL-1-induced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, but was not effective alone. Transfection with mutated RANTES/CCL5 promoter-reporter constructs revealed that kappaB, interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) and CAATT-enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta) sites all contributed to IL-1/IFNbeta-induced RANTES/CCL5 transcription. IFNbeta synergized with IL-1 to induce nuclear accumulation of C/EBPbeta protein. They also synergized to form nuclear ISRE complexes with Stat1, Stat2 and interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) proteins. Together, our results demonstrate that IFNbeta plays a positive regulatory role in the expression of RANTES/CCL5 in human astrocytes through several distinct mechanisms.

[PMID: 23028407]
The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family and are activated by environmental stress. JNK is also activated by proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF and IL-1, and Toll-like receptor ligands. This pathway, therefore, can act as a critical convergence point in immune system signaling for both adaptive and innate responses. Like other MAPKs, the JNKs are activated via the sequential activation of protein kinases that includes two dual-specificity MAP kinase kinases (MKK4 and MKK7) and multiple MAP kinase kinase kinases. MAPKs, including JNKs, can be deactivated by a specialized group of phosphatases, called MAP kinase phosphatases. JNK phosphorylates and regulates the activity of transcription factors other than c-Jun, including ATF2, Elk-1, p53 and c-Myc and non-transcription factors, such as members of the Bcl-2 family. The pathway plays a critical role in cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and migration. In this review, an overview of the functions that are related to rheumatic diseases is presented. In addition, some diseases in which JNK participates will be highlighted.

[PMID: 15637069]
c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are a group of mitogen-activated protein kinase family members that are important in regulating cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis. Activation of the JNK pathway has been implicated in the formation of several human tumors. We have previously demonstrated that a 55-kDa JNK isoform is constitutively activated in 86% of human brain tumors and more recently demonstrated that this isoform is either JNK2alpha2 or JNK2beta2. Importantly, we have also found that among the 10 known JNK isoforms, the JNK2 isoforms are unique in their ability to autophosphorylate in vitro and in vivo. This does not require the participation of any upstream kinases and also leads to substrate kinase activity in vitro and in vivo. To clarify the mechanism of JNK2alpha2 autoactivation, we have generated a series of chimeric cDNAs joining portions of JNK1alpha2, which does not have detectable autophosphorylation activity, with portions of JNK2alpha2, which has the strongest autophosphorylation activity. Through in vivo and in vitro kinase assays, we were able to define a domain ranging from amino acids 218 to 226 within JNK2alpha2 that is required for its autophosphorylation. Mutation of JNK2alpha2 to its counterpart of JNK1alpha2 in this region abrogated the autophosphorylation activity and c-Jun substrate kinase activity in vivo and in vitro. Notably, switching of JNK1alpha2 to JNK2alpha2 at this 9-amino acid site enabled JNK1alpha2 to gain the autophosphorylation activity in vivo and in vitro. We also found two other functional sites that participate in JNK2alpha2 activity. One site ranging from amino acids 363 to 382 of JNK2alpha2 is required for efficient c-Jun binding in vitro, and a site ranging from amino acids 383 to 424 enhances autophosphorylation intensity, although it is not required for triggering the autophosphorylation in vitro. These findings have uncovered the regions required for JNK2alpha2 autophosphorylation, and this information could be used as potential targets to block JNK2alpha2 activation.

[PMID: 24285252]
Sinodielide A (SA) is a naturally occurring guaianolide, which is isolated from the root of Sinodielsia yunnanensis. This root, commonly found in Yunnan province, is used in traditional Chinese medicine as an antipyretic, analgesic and diaphoretic agent. A number of studies have reported that agents isolated from a species of Umbelliferae (Apiaceae) have antitumor activities. We previously reported, using combined treatments with this medicinal herb and hyperthermia at various temperatures, an enhanced cytotoxicity in the human prostate cancer androgen‑independent cell lines, PC3 and DU145, and analyzed the related mechanisms. In the present study, we investigated the effects of treatment with SA prior to hyperthermia on the thermosensitivity of DU145 cells, and the mechanisms related to the induction of apoptosis and G(2)/M cell cycle arrest via the activation of extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways, as well as the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathways. Cells were exposed to hyperthermia alone (40-44˚C) or hyperthermia in combination with SA. Lethal damage to cells treated with mild hyperthermia (40 or 42˚C) for up to 6 h was slight; however, hyperthermia in combination with SA synergistically enhanced thermosensivity. Lethal damage to cells treated with acute hyperthermia (43 or 44˚C) was more severe, but these effects were also enhanced and were more significant by the combined treatment with SA. The kinetics of apoptosis induction and cell cycle distribution were analyzed by flow cytometry. In addition, the levels of ERK1/2, JNK and Akt were determined by western blot analysis. The incidence of apoptotic cells after treatment with SA (20.0 µM) at 37˚C for 4 h, hyperthermia (44˚C) alone for 30 min, and the combination in sequence were examined. The sub-G1 division (%) in the diagram obtained by flow cytometry was applied to that assay. The percentage of apoptotic cells (10.53±5.02%) was higher at 48 h as compared to 0, 12 and 24 h after treatment. The distribution of DU145 cells in the G2/M cell cycle phase was markedly increased after 24 h of heating at 44˚C and after the combined treatment with heating and SA. The phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was reduced following treatment with heating and SA, while the levels of phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK) were markedly increased immediately after heating at 44˚C and when heating was combined with SA. By contrast, the levels of phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) were immediately increased only after heating at 44˚C. Thus, we concluded that SA exerts its thermosensitizing effects on DU145 cells by inhibiting the activation of the MAPK/ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.

[PMID: 23385061]
Tylophorine, a phenanthroindolizidine alkaloid, is the major medicinal constituent of herb Tylophora indica. Tylophorine treatment increased the accumulation of c-Jun protein, a component of activator protein 1 (AP1), in carcinoma cells. An in vitro kinase assay revealed that the resultant c-Jun phosphorylation was primarily mediated via activated c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK). Moreover, flow cytometry indicated that ectopically overexpressed c-Jun in conjunction with tylophorine significantly increased the number of carcinoma cells that were arrested at the G1 phase. The tylophorine-mediated downregulation of cyclin A2 protein levels is known to be involved in the primary G1 arrest. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays revealed that tylophorine enhanced the c-Jun downregulation of the cyclin A2 promoter activity upon increased binding of c-Jun to the deregulation AP1 site and decreased binding to the upregulation activating transcription factor (ATF) site in the cyclin A2 promoter, thereby reducing cyclin A2 expression. Further, biochemical studies using pharmacological inhibitors and RNA silencing approaches demonstrated that tylophorine-mediated elevation of the c-Jun protein level occurs primarily via two discrete prolonged signaling pathways: (i) the NF-κB/PKCδ_(MKK4)_JNK cascade, which phosphorylates c-Jun and increases its stability by slowing its ubiquitination, and (ii) the PI3K_PDK1_PP2A_eEF2 cascade, which sustains eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) activity and thus c-Jun protein translation. To the best of our knowledge, this report is the first to demonstrate the involvement of c-Jun in the anticancer activity of tylophorine and the release of c-Jun translation from a global translational blockade via the PI3K_PDK1_eEF2 signaling cascade.

[PMID: 24321566]
Steroid hormones exert genotropic effects through members of the nuclear hormone receptor family. In the present study, we examined the effects of 17β-estradiol (E2) on nitric oxide (NO) production following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation and investigated the mechanisms in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). E2 alone did not affect NO production. In contrast, E2 inhibited LPS-induced production of NO in BMMs. Using a cell-impermeable E2 conjugated to BSA (E2-BSA), which has been used to investigate the nongenomic effects of estrogen, we found that the increase in NO production induced by LPS was also attenuated. In addition, the intracellular estrogen receptor blocker, ICI 182780, only partially antagonized the total effects of E2 on LPS-stimulated NO production capacity. E2 also attenuated the LPS activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) but not that of extracellular-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). This attenuation was not abrogated by ICI 182780. Moreover, the p38 inhibitor, SB 203580, greatly reduced the LPS-induced NO production, and the remaining NO levels were no longer regulated by E2. Additionally, E2-BSA inhibited LPS-mediated changes in p38 MAPK activation to the same extent as E2. Moreover, E2 and E2-BSA inhibited LPS-induced activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) and activator protein 1 (AP-1). This inhibitory effect of E2 was only partially antagonized by ICI 182780. Taken together, these results suggest that E2 has an inhibitory effect on LPS-induced NO production in BMMs through inhibition of p38 MAPK phosphorylation, and blockade of NF-κB and AP-1 activation. These effects are mediated at least in part via a nongenomic pathway.

[PMID: 23147205]
The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway forms part of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways comprising a sequential three-tiered kinase cascade. Here, an upstream MAP3K (MEKK1) phosphorylates and activates a MAP2K (MKK4 and MKK7), which in turn phosphorylates and activates the MAPK, JNK. The C-terminal kinase domain of MEKK1 (MEKK-C) is constitutively active, while MKK4/7 and JNK are both activated by dual phosphorylation of S/Y, and T/Y residues within their activation loops, respectively. While improvements in the purification of large quantities of active JNKs have recently been made, inadequacies in their yield, purity, and the efficiency of their phosphorylation still exist. We describe a novel and robust method that further improves upon the purification of large yields of highly pure, phosphorylated JNK1β1, which is most suitable for biochemical and biophysical characterization. Codon harmonization of the JNK1β1 gene was used as a precautionary measure toward increasing the soluble overexpression of the kinase. While JNK1β1 and its substrate ATF2 were both purified to >99% purity as GST fusion proteins using GSH-agarose affinity chromatography and each cleaved from GST using thrombin, constitutively-active MEKK-C and inactive MKK4 were separately expressed in E. coli as thioredoxin-His(6)-tagged proteins and purified using urea refolding and Ni(2+)-IMAC, respectively. Activation of JNK1β1 was then achieved by successfully reconstituting the JNK MAPK activation cascade in vitro; MEKK-C was used to activate MKK4, which in turn was used to efficiently phosphorylate and activate large quantities of JNK1β1. Activated JNK1β1 was thereafter able to phosphorylate ATF2 with high catalytic efficiency.

[PMID: 8607977]
Tyrosine kinase growth factor receptors activate MAP kinase by a complex mechanism involving the SH2/3 protein Grb2, the exchange protein Sos, and Ras. The GTP-bound Ras protein binds to the Raf kinase and initiates a protein kinase cascade that leads to MAP kinase activation. Three MAP kinase kinase kinases have been described--c-Raf, c-Mos, and Mekk--that phosphorylate and activate Mek, the MAP kinase kinase. Activated Mek phosphorylates and activates MAP kinase. Subsequently, the activated MAP kinase translocates into the nucleus where many of the physiological targets of the MAP kinase signal transduction pathway are located. These substrates include transcription factors that are regulated by MAP kinase phosphorylation (e.g., Elk-1, c-Myc, c-Jun, c-Fos, and C/EBP beta). Thus the MAP kinase pathway represents a significant mechanism of signal transduction by growth factor receptors from the cell surface to the nucleus that results in the regulation of gene expression. Three MAP kinase homologs have been identified in the rat: Erk1, Erk2, and Erk3. Human MAP kinases that are similar to the rat Erk kinases have also been identified by molecular cloning. The human Erk1 protein kinase has been shown to be widely expressed as a 44-kDa protein in many tissues. The human Erk2 protein kinase is a 41-kDa protein that is expressed ubiquitously. In contrast, a human Erk3-related protein kinase has been found to be expressed at a high level only in heart muscle and brain. The loci of these MAP kinase genes are widely distributed within the human genome: erk2 at 22q11.2; erk1 at 16p11.2; and ek3-related at 18q12-21. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, five MAP kinase gene homologs have been described: smkl, mpk1, hog1, fus3, and kss1. Together, these kinases are a more diverse group than the human erks that have been identified. Thus the erks are likely to represent only one subgroup of a larger human MAP kinase gene family. A candidate for this extended family of MAP kinases is the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (Jnk), which binds to and phosphorylates the transcription factor c-Jun at the activating sites Ser-63 and Ser-73. Evidence is presented here to demonstrate that Jnk is a distant relative of the MAP kinase group that is activated by dual phosphorylation at Tyr and Thr.

[PMID: 15708845]
Exposure to sources of UV radiation, such as sunlight, induces a number of cellular alterations that are highly dependent on its ability to affect gene expression. Among them, the rapid activation of genes coding for two subfamilies of proto-oncoproteins, Fos and Jun, which constitute the AP-1 transcription factor, plays a key role in the subsequent regulation of expression of genes involved in DNA repair, cell proliferation, cell cycle arrest, death by apoptosis, and tissue and extracellular matrix remodeling proteases. Besides being regulated at the transcriptional level, Jun and Fos transcriptional activities are also regulated by phosphorylation as a result of the activation of intracellular signaling cascades. In this regard, the phosphorylation of c-Jun by UV-induced JNK has been readily documented, whereas a role for Fos proteins in UV-mediated responses and the identification of Fos-activating kinases has remained elusive. Here we identify p38 MAPKs as proteins that can associate with c-Fos and phosphorylate its transactivation domain both in vitro and in vivo. This phosphorylation is transduced into changes in its transcriptional ability as p38-activated c-Fos enhances AP1-driven gene expression. Our findings indicate that as a consequence of the activation of stress pathways induced by UV light, endogenous c-Fos becomes a substrate of p38 MAPKs and, for the first time, provide evidence that support a critical role for p38 MAPKs in mediating stress-induced c-Fos phosphorylation and gene transcription activation. Using a specific pharmacological inhibitor for p38alpha and -beta, we found that most likely these two isoforms mediate UV-induced c-Fos phosphorylation in vivo. Thus, these newly described pathways act concomitantly with the activation of c-Jun by JNK/MAPKs, thereby contributing to the complexity of AP1-driven gene transcription regulation.

[PMID: 24139673]
Cellular inflammatory response plays an important role in ischemic brain injury and anti-inflammatory treatments in stroke are beneficial. Dietary supplementation with docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) shows anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects against ischemic stroke. However, its effectiveness and its precise modes of neuroprotective action remain incompletely understood. This study provides evidence of an alternative target for DHA and sheds light on the mechanism of its physiological benefits. We report a global inhibitory effect of 3 consecutive days of DHA preadministration on circulating and intracerebral cellular inflammatory responses in a rat model of permanent cerebral ischemia. DHA exhibited a neuroprotective effect against ischemic deficits by reduction of behavioral disturbance, brain infarction, edema and blood-brain barrier disruption. The results of enzymatic assay, Western blot, real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometric analysis revealed that DHA reduced central macrophages/microglia activation, leukocyte infiltration and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression and peripheral leukocyte activation after cerebral ischemia. In parallel with these immunosuppressive phenomena, DHA attenuated post-stroke oxidative stress, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation, c-Jun phosphorylation and activating protein-1 (AP-1) activation but further elevated ischemia-induced NF-E2-related factor-2 (Nrf2) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression. DHA treatment also had an immunosuppressive effect in lipopolysaccharide/interferon-γ-stimulated glial cultures by attenuating JNK phosphorylation, c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1 activation and augmenting Nrf2 and HO-1 expression. In summary, we have shown that DHA exhibited neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects against ischemic brain injury and these effects were accompanied by decreased oxidative stress and JNK/AP-1 signaling as well as enhanced Nrf2/HO-1 expression.

[PMID: 24270002]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by accumulation of two misfolded and aggregated proteins, β-amyloid and hyperphosphorylated tau. Both cellular systems responsible for clearance of misfolded and aggregated proteins, the lysosomal and the proteasomal, have been shown to be malfunctioning in the aged brain and more so in patients with neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. This malfunction could be contributing to β-amyloid and tau accumulation, eventually aggregating in plaques and tangles. We have investigated the impact of decreased proteasome activity on tau phosphorylation as well as on microtubule stability and transport. To do this, we used our recently developed neuronal model where human SH-SY5Y cells obtain neuronal morphology and function through differentiation. We found that exposure to low doses of the proteasome inhibitor MG-115 caused tau phosphorylation, microtubule destabilization and disturbed neuritic transport. Furthermore, reduced proteasome activity activated several proteins implicated in tau phosphorylation and AD pathology, including c-Jun N-terminal kinase, c-Jun and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) 1/2. Restoration of the microtubule transport was achieved by inhibiting ERK 1/2 activation, and simultaneous inhibition of both ERK 1/2 and c-Jun reversed the proteasome inhibition-induced tau phosphorylation. Taken together, this study suggests that a decrease in proteasome activity can, through activation of c-Jun and ERK 1/2, result in several events related to neurodegenerative diseases. Restoration of proteasome activity or modulation of ERK 1/2 and c-Jun function can open new treatment possibilities against neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

[PMID: 24144051]
Many clinical cases have been reported where epilepsy profoundly influenced the pathophysiological function of the heart; however, the underlying mechanisms were not elucidated. We use the tremor (TRM) rat as an animal model of epilepsy to investigate the potential mechanisms of myocardial injury. Cardiac functions were assessed by arrhythmia score, heart rate, heart:body mass ratio, and hemodynamic parameters including left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), and maximum rate of left ventricular pressure rise and fall (+dp/dtmax and -dp/dtmax). Catecholamine level was detected by HPLC. Apoptotic index was estimated by TUNEL assay. The expressions of Bcl-2, Bax, caspase-3, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK), c-Jun NH2-terminal protein kinases (JNK), and p38 were evaluated by Western blot. The results indicated that there existed cardiac dysfunction and cardiomyocyte apoptosis, accompanied by increasing catecholamine levels in TRM rats. Further investigation revealed that apoptosis was mediated by reducing Bcl-2, upregulating Bax, and activating caspase-3. Additional experiments demonstrated that P-ERK1/2 was decreased, whereas P-JNK and P-p38 were up-regulated. Our results suggest that the sympathetic nervous system activation and cardiomyocyte apoptosis are involved in the myocardial injury of TRM rats. The mechanisms of apoptosis might be associated with the activation of the mitochondria-initiated and the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.

[PMID: 24321066]
To investigate the effects of antidepressant citalopram on the gene expressions of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), and to discuss the impacts of citalopram on p38 and c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family in microglial cells. BV2 cells were induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to produce TNF-α and IL-1β. After pretreatment with citalopram (20 μmol/L) for 4 h, the mRNA levels of TNF-α and IL-1β were measured by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR); after pretreatment for 24 h, the protein levels of TNF-α and IL-1β were analyzed by ELISA; the effects of citalopram on the phosphorylation of p38MAPK and JNK were observed after pretreatment for 30 min. Citalopram significantly inhibited the mRNA and protein expressions of TNF-α and IL-1β, and the phosphorylation of p38MAPK and JNK. Citalopram may play the anti-inflammatory role by inhibiting MAPK pathway in microglial cells.