[PMID: 24806082]
A wide variety of functions has been attributed to ghrelin, a peptide hormone secreted in the stomach. The objective of the study was to assess the association of ghrelin concentrations with body composition among Iranian children. In this study, blood samples of 57 boys and 54 girls aged 6-10 were collected to measure ghrelin levels. Fat mass (FM) and fat-free mass (FFM) were examined by body composition analyzer. Actigraph GT3X was administered to assess children's physical activity and sleep. Data were analyzed using linear regression models. All measured parameters did not differ between genders except for sleep time which was higher and sleep efficacy which was lower in boys compared with girls. None of the FM and FFM indices studied in boys was significantly associated with ghrelin levels. In girls, however, ghrelin concentrations were significantly associated with FM (β = 0.04, P = 0.01), fat mass index (β = 0.07, P = 0.008), and fat-free mass index (β = 0.08, P = 0.04) and near-significantly associated with FFM (β = 0.03, P = 0.09) after adjusting for age, physical activity, sleep, and dietary intake. Girls with higher ghrelin levels were more likely to have increased total FM and FFM. Conversely, body composition was not associated with ghrelin levels in boys. Consequently, ghrelin may influence the gender-related differences of body composition during childhood in girls. But, further study is needed to confirm our findings.

[PMID: 17101319]
Ghrelin is secreted by the stomach and stimulates food intake. Obese individuals have lower fasting plasma ghrelin levels but increased appetite, suggesting greater responses to endogenous ghrelin in obesity. The aim of this study was to compare effects of exogenous ghrelin (at a dose that stimulates growth hormone [GH] release in the physiologic range) versus placebo on gastric emptying, gastric volume, and postprandial symptoms and determine whether body mass (ranging from normal weight to obesity) influences responses to ghrelin. After intravenous bolus synthetic human ghrelin (0.33 mug/kg) or saline, we measured plasma GH, gastric volume, and gastric emptying by combined (99m)Tc-single-photon emission computed tomography and scintigraphy ((111)In egg meal, 300 kcal) and postprandial symptoms using visual analogue scales. In 25 obese subjects (5 men and 20 women; body mass index [BMI], 36 +/- 4 kg/m(2)) and 13 female normal-weight (BMI, 22 +/- 2 kg/m(2)) subjects of similar ages, ghrelin increased GH levels (15.0 +/- 2.4 ng/mL) at 40 minutes postinjection and tended to decrease fasting gastric volumes compared with placebo (P = .059). There were no effects of BMI on treatment response and no differences between ghrelin and saline on postprandial (P = .09) or change in (postprandial minus fasting) gastric volumes, gastric emptying, or aggregate postprandial symptoms. Effects of ghrelin did not differ between obese and normal-weight participants. At doses that stimulate physiologic GH plasma levels, synthetic ghrelin tended to decrease fasting gastric volumes without altering postprandial volumes or gastric emptying in a predominantly female cohort. The data are not consistent with the hypothesis that higher body mass is associated with increased gastric responsiveness to ghrelin.

[PMID: 21035199]
Ghrelin is a peptide hormone produced and secreted in the stomach. Numerous studies over the past decade demonstrate its importance in food intake, body-weight regulation and glucose homeostasis. These effects are driven largely by the high expression of the ghrelin receptor (GHSR1a) in the hypothalamus. However, GHSR1a is also expressed in numerous extra-hypothalamic neuronal populations, suggesting that ghrelin has physiological functions besides those involved in metabolic functions. In this review, I focus on increasing evidence that ghrelin has important roles in extra-hypothalamic functions, including learning and memory, reward and motivation, anxiety and depression, and neuroprotection. Furthermore, I discuss how the recently demonstrated role of ghrelin in promoting survival during periods of caloric restriction could contribute to its inherent neuroprotective and neuromodulatory properties.

[PMID: 19009647]
Ghrelin is primarily secreted from the stomach and has been implicated in the coordination of eating behavior and weight regulation. Ghrelin also plays an essential role in the mechanism of gastric mucosal defense. Thus, it is important to clarify which diseases primarily influence changes in plasma ghrelin concentrations. Helicobacter pylori (H pylori) infection is involved in the pathogenesis of gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcer, gastric carcinoma, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. H pylori eradication is related to body weight change. Compared, H pylori infected and negative subjects with normal body mass index, plasma ghrelin concentration, gastric ghrelin mRNA, and the number of ghrelin producing cells in gastric mucosa are significantly lower in H pylori infected subjects than in H pylori-negative controls. Plasma ghrelin concentration decreases with the progression of gastric atrophy. Impaired gastric ghrelin production in association with atrophic gastritis induced by H pylori infection accounts for the decrease in plasma ghrelin concentration. However, the ratio of plasma acylated ghrelin to total ghrelin levels is higher in patients with chronic atrophic gastritis than in healthy subjects. This may result from the compensatory increase in plasma active ghrelin concentration in response to gastric atrophy. After H pylori eradication, gastric preproghrelin mRNA expression is increased nearly 4-fold in most cases. However, changes in plasma ghrelin concentrations before and after H pylori cure are not associated with the gastric ghrelin production. Plasma ghrelin changes are inversely correlated with both body weight change and initial plasma ghrelin levels.

[PMID: 22231739]
Ghrelin is secreted mainly in the stomach and plays a role in food intake regulation. Morbidly obese (MO) individuals report a decline in appetite after sleeve gastrectomy (SG), presumably due, in part, to ghrelin cell removal. Ghrelin cell distribution and expression were determined in three areas of resected stomach specimens from MO patients subjected to SG. Resected stomach specimens from 20 MO patients undergoing SG were analyzed. Real-time polymerase chain reaction of ghrelin mRNA and immunohistostaining for ghrelin cells in three stomach regions (fundus, body, and pre-antral areas) were performed. Body mass index (BMI) and total plasma ghrelin levels were obtained before and 3 months postoperatively. Ghrelin mRNA was detected throughout the stomach, its expression decreasing from the fundus towards the antrum. The relative quantification for ghrelin mRNA expression was 0.043, 0.026, and 0.015 at the fundus, body, and pre-antral region, respectively (P = 0.05, fundus vs. pre-antral region). Average ghrelin cell counts declined from 60 ± 40 to 45 ± 20 and 39 ± 13 cells/high power fields in the fundus, body, and pre-antral region, respectively. Three months after surgery, total plasma ghrelin levels decreased from 1,676 ± 470 to 1,179 ± 188 pg/ml (P < 0.00001) and BMI dropped from 46 ± 6 to 38 ± 5 kg/m2 (P < 0.00001). Distribution and expression of ghrelin-secreting cells throughout the stomach were defined, emphasizing the importance of meticulous resection of the fundus during SG for maximal ghrelin cell removal.

[PMID: 15648018]
Ghrelin is a recently described hormone secreted by the stomach. Ghrelin administration in ad-libitum-fed rodents was shown to increase appetite as well as body weight and body fat content, showing metabolic effects of ghrelin in vivo and suggesting its involvement in the pathogenesis of obesity. However, plasma ghrelin concentration was shown to be inversely correlated with body weight and body fat in people and rodents. Increased plasma ghrelin concentration was also reported during diet-induced weight loss and in malnourished states. These findings suggest that circulating ghrelin is regulated by nutritional state and body fat with a feedback mechanism opposing changes in body composition, with a potential key adaptive role during calorie restriction. Plasma ghrelin concentration was shown to be increased in advanced renal failure and hemodialysis patients. The known metabolic effects of ghrelin and the potential implications of hyperghrelinemia in kidney disease will be discussed in this article.

[PMID: 17646723]
Ghrelin is a hormone secreted mainly in the stomach which stimulates appetite and food intake. Endocrine factors are among the causes of anorexia in elderly people. The main objective of the present study was to examine the effect of age on ghrelin levels in non-institutionalized elderly people. Observational, cross-sectional, population-based study. A random sample of men aged 70 yr or older was taken from the municipal census. All participants underwent a physical examination which measured weight and height, grip strength, functional capacity (according to the Barthel Index) and nutritional status (according to the short form of the Mini Nutritional Assessment). Blood was taken for basic biochemical analysis, determination of somatotropic, corticotropic, and gonadotropic hormones, and for measurement of ghrelin and cholecystokinin. 152 men with a mean (SD) age of 76.7 (5.4) yr were recruited. Mean ghrelin levels were 1143 (401) pg/ml. A weak negative correlation was found between ghrelin levels and age (r=-0.16, p=0.057). Multiple linear regression analysis showed a significant and independent effect of age (beta=-12.1, p=0.049), body mass index (BMI) (beta=-22.0, p=0.021), and creatinine levels (beta=407.7, p=0.002) on ghrelin. No correlations with age and BMI were found for cholecystokinin. There is a slight decrease in ghrelin levels with age in older men aged 70 yr or more, although the clinical relevance of this finding remains unclear.

[PMID: 19129426]
Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid peptide secreted mainly by the stomach. Acyl-ghrelin, which binds to and activates the growth hormone secretagogue receptor type 1a (GHS-R1a), is considered to be the active form for its orexigenic effects. It has been demonstrated that peripheral administration of ghrelin stimulates food intake and adiposity in rodents and humans. Accordingly, different approaches to antagonize ghrelin/GHS-R1a signaling have been pursued for the treatment of obesity. In the present study, we generated and characterized high-affinity anti-acyl ghrelin-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). In vitro, the lead mAb (33A) displayed specific binding to acyl-ghrelin, with an estimated K(d) value < 100 pM. In recombinant receptor cell-based assays, 33A dose-dependently inhibited the ghrelin-mediated calcium signal, with an IC(50) of approximately 3.5 nM. In vivo, ghrelin dose-dependently stimulated food intake in mice, and this effect was fully blocked by a single injection of 33A. In a 4-week chronic study, 33A was shown to effectively bind to endogenous acyl-ghrelin; however, long-term administration of 33A did not affect food intake or body weight gain in a mouse model of diet-induced obesity. Our results indicate that peripheral neutralization of ghrelin can suppress appetite stimulated by a transient surge in ghrelin levels. The lack of long-term effects on body weight control by 33A suggests that compensatory mechanisms may contribute to the regulation of energy balance.

[PMID: 18350524]
Identification of ghrelin started with the discovery of growth hormone secretagogues, continued with the description of ghrelin receptors and ended with the elucidation of the chemical structure of ghrelin. However, several issues concerning the role of ghrelin in physiological and pathophysiological processes are still under investigation. Most of the ghrelin produced in the body is secreted in the stomach, but it is also expressed in the hypothalamus, pituitary, pancreas, intestine, kidney, heart and gonads. Ghrelin stimulates growth hormone secretion via growth hormone secretagogue receptors. Ghrelin secretion in the stomach depends on both acute and chronic changes in nutritional status and energy balance. Current data support the hypothesis that the stomach, in addition to its important role in digestion, not only influences pituitary hormone secretion but, via ghrelin production, it also sends orexigenic (appetite increasing) signals to hypothalamic nuclei involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis. In addition to these main effects, ghrelin influences insulin secretion and glucose metabolism and it may exert potentially important effects on cardiovascular and gastrointestinal functions. Because of its effects on a large number of physiological functions, ghrelin may be involved in the pathomechanism of several human disorders, including disturbances of appetite, energy homeostasis and glucose metabolism. Further research might lead to a better understanding of the pathophysiology of ghrelin and might provide more effective therapy for the above disorders.

[PMID: 26019019]
Ghrelin is mainly secreted from the stomach and plays a role in appetite, weight gain, and the promotion of a positive energy balance. The levels of ghrelin decrease immediately after gastrectomy. We herein investigated the effect of the administration of synthetic ghrelin to treat postoperative severe weight loss in a prospective, one-arm clinical trial to develop new strategies for weight gain. Ten patients (four distal gastrectomy and six total gastrectomy) received ghrelin treatment. Eligibility criteria included patients who underwent gastrectomy more than 1 year previously and 15 % body weight loss from the preoperative weight or a body mass index under 19. Synthetic human ghrelin (3 μg/kg) was administered to the patients twice a day for 1 week. Oral intake of calories, appetite [evaluated using the visual analog scale (VAS)], and body weight before and during administration of ghrelin were compared. There was a significant difference in the oral food intake before and during treatment (before treatment: 1236 ± 409 kcal vs. during treatment: 1398 ± 365 kcal, p = 0.039), and the VAS for appetite significantly improved with each day of ghrelin administration (p < 0.05). Significant amounts of body weight were gained (39.5 ± 6.8 vs. 40.1 ± 6.9, p = 0.037). The administration of synthetic ghrelin improved the food intake and was effective for treating appetite loss and body weight loss. Synthetic ghrelin may be a promising new therapy for severe body weight loss following gastrectomy.

[PMID: 27376422]
Ghrelin is a gut peptide composed of 28 amino acids mostly secreted in the gastric fundus mucosa. It was isolated and described in 1999 by Kojima et al. and only three years later its specific receptor, GHSR1a, was also identified. Ghrelin, the endogenous ligand for the GH secretagogue receptor, is the only peripheral orexigenic hormone that activates the receptors to be found especially in the appetite center (hypothalamus and pituitary gland). Ghrelin is present in human plasma in two forms: an inactive form known as deacylated ghrelin, and an active form called acylated ghrelin synthesized under the action of ghrelin O-acyltransferase enzyme (GOAT). The literature even mentions an extremely complex ghrelin/GOAT/GHSR system involved in the regulation of human energy, metabolism and adaptation of energy homeostasis to environmental changes. In humans, there is a preprandial rise and a postprandial fall in plasma ghrelin levels, which strongly suggest that the peptide plays a physiological role in meal initiation and may be employed in determining the amount and quality of ingested food. Besides the stimulation of food intake, ghrelin determines a decrease in energy expenditure and promotes the storage of fatty acids in adipocytes. Thus, in the human body ghrelin induces a positive energy balance, an increased adiposity gain, as well as an increase in caloric storage, seen as an adaptive mechanism to caloric restriction conditions. In the current world context, when we are witnessing an increasing availability of food and a reduction of energy expenditure to a minimum level, these mechanisms have become pathogenic. As a consequence, the hypothesis that ghrelin is involved in the current obesity epidemic has been embraced by many scholars and researchers.

[PMID: 12176667]
Ghrelin, a 28-amino-acid peptide, has recently been isolated from the rat stomach as an endogenous ligand for the GH secretagogue receptor. We have reported previously that central or peripheral administration of ghrelin stimulates food intake, and the secretion of GH and gastric acid in rats. In the present study, we investigated how much endogenous centrally released ghrelin is involved in the control of food intake and body weight gain. We also examined the profile of ghrelin secretion from the stomach by RIA using two kinds of anti-ghrelin antiserum, one raised against the N-terminal ([Cys(12)]-ghrelin[1-11]) region and one raised against the C-terminal ([Cys(0)]-ghrelin [13-28]) region of the peptide. The former antibody recognizes specifically ghrelin with n- octanoylated Ser 3 (acyl ghrelin), and does not recognize des-acyl ghrelin. The latter also recognizes des-acyl ghrelin (i.e. total ghrelin). Intracerebroventricular treatment with the anti-ghrelin antiserum against the N-terminal region twice a day for 5 days decreased significantly both daily food intake and body weight. Des-acyl ghrelin levels were significantly higher in the gastric vein than in the trunk. Either fasting for 12 h, administration of gastrin or cholecystokinin resulted in increase of both acyl and des-acyl ghrelin levels. The ghrelin levels exhibited a diurnal pattern, with the bimodal peaks occurring before dark and light periods. These two peaks were consistent with maximum and minimum volumes of gastric content respectively. These results suggest that (1) endogenous centrally released ghrelin participates in the regulation of food intake and body weight, (2) acyl ghrelin is secreted from the stomach, (3) intestinal hormones stimulate ghrelin release from the stomach, and (4) regulation of the diurnal rhythm of ghrelin is complex, since ghrelin secretion is augmented under conditions of both gastric emptying and filling.

[PMID: 17983856]
Ghrelin is produced primarily in the stomach in response to hunger, and circulates in the blood. Plasma ghrelin levels increase during fasting and decrease after ingesting glucose and lipid, but not protein. The efferent vagus nerve contributes to the fasting-induced increase in ghrelin secretion. Ghrelin secreted by the stomach stimulates the afferent vagus nerve and promotes food intake. Ghrelin also stimulates pituitary gland secretion of growth hormone (GH) via the afferent vagus nerve. GH inhibits stomach ghrelin secretion. These findings indicate that the vagal circuit between the central nervous system and stomach has a crucial role in regulating plasma ghrelin levels. Moreover, body mass index modulates plasma ghrelin levels. In a lean state and anorexia nervosa, plasma ghrelin levels are increased, whereas in obesity, except in Prader-Willi syndrome, plasma ghrelin levels are decreased and the feeding- and sleeping-induced decline in plasma ghrelin levels is disrupted. There are two forms of ghrelin: active n-octanoyl-modified ghrelin and des-acyl ghrelin. Fasting increases both ghrelin types compared with the fed state. Hyperphagia and obesity are likely to decrease plasma des-acyl ghrelin, but not n-octanoyl-modified ghrelin levels. Hypothalamic serum and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase-1 and serotonin 5-HT2C/1B receptor gene expression levels are likely to be proportional to plasma des-acyl ghrelin levels during fasting, whereas they are likely to be inversely proportional to plasma des-acyl ghrelin levels in an increased energy storage state such as obesity. Thus, a dysfunction of the ghrelin feedback systems might contribute to the pathophysiology of obesity and eating disorders.

[PMID: 29392854]
Ghrelin, an orexigenic peptide, is secreted from endocrine cells in the gastric mucosa. Circulating levels rise in the preprandial phase, suggesting an anticipatory or cephalic phase of release, and decline in the postprandial phase, suggesting either the loss of a stimulatory factor or inhibition by factors released when nutrients enter the intestine. We hypothesized that vagal signals are not required for the (i) preprandial increase or (ii) postprandial suppression of ghrelin levels. Further, we wanted to investigate the hypothesis that (iii) glucagon-like peptide-1 might be implicated in the postprandial decline in ghrelin levels. We measured ghrelin levels in plasma from sham-feeding and meal studies carried out in vagotomized individuals and controls, and from a GLP-1 infusion study carried out in fasting healthy young individuals. We find that (i) ghrelin secretion is unchanged during indirect vagal stimulation as elicited by modified sham-feeding in vagotomized individuals and matched controls, (ii) ghrelin secretion is similarly suppressed after meal ingestion in vagotomized individuals and controls, and (iii) infusion of GLP-1 does not lower ghrelin levels. We conclude that for postprandial suppression of circulating ghrelin levels, a circulating factor (but not GLP-1) or short (duodeno-gastric) reflexes seem to be implicated.

[PMID: 12352514]
Ghrelin is secreted by the stomach, the hypothalamus, and the placenta in humans and has growth hormone-secreting and orexigenic properties. Leptin is secreted mainly by the adipocyte, plays a major role in energy balance, and reflects fat mass in infants as well as adults. Leptin and ghrelin central effects are mediated, at least partly, through the neuropeptide Y/Y1 receptor pathway in the hypothalamus. We determined whether ghrelin is also present in the fetus and investigated its relationship to leptin, growth hormone, birth weight, and calf and abdominal circumferences in 90 full-term neonates. Immunoreactive ghrelin was detected in all cord samples (mean +/- SD, 187 +/- 88 pmol/L; range, 66-594 pmol/L). In contrast to leptin, ghrelin concentrations of boys and girls were not statistically different. In female neonates, ghrelin is inversely correlated with anthropometric measures. In male neonates, ghrelin is positively correlated with leptin and negatively with growth hormone. The presence of significant ghrelin concentrations in all neonates before the first feeding is intriguing. Unlike the fairly constant concentrations and effects of leptin over the short term, the wide variability of ghrelin concentrations observed in newborns raises the possibility that ghrelin secretion causes short-term changes in feeding behavior. We suggest that ghrelin may play a physiologic role in the initiation of feeding.

[PMID: 17096064]
Ghrelin is a body weight-regulating peptide produced and secreted primarily by the gastric mucosa. Helicobacter pylori infection impairs gastric ghrelin production, leading to a lower plasma ghrelin concentration. However, the effect of H. pylori eradication on plasma ghrelin levels and its relation to body weight change after H. pylori cure are still uncertain. We examined the association of plasma ghrelin levels with gastric ghrelin production and body weight change before and after H. pylori eradication. Plasma ghrelin concentrations, gastric ghrelin expression, and body weight were determined in a total of 134 consecutive individuals before and 12 weeks after successful H. pylori eradication. Gastric ghrelin expression was evaluated by determining mRNA expression levels and the number of ghrelin-producing cells in gastric mucosa biopsy specimens by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Plasma ghrelin concentration increased in 50 patients and decreased in 84 patients after H. pylori eradication. After H. pylori cure, however, gastric preproghrelin mRNA expression was increased nearly fourfold (P < 0.0001), and the number of ghrelin-positive cells was increased or unchanged. In contrast, plasma ghrelin changes after H. pylori cure were inversely correlated with both body weight change (P < 0.0001) and initial plasma ghrelin levels (P < 0.0001). Changes in plasma ghrelin concentrations before and after H. pylori cure were inversely correlated with body weight change and initial plasma ghrelin levels but not with gastric ghrelin production in Japanese patients.

[PMID: 16254526]
Ghrelin, a recently discovered hormone mainly secreted by the stomach, has several metabolic functions including regulation of food intake, energy homeostasis and body weight. There are few studies on this hormone in healthy infants during the first year of life. The aim of this study was to examine the correlations between ghrelin and weight gain in healthy term infants in the first year of life. 104 healthy term infants aged 0 to 12 months were included in a cross-sectional study. Anthropometric measurements were assessed and mean weight gain was calculated. Serum ghrelin concentrations have been determined at least 3 hours after feeding by radioimmunoassay test. Ghrelin concentrations were correlated negatively to weight gain (r=-0.302; P=0.003) and positively to age (r = 0.412; P < 0.001), weight (r = 0.374; P < 0.001) and length (r=0.387; P<0.001). In breastfed infants a statistically significant negative correlation between ghrelin concentration and infant weight gain (r=-0.407; P=0.001) was observed, whereas in formula-fed infants this correlation was not statistically significant (r=-0.067; P=0.719). The negative correlation observed between ghrelin concentration and infant weight gain suggests that ghrelin might also play a role in the regulation of body weight in healthy infants with a physiologic energy balance. Further studies are needed to clarify how ghrelin might be involved in both short-term and long-term energy balance.

[PMID: 17251274]
Ghrelin, the only known orexigenic gut hormone, is secreted mainly from the stomach, increases with fasting and before meal initiation in humans and rats, and increases food intake after central or peripheral administration. To investigate sex differences in the action of ghrelin, we assessed the effects of exogenous ghrelin in intact male and female rats, the effects of exogenous ghrelin in ovariectomized (OVX) and estradiol (E2)-treated female rats, as well as the effects of OVX on plasma ghrelin and hypothalamic orexigneic neuropeptide expression in rats and on food intake and weight gain in transgenic mice lacking the ghrelin receptor (Ghsr(-/-) mice). Male and OVX female rats were significantly more sensitive than intact female rats to the orexigenic effects of both centrally (intra-third ventricular, i3vt, 0.01, 0.1, and 1.0 nmol) and systemically (ip, 3, 6, and 9 nmol) administered ghrelin. This difference is likely to be estradiol dependent because E2 attenuated the orexigenic action of ghrelin in OVX female and male rats. Furthermore, OVX increased food intake and body weight in wild-type mice, but not in Ghsr(-/-) mice, suggesting that OVX increases food intake by releasing ghrelin from a tonic inhibitory effect of estradiol. In addition, following OVX, there was an increase in plasma ghrelin that was temporally associated with increased food intake, body weight, and hypothalamic neuropeptide Y and Agouti-related protein mRNA expression. Collectively, these data suggest that estradiol inhibits the orexigenic action of ghrelin in females, that weight gain associated with OVX is ghrelin mediated, and that this endocrine interaction may account for an important sex differences in food intake and the regulation of body weight.