[PMID: 25432018]
EWS-FLI1 is an oncogenic fusion protein implicated in the development of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT). Using our previously reported lead compound 2 (YK-4-279), we designed and synthesized a focused library of analogues. The functional inhibition of the analogues was measured by an EWS-FLI1/NR0B1 reporter luciferase assay and a paired cell screening approach measuring effects on growth inhibition for human cells containing EWS-FLI1 (TC32 and TC71) and control PANC1 cell lines devoid of the oncoprotein. Our data revealed that substitution of electron donating groups at the para-position on the phenyl ring was the most favorable for inhibition of EWS-FLI1 by analogs of 2. Compound 9u (with a dimethylamino substitution) was the most active inhibitor with GI50 = 0.26 ± 0.1 μM. Further, a correlation of growth inhibition (EWS-FLI1 expressing TC32 cells) and the luciferase reporter activity was established (R(2) = 0.84). Finally, we designed and synthesized a biotinylated analogue and determined the binding affinity for recombinant EWS-FLI1 (Kd = 4.8 ± 2.6 μM).

[PMID: 21979944]
Ewing's sarcoma, a malignant bone tumor of children and young adults, is a member of the small-round-blue-cell tumor family. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs), which include peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), are characterized by chromosomal translocations that generate fusions between the EWS gene and ETS-family transcription factors, most commonly FLI1. The EWS-FLI1 fusion oncoprotein represents an attractive therapeutic target for treatment of Ewing's sarcoma. The cell of origin of ESFT and the molecular mechanisms by which EWS-FLI1 mediates tumorigenesis remain unknown, and few animal models of Ewing's sarcoma exist. Here, we report the use of zebrafish as a vertebrate model of EWS-FLI1 function and tumorigenesis. Mosaic expression of the human EWS-FLI1 fusion protein in zebrafish caused the development of tumors with histology strongly resembling that of human Ewing's sarcoma. The incidence of tumors increased in a p53 mutant background, suggesting that the p53 pathway suppresses EWS-FLI1-driven tumorigenesis. Gene expression profiling of the zebrafish tumors defined a set of genes that might be regulated by EWS-FLI1, including the zebrafish ortholog of a crucial EWS-FLI1 target gene in humans. Stable zebrafish transgenic lines expressing EWS-FLI1 under the control of the heat-shock promoter exhibit altered embryonic development and defective convergence and extension, suggesting that EWS-FLI1 interacts with conserved developmental pathways. These results indicate that functional targets of EWS-FLI1 that mediate tumorigenesis are conserved from zebrafish to human and provide a novel context in which to study the function of this fusion oncogene.

[PMID: 16206264]
The Ewing family of tumors harbors chromosomal translocations that join the N-terminal region of the EWS gene with the C-terminal region of several transcription factors of the ETS family, mainly FLI1, resulting in chimeric transcription factors that play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of Ewing tumors. To identify downstream targets of the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein, we established 293 cells expressing constitutively either the chimeric EWS/FLI1 or wild type FLI1 proteins and used cDNA arrays to identify genes differentially regulated by EWS/FLI1. DAX1 (NR0B1), an unusual orphan nuclear receptor involved in gonadal development, sex determination and steroidogenesis, showed a consistent up-regulation by EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein, but not by wild type FLI1. Specific induction of DAX1 by EWS/FLI1 was confirmed in two independent cell systems with inducible expression of EWS/FLI1. We also analyzed the expression of DAX1 in Ewing tumors and derived cell lines, as well as in other nonrelated small round cell tumors. DAX1 was expressed in all Ewing tumor specimens analyzed, and in seven out of eight Ewing tumor cell lines, but not in any neuroblastoma or embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, silencing of EWS/FLI1 by RNA interference in a Ewing tumor cell line markedly reduced the levels of DAX1 mRNA and protein, confirming that DAX1 up-regulation is dependent upon EWS/FLI1 expression. The high levels of DAX1 found in Ewing tumors and its potent transcriptional repressor activity suggest that the oncogenic effect of EWS/FLI1 may be mediated, at least in part, by the up-regulation of DAX1 expression.

[PMID: 18256529]
Ewing's sarcomas are characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocations expressing EWS-ETS fusion proteins, the most common of which is EWS-FLI.(1-5) EWS-FLI is an oncogenic transcription factor that regulates genes involved in tumorigenesis.(6,7) Because the Ewing's sarcoma cell of origin remains unknown, a variety of model systems have been developed to study EWS-FLI fusions,(8-14) and multiple microarray experiments describing potential EWS-FLI target genes have been reported.(8,10,11,13,15-21) Each model has potential benefits and drawbacks, but a large-scale comparison of these has not been reported. Herein we report a meta-analysis of the genes that are dysregulated by EWS-FLI in Ewing's sarcoma model systems. In general, EWS-FLI gain- and loss-of-function models in human cell types were well correlated to patient-derived tumor samples, while murine models were not. Using frequency analysis of dysregulated genes across multiple model systems, we identified a conserved "core" EWS-FLI transcriptional signature. This signature contained many of the genes known to be involved in the tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma, and also contained genes that have not been previously reported. Comparisons between the core EWS-FLI signature and published mesenchymal stem cell data support the recent assertion that mesenchymal stem cells are likely the Ewing's sarcoma precursor cell.(15) These results demonstrate the utility of using comparative analysis to validate model systems and emphasize the unique potential of this approach to identify both oncogenic and background cell signatures.

[PMID: 25162919]
Ewing sarcoma (ES) represents the paradigm of an aberrant E-twenty-six (ETS) oncogene-driven cancer. It is characterized by specific rearrangements of one of five alternative ETS family member genes with EWSR1. There is experimental evidence that the resulting fusion proteins act as aberrant transcription factors driving ES pathogenesis. The transcriptional gene regulatory network driven by EWS-ETS proteins provides the oncogenic engine to the tumor. Therefore, EWS-ETS and their downstream machinery are considered ideal tumor-specific therapeutic targets. This review critically discusses the literature on the development of EWS-ETS-directed ES targeting strategies considering current knowledge of EWS-ETS biology and cellular context. It focuses on determinants of EWS-FLI1 function with an emphasis on interactions with chromatin structure. We speculate about the relevance of poorly investigated aspects in ES research such as chromatin remodeling and DNA damage repair for the development of targeted therapies. This review questions the specificity of signature-based screening approaches to the identification of EWS-FLI1-targeted compounds. It challenges the view that targeting the downstream gene regulatory network carries potential for therapeutic breakthroughs because of resistance-inducing network rewiring. Instead, we propose to combine targeting of the fusion protein with epigenetic therapy as a future treatment strategy in ES.

[PMID: 19718047]
Ewing's sarcoma is a malignant bone-associated tumor of children and young adults. Most cases of Ewing's sarcoma express the EWS/FLI fusion protein. EWS/FLI functions as an aberrant ETS-type transcription factor and serves as the master regulator of Ewing's sarcoma-transformed phenotype. We recently showed that EWS/FLI regulates one of its key targets, NR0B1, through a GGAA-microsatellite in its promoter. Whether other critical EWS/FLI targets are also regulated by GGAA-microsatellites was unknown. In this study, we combined transcriptional analysis, whole genome localization data, and RNA interference knockdown to identify glutathione S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) as a critical EWS/FLI target gene in Ewing's sarcoma. We found that EWS/FLI directly binds the GSTM4 promoter, and regulates GSTM4 expression through a GGAA-microsatellite in its promoter. Reduction of GSTM4 levels caused a loss of oncogenic transformation. Furthermore, reduction of GSTM4 resulted in an increased sensitivity of Ewing's sarcoma cells to chemotherapeutic agents, suggesting a role for this protein in drug resistance. Consistent with this hypothesis, patients with Ewing's sarcoma whose tumors had higher levels of GSTM4 expression had worse outcomes than those with lower expression levels. These data show that GSTM4 contributes to the cancerous behavior of Ewing's sarcoma and define a wider role for GGAA-microsatellites in EWS/FLI function than previously appreciated. These data also suggest a novel therapeutic resistance mechanism, in which the central oncogenic abnormality directly regulates a resistance gene.

[PMID: 22241085]
Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are highly aggressive and highly metastatic tumors caused by a chromosomal fusion between the Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS) with the transcription factor FLI-1. However, expression of the EWS/FLI-1 chimeric oncogene by itself is insufficient for carcinogenesis, suggesting that additional events are required. Here, we report the identification of the Akt substrate PRAS40 as an EWS target gene. EWS negatively regulates PRAS40 expression by binding the 3' untranslated region in PRAS40 mRNA. ESFT cell proliferation was suppressed by treatment with an Akt inhibitor, and ESFT cell proliferation and metastatic growth were suppressed by siRNA-mediated PRAS40 knockdown. Furthermore, PRAS40 knockdown was sufficient to reverse an increased cell proliferation elicited by EWS knockdown. In support of a pathologic role for PRAS40 elevation in EFST, we documented inverse protein levels of EWS and PRAS40 in ESFT cells. Together, our findings suggest that PRAS40 promotes the development of ESFT and might therefore represent a novel therapeutic target in this aggressive disease.

[PMID: 16697960]
Our understanding of Ewing's sarcoma development mediated by the EWS/FLI fusion protein has been limited by a lack of knowledge regarding the tumor cell of origin. To circumvent this, we analyzed the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma itself. By combining retroviral-mediated RNA interference with reexpression studies, we show that ongoing EWS/FLI expression is required for the tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. We used this system to define the full complement of EWS/FLI-regulated genes in Ewing's sarcoma. Functional analysis revealed that NKX2.2 is an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is necessary for oncogenic transformation in this tumor. Thus, we developed a highly validated transcriptional profile for the EWS/FLI fusion protein and identified a critical target gene in Ewing's sarcoma development.

[PMID: 25483190]
Ewing sarcoma is a malignant bone cancer that primarily occurs in children and adolescents. Eighty-five percent of Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the presence of the aberrant chimeric EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. Previously, we demonstrated that an interaction between EWS/FLI1 and wild-type EWS led to the inhibition of EWS activity and mitotic dysfunction. Although defective mitosis is considered to be a critical step in cancer initiation, it is unknown how interference with EWS contributes to Ewing sarcoma formation. Here, we demonstrate that EWS/FLI1- and EWS-knockdown cells display a high incidence of defects in the midzone, a midline structure located between segregating chromatids during anaphase. Defects in the midzone can lead to the failure of cytokinesis and can result in the induction of aneuploidy. The similarity among the phenotypes of EWS/FLI1- and EWS siRNA-transfected HeLa cells points to the inhibition of EWS as the key mechanism for the induction of midzone defects. Supporting this observation, the ectopic expression of EWS rescues the high incidence of midzone defects observed in Ewing sarcoma A673 cells. We discovered that EWS interacts with Aurora B kinase, and that EWS is also required for recruiting Aurora B to the midzone. A domain analysis revealed that the R565 in the RGG3 domain of EWS is essential for both Aurora B interaction and the recruitment of Aurora B to the midzone. Here, we propose that the impairment of EWS-dependent midzone formation via the recruitment of Aurora B is a potential mechanism of Ewing sarcoma development.

[PMID: 17250957]
Sarcomas account for less than 10% of all human malignancies that are believed to originate from as yet poorly defined mesenchymal progenitor cells. They constitute some of the most aggressive adult and childhood cancers in that they have a high metastatic proclivity and are typically refractory to conventional chemo- and radiation therapy. Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family tumors (ESFT) and the second most common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy of children and young adults. It is associated in 85% of cases with the t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation that generates fusion of the 5' segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of the ETS family gene FLI-1. The resulting EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is believed to behave as an aberrant transcriptional activator that contributes to ESFT development by altering the expression of its target genes in a permissive cellular environment. Although ESFTs are among the best studied sarcomas, the mechanisms involved in EWS-FLI-1-induced transformation require further elucidation and the primary cells from which ESFTs originate need to be identified. This review will highlight some of the most recent discoveries in the field of Ewing sarcoma biology and origins.

[PMID: 22723308]
Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric cancer of the bone and soft tissue, in which patients whose tumors have a poor histologic response to initial chemotherapy have a poor overall prognosis. Therefore, it is important to identify molecules involved in resistance to chemotherapy. Herein, we show that the DNA repair protein and transcriptional cofactor, EYA3, is highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma tumor samples and cell lines compared with mesenchymal stem cells, the presumed cell-of-origin of Ewing sarcoma, and that it is regulated by the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein transcription factor. We further show that EWS/FLI1 mediates upregulation of EYA3 via repression of miR-708, a miRNA that targets the EYA3 3'-untranslated region, rather than by binding the EYA3 promoter directly. Importantly, we show that high levels of EYA3 significantly correlate with low levels of miR-708 in Ewing sarcoma samples, suggesting that this miR-mediated mechanism of EYA3 regulation holds true in human cancers. Because EYA proteins are important for cell survival during development, we examine, and show, that loss of EYA3 decreases survival of Ewing sarcoma cells. Most importantly, knockdown of EYA3 in Ewing sarcoma cells leads to sensitization to DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics used in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma, and as expected, after chemotherapeutic treatment, EYA3 knockdown cells repair DNA damage less effectively than their control counterparts. These studies identify EYA3 as a novel mediator of chemoresistance in Ewing sarcoma and define the molecular mechanisms of both EYA3 overexpression and of EYA3-mediated chemoresistance.

[PMID: 23750284]
Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone malignancy in children and young adults. It is driven by oncogenic fusion proteins (i.e. EWS/FLI1) acting as aberrant transcription factors that upregulate and downregulate target genes, leading to cellular transformation. Thus, identificating these target genes and understanding their contribution to Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis are key for the development of new therapeutic strategies. In this study we show that lysyl oxidase (LOX), an enzyme involved in maintaining structural integrity of the extracellular matrix, is downregulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and in consequence it is not expressed in Ewing sarcoma cells and primary tumors. Using a doxycycline inducible system to restore LOX expression in an Ewing sarcoma derived cell line, we showed that LOX displays tumor suppressor activities. Interestingly, we showed that the tumor suppressor activity resides in the propeptide domain of LOX (LOX-PP), an N-terminal domain produced by proteolytic cleavage during the physiological processing of LOX. Expression of LOX-PP reduced cell proliferation, cell migration, anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and formation of tumors in immunodeficient mice. By contrast, the C-terminal domain of LOX, which contains the enzymatic activity, had the opposite effects, corroborating that the tumor suppressor activity of LOX is mediated exclusively by its propeptide domain. Finally, we showed that LOX-PP inhibits ERK/MAPK signalling pathway, and that many pathways involved in cell cycle progression were significantly deregulated by LOX-PP, providing a mechanistic explanation to the cell proliferation inhibition observed upon LOX-PP expression. In summary, our observations indicate that deregulation of the LOX gene participates in Ewing sarcoma development and identify LOX-PP as a new therapeutic target for one of the most aggressive paediatric malignancies. These findings suggest that therapeutic strategies based on the administration of LOX propeptide or functional analogues could be useful for the treatment of this devastating paediatric cancer.

[PMID: 24481407]
Transcription factors have long been deemed 'undruggable' targets for therapeutics. Enhanced recognition of protein biochemistry as well as the need to have more targeted approaches to treat cancer has rendered transcription factors approachable for therapeutic development. Since transcription factors lack enzymatic domains, the specific targeting of these proteins has unique challenges. One challenge is the hydrophobic microenvironment that affects small molecules gaining access to block protein interactions. The most attractive transcription factors to target are those formed from tumor specific chromosomal translocations that are validated oncogenic driver proteins. EWS-FLI1 is a fusion protein that results from the pathognomonic translocation of Ewing sarcoma (ES). Our past work created the small molecule YK-4-279 that blocks EWS-FLI1 from interacting with RNA Helicase A (RHA). To fulfill long-standing promise in the field by creating a clinically useful drug, steps are required to allow for in vivo administration. These investigations identify the need for continuous presence of the small molecule protein-protein inhibitor for a period of days. We describe the pharmacokinetics of YK-4-279 and its individual enantiomers. In vivo studies confirm prior in vitro experiments showing (S)-YK-4-279 as the EWS-FLI1 specific enantiomer demonstrating both induction of apoptosis and reduction of EWS-FLI1 regulated caveolin-1 protein. We have created the first rat xenograft model of ES, treated with (S)-YK-4-279 dosing based upon PK modeling leading to a sustained complete response in 2 of 6 ES tumors. Combining laboratory studies, pharmacokinetic measurements, and modeling has allowed us to create a paradigm that can be optimized for in vivo systems using both in vitro data and pharmacokinetic simulations. Thus, (S)-YK-4-279 as a small molecule drug is ready for continued development towards a first-in-human, first-in-class, clinical trial.

[PMID: 20691659]
Ewing sarcoma is primarily caused by a t(11;22) chromosomal translocation encoding the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. To exert its oncogenic function, EWS-FLI1 acts as an aberrant transcription factor, broadly altering the gene expression profile of tumor cells. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB) is a tightly regulated transcription factor controlling cell survival, proliferation and differentiation, as well as tumorigenesis. NFkappaB activity is very low in unstimulated Ewing sarcoma cells, but can be induced in response to tumor necrosis factor (TNF). We wondered whether NFkappaB activity could be modulated by EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma. Using a knockdown approach in Ewing sarcoma cells, we demonstrated that EWS-FLI1 has no influence on NFkappaB basal activity, but impairs TNF-induced NFkappaB-driven transcription, at least in part through inhibition of NFkappaB binding to DNA. We detected an in vivo physical interaction between the fusion protein and NFkappaB p65, which could mediate these effects. Our findings suggest that, besides directly controlling the activity of its primary target promoters, EWS-FLI1 can also indirectly influence gene expression in tumor cells by modulating the activity of key transcription factors such as NFkappaB.

[PMID: 25401475]
Chromosomal translocation that results in fusion of the genes encoding RNA-binding protein EWS and transcription factor FLI1 (EWS-FLI1) is pathognomonic for Ewing sarcoma. EWS-FLI1 alters gene expression through mechanisms that are not completely understood. We performed RNA sequencing (RNAseq) analysis on primary pediatric human mesenchymal progenitor cells (pMPCs) expressing EWS-FLI1 in order to identify gene targets of this oncoprotein. We determined that long noncoding RNA-277 (Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 [EWSAT1]) is upregulated by EWS-FLI1 in pMPCs. Inhibition of EWSAT1 expression diminished the ability of Ewing sarcoma cell lines to proliferate and form colonies in soft agar, whereas EWSAT1 inhibition had no effect on other cell types tested. Expression of EWS-FLI1 and EWSAT1 repressed gene expression, and a substantial fraction of targets that were repressed by EWS-FLI1 were also repressed by EWSAT1. Analysis of RNAseq data from primary human Ewing sarcoma further supported a role for EWSAT1 in mediating gene repression. We identified heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (HNRNPK) as an RNA-binding protein that interacts with EWSAT1 and found a marked overlap in HNRNPK-repressed genes and those repressed by EWS-FLI1 and EWSAT1, suggesting that HNRNPK participates in EWSAT1-mediated gene repression. Together, our data reveal that EWSAT1 is a downstream target of EWS-FLI1 that facilitates the development of Ewing sarcoma via the repression of target genes.

[PMID: 17453169]
Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (EWS/PNET) are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations most often generating a chimeric EWS/FLI-1 gene. Depending on the number of juxtaposed exons assembled, several fusion types have been described with different incidences and prognoses. To assess the impact of each fusion type on the specific phenotypic, tumorigenic, and metastatic features of EWS/PNET, we developed an amenable system using a murine mesenchymal multipotent C3H10T1/2 cell line. Upon transduction of EWS/FLI-1, cells acquired dramatic morphological changes in vitro, including a smaller size and "neurite-like" membrane elongations. Chimeric fusion proteins conferred oncogenic properties in vitro, including anchorage-independent growth and an increased rate of proliferation. Furthermore, EWS/FLI-1 expression blocked mineralization, with concomitant repression of osteoblastic genes, and induced a dramatic repression of the adipocytic differentiation program. Moreover, EWS/FLI-1 promoted an aberrant neural phenotype by the de novo expression of specific neural genes. The intramuscular injection of transduced cells led to tumor development and the induction of overt osteolytic lesions. Analogously, to what was observed in human tumors, type 2 EWS/FLI-1 cells formed primary tumors in immunodeficient mice with a higher incidence and a lower latency than cells bearing types 1 and 3 fusions. By contrast, cells expressing types 2 and 3 fusions showed specific metastatic activity with a higher number of macroscopic metastases in soft tissues and osteolytic lesions in the limbs as compared to type-1-expressing cells. Therefore, the structure of each oncoprotein strongly influenced its tumorigenicity and metastagenicity. Thus, this model provides a basis for understanding the genetic determinants involved in Ewing tumor development and metastatic activity and represents a cellular system to analyze other oncoproteins involved in human sarcomagenesis.

[PMID: 18485618]
Ewing's tumour is the second most frequent primary tumour of bone. It is associated in 85% of cases with a specific and recurrent chromosome translocation, a t(11; 22)(q24; q12) which generates a fusion gene between the 5' part of EWS and the 3' part of FLI-1, a member of the ETS family. Less frequently, this gene fusion involves EWS and another member of the ETS family which can be: ERG, ETV1, E1AF or FEV depending on the cases. The EWS-ETS fusion is causative in the development of Ewing's tumour. Its mechanism of action mainly relies on the abnormal transcription regulation of key target genes which are involved in the regulation of cell cycle, signal transduction, migration. The cellular context within which EWS-FLI-1 exerts its oncogenic action is a long standing matter of debate. Recent data converge to suggest that the Ewing cell origin is a mesenchymal stem cell.

[PMID: 23894528]
Fusion of the EWS gene to FLI1 produces a fusion oncoprotein that drives an aberrant gene expression program responsible for the development of Ewing sarcoma. We used a homogenous proximity assay to screen for compounds that disrupt the binding of EWS-FLI1 to its cognate DNA targets. A number of DNA-binding chemotherapeutic agents were found to non-specifically disrupt protein binding to DNA. In contrast, actinomycin D was found to preferentially disrupt EWS-FLI1 binding by comparison to p53 binding to their respective cognate DNA targets in vitro. In cell-based assays, low concentrations of actinomycin D preferentially blocked EWS-FLI1 binding to chromatin, and disrupted EWS-FLI1-mediated gene expression. Higher concentrations of actinomycin D globally repressed transcription. These results demonstrate that actinomycin D preferentially disrupts EWS-FLI1 binding to DNA at selected concentrations. Although the window between this preferential effect and global suppression is too narrow to exploit in a therapeutic manner, these results suggest that base-preferences may be exploited to find DNA-binding compounds that preferentially disrupt subclasses of transcription factors.

[PMID: 21680731]
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is a group of aggressive pediatric malignancies driven by the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein, an aberrant transcription factor up-regulating specific target genes, such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) and its Y1 and Y5 receptors (Y5Rs). Previously, we have shown that both exogenous NPY and endogenous NPY stimulate ESFT cell death via its Y1 and Y5Rs. Here, we demonstrate that this effect is prevented by dipeptidyl peptidases (DPPs), which cleave NPY to its shorter form, NPY(3-36), not active at Y1Rs. We have shown that NPY-induced cell death can be abolished by overexpression of DPPs and enhanced by their down-regulation. Both NPY treatment and DPP blockade activated the same cell death pathway mediated by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1) and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). Moreover, the decrease in cell survival induced by DPP inhibition was blocked by Y1 and Y5R antagonists, confirming its dependence on endogenous NPY. Interestingly, similar levels of NPY-driven cell death were achieved by blocking membrane DPPIV and cytosolic DPP8 and DPP9. Thus, this is the first evidence of these intracellular DPPs cleaving releasable peptides, such as NPY, in live cells. In contrast, another membrane DPP, fibroblast activation protein (FAP), did not affect NPY actions. In conclusion, DPPs act as survival factors for ESFT cells and protect them from cell death induced by endogenous NPY. This is the first demonstration that intracellular DPPs are involved in regulation of ESFT growth and may become potential therapeutic targets for these tumors.