[PMID: 21321981]
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is associated with prostate cancer morbidity. In several experimental models, IL-6 has been reported to have anti-apoptotic and pro-angiogenic effects. Siltuximab (CNTO 328) is a monoclonal anti-IL-6 antibody which has been successfully applied in several models representing prostate cancer. This study was designed to assess preliminary safety of siltuximab in patients with early prostate cancer. Twenty patients scheduled to undergo radical prostatectomy received either no drug or siltuximab (6 mg/kg, five patients per group with administration once, two times, and three times prior to surgery). Blood samples were collected for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analyses. Expression of elements of IL-6 signaling pathways was analyzed in tumor tissue by immunohistochemistry. Gene analysis in tumor specimens was performed with the DASL array. No adverse events related to siltuximab were observed. Patients treated with siltuximab presented with higher levels of proliferation and apoptosis markers. Following a single dose, serum concentrations of siltuximab declined in a biexponential manner. This study revealed a decrease in phosphorylation of Stat3 and p44/p42 mitogen-activated protein kinases. In addition, gene expression analyses indicate down-regulation of genes immediately downstream of the IL-6 signaling pathway and key enzymes of the androgen signaling pathway. Preliminary safety of siltuximab is favorable. Future studies in which siltuximab could be combined with androgen-deprivation therapy and experimental therapies in advanced prostate cancer are justified.

[PMID: 25042199]
Multicentric Castleman's disease is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder driven by dysregulated production of interleukin 6. No randomised trials have been done to establish the best treatment for the disease. We assessed the safety and efficacy of siltuximab-a chimeric monoclonal antibody against interleukin 6-in HIV-negative patients with multicentric Castleman's disease. We did this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study at 38 hospitals in 19 countries worldwide. We enrolled HIV-negative and human herpesvirus-8-seronegative patients with symptomatic multicentric Castleman's disease. Treatment allocation was randomised with a computer-generated list, with block size six, and stratification by baseline corticosteroid use. Patients and investigators were masked to treatment allocation. Patients were randomly assigned (2:1) to siltuximab (11 mg/kg intravenous infusion every 3 weeks) or placebo; all patients also received best supportive care. Patients continued treatment until treatment failure. The primary endpoint was durable tumour and symptomatic response for at least 18 weeks for the intention-to-treat population. Enrolment has been completed. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01024036. We screened 140 patients, 79 of whom were randomly assigned to siltuximab (n=53) or placebo (n=26). Durable tumour and symptomatic responses occurred in 18 (34%) of 53 patients in the siltuximab group and none of 26 in the placebo group (difference 34·0%, 95% CI 11·1-54·8, p=0·0012). The incidence of grade 3 or more adverse events (25 [47%] vs 14 [54%]) and serious adverse events (12 [23%] vs five [19%]) was similar in each group despite longer median treatment duration with siltuximab than with placebo (375 days [range 1-1031] vs 152 days [23-666]). The most common grade 3 or higher were fatigue (five vs one), night sweats (four vs one), and anaemia (one vs three). Three (6%) of 53 patients had serious adverse events judged reasonably related to siltuximab (lower respiratory tract infection, anaphylactic reaction, sepsis). Siltuximab plus best supportive care was superior to best supportive care alone for patients with symptomatic multicentric Castleman's disease and well tolerated with prolonged exposure. Siltuximab is an important new treatment option for this disease. Janssen Research & Development.

[PMID: 21211286]
To study the effects of siltuximab on the interleukin-6 (IL-6)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) signaling pathway in ovarian epithelial carcinoma. (1) Expressions of IL-6 in ovarian cancer patient specimens were assessed by immunohistochemistry. (2) Expression of phosphorylation Stat3 (pStat3) protein in siltuximab and IL-6 treated SKOV3 cell lines was determined by western blot, and expression levels of Stat3-induced bcl-XL, MCL-1, survivin, in siltuximab treated SKOV3/TR and CAOV3/TR cells lines were also determined by western blot. (3) Real-time image analysis was used to study the nuclear translocation of pEGFP-Stat3 fusion protein in ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3-pEGFP-Stat3 treated with siltuximab and IL-6. (4) Paclitaxel sensitivity in siltuximab treated SKOV3/TR and CAOV3/TR cell lines were assessed using the methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT). The 50% inhibiting concentration (IC(50)) was defined as the paclitaxel concentration required to decrease the A(490) value to 50%. (1) There were significantly difference in IL-6 staining density and the positive rate of IL-6 protein stained among the metastatic, and drug-resistant recurrent tumors, and matched primary tumors [69% (18/26)] vs. 77% (20/26) vs. 23% (6/26), P < 0.05]. (2)A clear increase in Stat3 phosphorylation levels was observed in the IL-6-treated SKOV3 cell lines as compared to the SKOV3 cell lines. When the IL-6-treated SKOV3 cells were incubated with siltuximab with a range of concentrations of 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0 and 10 µg/ml, there were trends toward reduced pStat3 expression in the treated cell lines. Compared without treatment with siltuximab, the expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins MCL-1, bcl-XL and survivin in SKOV3/TR and CAOV3/TR cell lines were significantly decreased after treated with siltuximab. (3) In resting cells, the majority of pEGFP-Stat3 was cytoplasmic until the addition of human IL-6, which promptly induced the translocation of fluorescent Stat3 molecules to the nucleus. Exposure of cells to siltuximab with a range of concentrations of 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0 and 10 µg/ml, followed by an incubation in IL-6 significantly reduced pEGFP-Stat3 nucleocytoplasmic translocation. (4) MTT cytotoxicity assay demonstrated that siltuximab increased paclitaxel-induced cell death and partially overcame paclitaxel resistance. Treated with siltuximab (1 and 10 µg/ml), the paclitaxel IC(50) value of siltuximab in SKOV3/TR (0.49, 0.19 µg/ml) and CAOV3/TR (0.0010, 0.0008 µg/ml) cells were significantly lower than those in untreated cells (0.71, 0.0021 µg/ml; all P < 0.05). These results demonstrated that siltuximab effectively block the IL-6 signaling pathways, which. Blockage of IL-6 signaling may provide benefits for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

[PMID: 20699329]
To explore potential therapeutic strategies for interrupting the interleukin-6 (IL-6) signaling pathway, we measured IL-6 expression in ovarian cancer tissues, and evaluated the effects of a monoclonal anti-IL-6 antibody; siltuximab (CNTO 328), on levels of IL-6-induced Stat3 phosphorylation, Stat3 nuclear translocation, and Stat3 downstream antiapoptotic genes. We then looked for enhancing paclitaxel sensitivity in multidrug-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines. Expressions of IL-6 in ovarian cancer patient specimens were assessed by immunohistochemistry. Effects of siltuximab on IL-6-induced activation of Stat3 in an ovarian cancer cell line were determined by Western blot and real-time analysis of Stat3 nucleocytoplasmic translocation. Influence of combination of siltuximab and paclitaxel on tumor growth was evaluated in a xenograft mouse mode in vivo. Metastatic and drug-resistant recurrent tumors have significantly higher IL-6 expression when compared with the matched primary tumors. Siltuximab specifically suppressed IL-6-induced Stat3 phosphorylation and Stat3 nuclear translocation. Treatment with siltuximab significantly decreased the levels of Stat3 downstream proteins such as MCL-1, Bcl-X(L), and survivin. Treatment with siltuximab reduced expression of multiple IL-6-induced genes in these cell lines. Furthermore, siltuximab increased the cytotoxic effects of paclitaxel in a paclitaxel resistant ovarian cancer cell line in vitro, but combination therapy with siltuximab did not have a significant effect on paclitaxel resistant tumor growth in vivo. These results show that siltuximab effectively block the IL-6 signaling pathways and IL-6-induced gene expression. Blockage of IL-6 signaling may provide benefits for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

[PMID: 25784388]
Siltuximab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to interleukin (IL)-6 with high affinity and specificity; C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute-phase protein induced by IL-6. CRP suppression is an indirect measurement of IL-6 activity. Here, modeling and simulation of the pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) relationship between siltuximab and CRP were used to support dose selection for multicentric Castleman's disease (CD). PK/PD modeling was applied to explore the relationship between siltuximab PK and CRP suppression following intravenous siltuximab infusion in 47 patients with B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (n = 17), multiple myeloma (n = 13), or CD (n = 17). Siltuximab was administered as 2.8, 5.5, or 11 mg/kg q2wks, 11 mg/kg q3wks, or 5.5 mg/kg weekly. Simulations of studied or hypothetical siltuximab dosage regimens (15 mg/kg q4wks) were also performed to evaluate maintenance of CRP suppression below the cutoff value of 1 mg/L. A two-compartment PK model and an inhibitory indirect response PD model adequately described the serum siltuximab and CRP concentration-time profiles simultaneously. PD parameter estimates were physiologically plausible. For all disease types, simulations showed that 11 mg/kg q3wks or 15 mg/kg q4wks would reduce serum CRP to below 1 mg/L after the second dose and throughout the treatment period. PK/PD modeling was used to select doses for further development of siltuximab in multicentric CD. The dosing recommendation was also supported by the observed efficacy dose-response relationship. CRP suppression in the subsequent randomized multicentric CD study was in agreement with the modeling predictions.

[PMID: 26392750]
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine implicated in the pathogenesis of many immune-mediated disorders including several types of non-infectious uveitis. These uveitic conditions include Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, uveitis associated with Behçet disease, and sarcoidosis. This review summarizes the role of IL-6 in immunity, highlighting its effect on Th17, Th1, and plasmablast differentiation. It reviews the downstream mediators activated in the process of IL-6 binding to its receptor complex. This review also summarizes the biologics targeting either IL-6 or the IL-6 receptor, including tocilizumab, sarilumab, sirukumab, olokizumab, clazakizumab, and siltuximab. The target, dosage, potential side effects, and potential uses of these biologics are summarized in this article based on the existing literature. In summary, anti-IL-6 therapy for non-infectious uveitis shows promise in terms of efficacy and side effect profile.

[PMID: 25294016]
We compared the safety and efficacy of siltuximab (S), an anti-interleukin-6 chimeric monoclonal antibody, plus bortezomib (B) with placebo (plc) + B in patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma in a randomized phase 2 study. Siltuximab was given by 6 mg/kg IV every 2 weeks. On progression, B was discontinued and high-dose dexamethasone could be added to S/plc. Response and progression-free survival (PFS) were analyzed pre-dexamethasone by European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) criteria. For the 281 randomized patients, median PFS for S + B and plc + B was 8.0 and 7.6 months (HR 0.869, P = 0.345), overall response rate was 55 versus 47% (P = 0.213), complete response rate was 11 versus 7%, and median overall survival (OS) was 30.8 versus 36.8 months (HR 1.353, P = 0.103). Sustained suppression of C-reactive protein, a marker reflective of inhibition of interleukin-6 activity, was seen with S + B. Siltuximab did not affect B pharmacokinetics. Siltuximab/placebo discontinuation (75 versus 66%), grade ≥3 neutropenia (49 versus 29%), thrombocytopenia (48 versus 34%), and all-grade infections (62 versus 49%) occurred more frequently with S + B. The addition of siltuximab to bortezomib did not appear to improve PFS or OS despite a numerical increase in response rate in patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma.

[PMID: 23432640]
Interleukin-6 (IL6) plays a central role in multiple myeloma pathogenesis and confers resistance to corticosteroid-induced apoptosis. We therefore evaluated the efficacy and safety of siltuximab, an anti-IL6 monoclonal antibody, alone and in combination with dexamethasone, for patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who had ≥ 2 prior lines of therapy, one of which had to be bortezomib-based. Fourteen initial patients received siltuximab alone, 10 of whom had dexamethasone added for suboptimal response; 39 subsequent patients were treated with concurrent siltuximab and dexamethasone. Patients received a median of four prior lines of therapy, 83% were relapsed and refractory, and 70% refractory to their last dexamethasone-containing regimen. Suppression of serum C-reactive protein levels, a surrogate marker of IL6 inhibition, was demonstrated. There were no responses to siltuximab but combination therapy yielded a partial (17%) + minimal (6%) response rate of 23%, with responses seen in dexamethasone-refractory disease. The median time to progression, progression-free survival and overall survival for combination therapy was 4.4, 3.7 and 20.4 months respectively. Haematological toxicity was common but manageable. Infections occurred in 57% of combination-treated patients, including ≥ grade 3 infections in 18%. Further study of siltuximab in modern corticosteroid-containing myeloma regimens is warranted, with special attention to infection-related toxicity.

[PMID: 23913484]
Development and progression of prostate cancer (PCa) are associated with chronic inflammation. The cytokine interleukin 6 (IL6) can influence progression, differentiation, survival, and angiogenesis of PCa. To identify novel pathways that are triggered by IL6, we performed a gene expression profiling of two PCa cell lines, LNCaP and MDA PCa 2b, treated with 5 ng/ml IL6. Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) was identified as one of the most prevalent IL6-regulated genes in both cell lines. IRF9 is a mediator of type I IFN signaling and acts together with STAT1 and 2 to activate transcription of IFN-responsive genes. The IL6 regulation of IRF9 was confirmed at mRNA and protein levels by quantitative real-time PCR and western blot respectively in both cell lines and could be blocked by the anti-IL6 antibody Siltuximab. Three PCa cell lines, PC3, Du-145, and LNCaP-IL6+, with an autocrine IL6 loop displayed high expression of IRF9. A tissue microarray with 36 PCa tissues showed that IRF9 protein expression is moderately elevated in malignant areas and positively correlates with the tissue expression of IL6. Downregulation and overexpression of IRF9 provided evidence for an IFN-independent role of IRF9 in cellular proliferation of different PCa cell lines. Furthermore, expression of IRF9 was essential to mediate the antiproliferative effects of IFNα2. We concluded that IL6 is an inducer of IRF9 expression in PCa and a sensitizer for the antiproliferative effects of IFNα2.

[PMID: 25655379]
Siltuximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody with high affinity and specificity for interleukin-6, has been shown to enhance anti-multiple myeloma activity of bortezomib and corticosteroid in vitro. We evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetics, immunogenicity, and antitumor effect of siltuximab in combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone in Japanese patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. This open-label, phase 1, dose-escalating study used two doses of siltuximab: 5.5 and 11.0 mg/kg (administered on day 1 of each 21-day cycle). In total, nine patients were treated. The most common grade 3/4 adverse events, lymphopenia (89 %) and thrombocytopenia (44 %), occurred in patients receiving both doses of siltuximab; however, no dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were observed. Following intravenous administration of siltuximab at 5.5 and 11.0 mg/kg, the maximum serum concentration and the area under the curve from 0 to 21 days and from 0 to infinity increased in an approximately dose-proportional manner. Mean half-life, total systemic clearance, and volume of distribution were similar at doses of 5.5 and 11.0 mg/kg. Across both doses, six of the nine patients had complete or partial response (22 and 44 %, respectively). In conclusion, as no DLT was observed, the recommended dose for this combination is 11.0 mg/kg once every 3 weeks. The study is registered at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01309412.

[PMID: 20808314]
Serum interleukin (IL)-6 levels correlate with disease outcomes in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. Siltuximab, a chimeric, murine-human mAb against IL-6, was evaluated in a three-part phase I/II study in patients with progressive metastatic RCC. In part 1, 11 patients received 1, 3, 6, or 12mgkg-¹ at weeks 1, 4 and q2w × 2 thereafter; in part 2, 37 patients randomly received 3 or 6 mgkg-¹ q3w × 4; in part 3, 20 low-risk patients received 6mgkg-¹ q2w × 6. Modified WHO response criteria were assessed at weeks 7, 11, the 6-week follow-up, and when clinically indicated. Siltuximab was well tolerated overall, with no maximum tolerated dose or immune response observed. In all, 5 out of 11, 17 out of 37, and 9 out of 20 patients in parts 1, 2, and 3, respectively, received extended treatment beyond 4-6 initial infusions. In part 2, stable disease (SD) (≥11weeks) or better was achieved by 11 out of 17 (65%) 3 mgkg-¹ treated patients (one partial response (PR) ~8 months, 10 SD) and 10 out of 20 (50%) 6mgkg-¹ treated patients (10 SD). In part 3, documented complete or PR was not observed, but 13 out of 20 (65%) patients achieved SD. Siltuximab stabilised disease in >50% of progressive metastatic RCC patients. One PR was observed. Given the favourable safety profile of siltuximab and poor correlation of tumour shrinkage with clinical benefit demonstrated for other non-cytotoxic therapies, further evaluation of dose-escalation strategies and/or combination therapy may be considered for patients with RCC.

[PMID: 21795409]
We investigated whether inhibition of interleukin 6 (IL-6) has therapeutic activity in ovarian cancer via abrogation of a tumor-promoting cytokine network. We combined preclinical and in silico experiments with a phase 2 clinical trial of the anti-IL-6 antibody siltuximab in patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Automated immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays from 221 ovarian cancer cases showed that intensity of IL-6 staining in malignant cells significantly associated with poor prognosis. Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with siltuximab reduced constitutive cytokine and chemokine production and also inhibited IL-6 signaling, tumor growth, the tumor-associated macrophage infiltrate and angiogenesis in IL-6-producing intraperitoneal ovarian cancer xenografts. In the clinical trial, the primary endpoint was response rate as assessed by combined RECIST and CA125 criteria. One patient of eighteen evaluable had a partial response, while seven others had periods of disease stabilization. In patients treated for 6 months, there was a significant decline in plasma levels of IL-6-regulated CCL2, CXCL12, and VEGF. Gene expression levels of factors that were reduced by siltuximab treatment in the patients significantly correlated with high IL-6 pathway gene expression and macrophage markers in microarray analyses of ovarian cancer biopsies. IL-6 stimulates inflammatory cytokine production, tumor angiogenesis, and the tumor macrophage infiltrate in ovarian cancer and these actions can be inhibited by a neutralizing anti-IL-6 antibody in preclinical and clinical studies.

[PMID: 25873122]
We describe a case of multicentric Castleman disease with generalized lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, accompanied by typical B symptoms - loss of 15 kg, fever of non-infectious origin, night sweats, symptoms of anemia. Histological examination of the nodes with the highest accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose, taken from mediastinum by thoracoscopy, revealed plasmocellular type of Castleman disease. Tests for HIV and human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) were negative. Three recurrences of herpes zoster indicating an alteration of immunity preceded the dia-gnosis of disease. Treatment was initiated with combination of thalidomide, dexamethasone, and cyclophosphamide. The response after 2 months therapy was not clear and patient doesn't tolerated the therapy well. Therefore, this treatment was terminated and R-CHOP (Mabthera - rituximab, cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine, and prednisone) was selected as a second-line therapy. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly were reduced during the 2 cycles of treatment, however, serious infectious complications accompanied the therapy. Therefore, only use of Mabthera monotherapy 375 mg /m2 was administered in 28-day intervals. This treatment has shown efficacy and tolerability. PET-CT scan has demonstrated disappearance of lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, in addition, normalized accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose. Monotherapy with Mabthera has proved to be effective and well tolerated drug in this case. Currently, there are more effective therapeutic alternatives in multicentric Castleman disease: treatment with monotherapy of rituximab or in combination therapy with immunomodulatory drugs (thalidomide or lenalidomide, treatment with anti-IL-6 (siltuximab) or against its receptor (tocilizumab). In the case of ineffectiveness of one treatment option must be tested other alternative. In this case the therapy based on thalidomide wasn't successful, whereas the treatment with Mabthera has achieved disappearance of disease symptoms.

[PMID: 20625121]
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) has emerged as a key factor in the pathogenesis of the atypical lymphoproliferative disorder Castleman's disease (CD). Siltuximab is a new anti-IL-6, chimeric monoclonal antibody with potential therapeutic benefit in patients with CD. We report interim results from an open-label, dose-finding, seven-cohort, phase I study in which patients with symptomatic, multicentric or unresectable, unicentric CD received siltuximab at 1-, 2-, or 3-week intervals. The main efficacy end point of clinical benefit response (CBR) was defined as a composite of clinical and laboratory measures relevant to the management of CD. In addition, radiologic response was independently assessed by using modified Cheson criteria. Eighteen (78%) of 23 patients (95% CI, 56% to 93%) achieved CBR, and 12 patients (52%) demonstrated objective tumor response. All 11 patients (95% CI, 72% to 100%) treated with the highest dose of 12 mg/kg achieved CBR, and eight patients (73%) achieved objective tumor response. Overall objective-response duration ranged from 44 to > or = 889 days, and one patient had complete response for > or = 318 days. Hemoglobin increased markedly in 19 patients (median increase, 2.1 g/dL; range, 0.2 to 4.7 g/dL) in the absence of transfusion or erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. No dose-limiting toxicity was reported, and only three patients had grade 3 or higher adverse events after a median exposure of 331 days (range, 1 to 1,148 days). These interim results strongly suggest that siltuximab is an effective treatment with favorable safety for the management of CD. An additional study is planned to fully evaluate safety and efficacy at the recommended dose of 12 mg/kg every 3 weeks.

[PMID: 20179212]
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) induces tumor growth, invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. Siltuximab (CNTO 328) is a chimeric, murine-human monoclonal antibody that specifically binds human IL-6 with high affinity. C-reactive protein (CRP) can be a pharmacodynamic (PD) marker of IL-6 bioactivity. Reductions in CRP may correlate with clinical activity and IL-6 bioactivity. Starting-dose selection for this study was based on a previous siltuximab study in multiple myeloma patients. Pharmacokinetic (PK)/PD modeling explored the relationship between siltuximab PK and CRP suppression following i.v. siltuximab infusion in a three-part phase I/II study in 68 metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients. Modeling results were then used to simulate and determine which siltuximab dosage regimens would maintain CRP suppression below the lower limit of quantification (4 mg/L). Siltuximab was given at 1, 3, 6, or 12 mg/kg at weeks 1 and 4 and then every 2 weeks for 2 cycles in part 1; at 3 or 6 mg/kg every 3 weeks for 4 cycles in part 2; and at 6 mg/kg every 2 weeks for 6 cycles in part 3. A two-compartment PK model adequately described the serum siltuximab concentration-time data. An inhibitory indirect response PD model examined the relationship between siltuximab concentrations and CRP suppression. PD parameter estimates seemed reliable and physiologically relevant. Simulations showed that 6 mg/kg siltuximab every 2 weeks or 9 mg/kg every 3 weeks would reduce serum CRP to below 4 mg/L. Using a stepwise design, PK/PD modeling was used to select the dose levels in this study. Furthermore, PK/PD modeling results were used to help select doses to be used in future siltuximab clinical development.

[PMID: 21241278]
Signalling through the interleukin (IL)-6 pathway induces proliferation and drug resistance of multiple myeloma cells. We therefore sought to determine whether the IL-6-neutralizing monoclonal antibody siltuximab, formerly CNTO 328, could enhance the activity of melphalan, and to examine some of the mechanisms underlying this interaction. Siltuximab increased the cytotoxicity of melphalan in KAS-6/1, INA-6, ANBL-6, and RPMI 8226 human myeloma cell lines (HMCLs) in an additive-to-synergistic manner, and sensitized resistant RPMI 8226.LR5 cells to melphalan. These anti-proliferative effects were accompanied by enhanced activation of drug-specific apoptosis in HMCLs grown in suspension, and in HMCLs co-cultured with a human-derived stromal cell line. Siltuximab with melphalan enhanced activation of caspase-8, caspase-9, and the downstream effector caspase-3 compared with either of the single agents. This increased induction of cell death occurred in association with enhanced Bak activation. Neutralization of IL-6 also suppressed signalling through the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway, as evidenced by decreased phosphorylation of Akt, p70 S6 kinase and 4E-BP1. Importantly, the siltuximab/melphalan regimen demonstrated enhanced anti-proliferative effects against primary plasma cells derived from patients with myeloma, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, and amyloidosis. These studies provide a rationale for translation of siltuximab into the clinic in combination with melphalan-based therapies.

[PMID: 24922005]
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) can activate downstream signaling pathways in lung cancer cells, such as the STAT3 pathway, and is reported to be produced by tumor cells with activating EGFR mutations. We examined IL-6/STAT3 in lung cancer tumor tissues and the effects of siltuximab, a neutralizing antibody to human IL-6, in mouse models of lung cancer. IL-6 and STAT3 activation levels were compared with tumor histology and presence of KRAS mutations in snap-frozen, non-small-cell lung cancer tumors. The effects of siltuximab alone or in combination with erlotinib were examined in mouse xenograft models constructed using three cell line xenograft models and one primary explant mouse model. We examined the influence of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) on tumor growth and siltuximab effects. IL-6 levels were higher in tumors of squamous cell versus adenocarcinoma histology and were not associated with presence of KRAS mutations. Tyrosine phosphorylation status of STAT3 did not correlate with tumor IL-6 levels. Serine phosphorylation of STAT3 was correlated with KRAS mutation status. Both tumor and stromal cells contributed to total IL-6 within tumors. Siltuximab had minimal effect as a single agent in xenografts with tumor cells alone; however, in models coadministered with CAFs, siltuximab had more potent effects on tumor inhibition. We observed no effects of combined erlotinib and siltuximab. IL-6 is elevated in subsets of human NSCLCs, especially with squamous cell histology. Tumors supported by stromal production of IL-6 seem to be the most vulnerable to tumor growth inhibition by siltuximab.

[PMID: 22828917]
Siltuximab is a chimeric, anti-interleukin-6 monoclonal antibody with potential therapeutic benefit in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients. We assessed the safety and tolerability of siltuximab in combination with docetaxel, the pharmacokinetics of docetaxel alone and with siltuximab, and the efficacy and pharmacodynamics of siltuximab plus docetaxel. In an open-label, dose-escalation, multicenter, phase 1 study, patients with metastatic, progressive CRPC received docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) q3w plus siltuximab 6 mg/kg q2w (n=12), 9 mg/kg q3w (n=12), or 12 mg/kg q3w (n=15). Dose-limiting toxicity (DLT), PSA, and radiologic response according to WHO criteria were evaluated. DLT was reported in 1 of 11 patients receiving 6 mg/kg, 1 of 12 receiving 9 mg/kg, and in 1 of 14 receiving 12 mg/kg. Common Grade ≥ 3 adverse events were neutropenia (73 %), leukopenia (60 %), lymphopenia (30 %), dyspnea (19 %), and fatigue (14 %). Toxicities were not dose dependent. Siltuximab did not affect docetaxel pharmacokinetics. The pharmacokinetic profile for siltuximab in combination was similar to single-agent siltuximab pharmacokinetics. Twenty-three (62 %; 95 % CI 45 %, 78 %) of 37 combination-treated patients achieved a confirmed ≥ 50 % PSA decline. Of 17 patients with measurable disease at baseline, 2 confirmed and 2 unconfirmed radiologic partial responses ranging 190 to 193 days were achieved with 9- and 12-mg/kg siltuximab. C-reactive protein concentrations were suppressed throughout treatment in all patients. These results suggest that siltuximab in combination with docetaxel is safe and shows preliminary efficacy in patients with CRPC, although alternative siltuximab schedules may be better tolerated for future studies.

[PMID: 21216930]
Members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors are potential targets for the treatment and prevention of cancers including non-small-cell lung cancer. STAT proteins can be phosphorylated and activated by diverse upstream kinases including cytokine receptors and tyrosine kinases. We examined STAT protein activation in lung cancer cell lines including those with activating mutations in the EGFR and examined upstream kinases responsible for STAT3 phosphorylation and activation using small molecules, antibodies, and RNA interference. We found more pronounced STAT3 activation in cells with activating EGFR mutations, yet inhibition of EGFR activity had no effect on STAT3 activation. Inhibition of JAK1 with small molecules or RNA interference resulted in loss of STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation and inhibition of cell growth. An interleukin-6 neutralizing antibody, siltuximab (CNTO 328) could inhibit STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation in a cell-dependent manner. Siltuximab could completely inhibit STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation in H1650 cells, and this resulted in inhibition of lung cancer cell growth in vivo. Combined EGFR inhibition with erlotinib and siltuximab resulted in dual inhibition of both tyrosine and serine STAT3 phosphorylation, more pronounced inhibition of STAT3 transcriptional activity, and translated into combined effects on lung cancer growth in a mouse model. Our results suggest that JAK1 is responsible for STAT3 activation in lung cancer cells and that indirect attacks on JAK1-STAT3 using an IL-6 neutralizing antibody with or without EGFR inhibition can inhibit lung cancer growth in lung cancer subsets.