[PMID: 28178876]
Fecal microbiota transplantation is a highly effective intervention for patients suffering from recurrent Clostridium difficile, a common hospital-acquired infection. Fecal microbiota transplantation's success as a therapy for C. difficile has inspired interest in performing clinical trials that experiment with fecal microbiota transplantation as a therapy for other conditions like inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, diabetes, and Parkinson's disease. Results from clinical trials that use fecal microbiota transplantation to treat inflammatory bowel disease suggest that, for at least one condition beyond C. difficile, most fecal microbiota transplantation donors produce stool that is not efficacious. The optimal strategies for identifying and using efficacious donors have not been investigated. We therefore examined the optimal Bayesian response-adaptive strategy for allocating patients to donors and formulated a computationally tractable myopic heuristic. This heuristic computes the probability that a donor is efficacious by updating prior expectations about the efficacy of fecal microbiota transplantation, the placebo rate, and the fraction of donors that produce efficacious stool. In simulations designed to mimic a recent fecal microbiota transplantation clinical trial, for which traditional power calculations predict [Formula: see text] statistical power, we found that accounting for differences in donor stool efficacy reduced the predicted statistical power to [Formula: see text]. For these simulations, using the heuristic Bayesian allocation strategy more than quadrupled the statistical power to [Formula: see text]. We use the results of similar simulations to make recommendations about the number of patients, the number of donors, and the choice of clinical endpoint that clinical trials should use to optimize their ability to detect if fecal microbiota transplantation is effective for treating a condition.

[PMID: 27999162]
Bacterial communities from subjects treated for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (rCDI) by fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), using either heterologous donor stool samples or autologous stool samples, were characterized by Illumina next-generation sequencing. As previously reported, the success of heterologous FMT (90%) was superior to that of autologous FMT (43%) (P = 0.019), and post-FMT intestinal bacterial communities differed significantly between treatment arms (P < 0.001). Subjects cured by autologous FMT typically had greater abundances of the Clostridium XIVa clade and Holdemania bacteria prior to treatment, and the relative abundances of these groups increased significantly after FMT compared to heterologous FMT and pre-FMT samples. The typical shift to post-FMT, donor-like assemblages, featuring high relative abundances of genera within the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla, was not observed in the autologous FMT subjects. Autologous FMT patient bacterial communities were significantly different in composition than those for heterologous FMT patients and donors (P < 0.001). The SourceTracker program, which employs a Bayesian algorithm to determine source contributions to sink communities, showed that patients initially treated by heterologous FMT had significantly higher percentages of engraftment (i.e., similarity to donor communities, mean value of 74%) compared to those who suffered recurrence following autologous FMT (1%) (P ≤ 0.013). The findings of this study suggest that complete donor engraftment may be not necessary if functionally critical taxa are present in subjects following antibiotic therapy. This study provides a detailed characterization of fecal bacterial communities in subjects who participated in a previously published randomized clinical trial to treat recurrent C. difficile infection (rCDI). Bacterial communities were characterized to determine differences between subjects who received fecal bacteria either from healthy donor stool samples or their own stool samples as "placebo" in order to determine which groups of bacteria were most important in achieving a cure. The results of this study suggested that bacteria associated with secondary bile acid metabolism could potentially provide resistance to infection and that complete transfer of healthy donor microorganisms was not necessary to resolve CDI following unsuccessful antibiotic treatment.

[PMID: 27194400]
Treatment options for multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacterial infections are limited and often less effective. Non-pharmacologic approaches to preventing or treating MDR infections are currently restricted to improved antimicrobial stewardship and infection control practices. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), a highly effective treatment for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, has emerged as a promising therapy for intestinal MDR bacterial decolonization. A total of eight case reports have been published showing FMT resulted in intestinal decolonization of extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing and carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae, vancomycin-resistant Enterococci, or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The procedure has been shown to work even in immunocompromised patients and those experiencing medical crises without any adverse events. Five trials are currently underway to further investigate the use of FMT for MDR bacterial decolonization. FMT is a completely novel way to eradicate drug-resistant bacteria from the intestinal reservoir and should be further investigated to address the global problem of difficult-to-treat, MDR bacterial infections.

[PMID: 29104169]
We aimed to assess the asymptomatic Clostridium difficile carriage rates following fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). All patients who underwent FMT for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) via colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy between June 2013 and April 2015 and had a minimum of 8-week follow-up post FMT at two tertiary care referral centres were included in the study. Patients were prospectively followed both clinically and with stool assessments for 8 weeks post FMT. Assessments occurred at 1 week and 4 weeks post FMT to assess for failure. Failure was defined as presence of diarrhoeal symptoms and a positive CDI stool test by polymerase chain reaction for toxin gene (PCR) at any time point during the 8-week follow-up period. CDI stool testing using PCR was performed at weeks 1 and 4 post FMT in asymptomatic patients as well. 167 patients were included. Twenty-eight patients (16.7% (28/167)) were FMT failures throughout the 8-week period. At week 1, seven patients had already failed the FMT. Of the remaining 160 patients, 144 were asymptomatic, and among these, 141 were negative for C. difficile toxin gene by PCR. This resulted in an asymptomatic carriage rate of 2.1% (3/144). At week 4, 143 patients had not yet failed FMT. Of these patients 129 patients were asymptomatic and among those, 125 were negative by PCR, resulting in an asymptomatic carriage rate of 3% (3/129). Asymptomatic carriage after FMT is rare. This suggests that testing for cure after FMT in asymptomatic patients is not necessary.

[PMID: 29450831]
Fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) has emerged as a highly efficacious treatment for difficult cases of refractory and/or recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). There have been many well-conducted randomized controlled trials and thousands of patients reported in case series that describe success rates of approximately 90% following one or more FMT. Although the exact mechanisms of FMT have yet to be fully elucidated, replacement or restoration of a 'normal' microbiota (or at least a microbiota resembling those who have never had CDI) appears to have a positive effect on the gut dysbiosis that is thought to exist in these patients. Furthermore, despite being aesthetically unappealing, this 'ultimate probiotic' is a particularly attractive solution to a difficult problem that avoids repeated courses of antibiotics. The lack of clarity about the exact mechanism of action and the 'active ingredient' of FMT (e.g., individual or communities of bacteria, bacteriophage, or bioactive molecules such as bile acids) has hindered the ability to produce a standardized and well-characterized FMT product. There is no standard method to produce material for FMT, and there are a multitude of factors that can vary between institutions that offer this therapy. Only a few studies have directly compared clinical efficacy in groups of patients who have been treated with FMT prepared differently (e.g., fresh vs. frozen) or administered by different route (e.g., by nasojejunal tube, colonoscopy or by oral administration of encapsulated product). More of these studies should be undertaken to clarify the superiority or otherwise of these variables. This review describes the methods and protocols that two English NHS hospitals independently adopted over the same time period to provide FMT for patients with recurrent CDI. There are several fundamental differences in the methods used, including selection and testing of donors, procedures for preparation and storage of material, and route of administration. These methods are described in detail in this review highlighting differing practice. Despite these significant methodological variations, clinical outcomes in terms of cure rate appear to be remarkably similar for both FMT providers. Although both hospitals have treated only modest numbers of patients, these findings suggest that many of the described differences may not be critical factors in influencing the success of the procedure. As FMT is increasingly being proposed for a number of conditions other than CDI, harmonization of methods and techniques may be more critical to the success of FMT, and thus it will be important to standardize these as far as practically possible.

[PMID: 29020255]
Rarely, in fulminant Clostridium difficile infection (CDI), the rectal stump is persistently infected following total abdominal colectomy. We report cure of a septic patient with proctitis by fecal microbiota transplant via rectal swabs (mini-FMT). This novel procedure offers a management option for recurrent CDI following total abdominal colectomy.

[PMID: 27648772]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) restores a diverse bacterial profile to the gastrointestinal tract and may effectively treat patients with Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). The objective of this systematic review was to evaluate the effectiveness of FMT in the treatment of CDI. Ovid MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane database were used. The authors searched studies with 10 or more patients examining the resolution of symptoms after FMT in patients with CDI. Reviews, letters to the editors, and abstracts were excluded. Participants were patients with CDI. Intervention used was FMT. Quality assessment was performed using the Cochrane risk of bias assessment tool. Results were synthesized using a narrative approach. Retrospective and uncontrolled prospective cohort studies suggest that FMT is a highly effective therapy for recurrent/refractory CDI, with clinical success rates ranging from 83% to 100%, which is similar to rates published by two randomized controlled trials. Fecal microbiota transplantation may be effectively administered via antegrade (upper gastrointestinal) or retrograde (lower gastrointestinal) routes of delivery. Fecal microbiota transplantation rarely results in major adverse events. However, diarrhea, cramping, and bloating commonly occur and are typically self-limited. Most studies were uncontrolled retrospective studies. Fecal microbiota transplantation should be considered in patients with recurrent episodes of mild to moderate CDI who have failed conventional antimicrobial therapy. There is insufficient evidence to recommend FMT for the treatment of severe CDI. Systematic review, level III.

[PMID: 28506071]
The use of fecal microbiota transplantation in recurrent Clostridium difficile infection and coexistent inflammatory bowel disease remains unclear. A 61-year-old man with ulcerative pancolitis was diagnosed with a third recurrence of Clostridium difficile infection, previously treated with metronidazole, vancomycin and fidaxomicin. Fecal microbiota transplantation of an unrelated healthy donor was performed by the lower route. After a twelve month follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic without Clostridium difficile infection relapses or inflammatory bowel disease flare-ups. Fecal microbiota transplantation is relatively simple to perform, well-tolerated, safe and effective in recurrent Clostridium difficile infection with ulcerative pancolitis, as an alternative in case of antibiotic therapy failure.

[PMID: 25548572]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is an effective treatment for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) and is considered as a treatment for other gastrointestinal (GI) diseases. We followed up the relief of symptoms and long-term, over-a-year microbiota stabilization in a 46-year-old man, who underwent FMT for antibiotic-induced, non-CDI colitis nine months after being treated for CDI by FMT. Fecal and mucosal microbiota was analyzed before the second FMT and during 14 months after FMT by using a high-throughput phylogenetic microarray. FMT resolved the symptoms and restored normal GI-function. Microbiota analysis revealed increased bacterial diversity in the rectal mucosa and a stable fecal microbiota up to three months after FMT. A number of mucosa-associated bacteria increased after FMT and some of these bacteria remained increased in feces up to 14 months. Notably, the increased bacteria included Bifidobacterium spp. and various representatives of Clostridium clusters IV and XIVa, such as Clostridium leptum, Oscillospira guillermondii, Sporobacter termitidis, Anaerotruncus colihominis, Ruminococcus callidus, R. bromii, Lachnospira pectinoschiza, and C. colinum, which are presumed to be anti-inflammatory. The presented case suggests a possible role of microbiota in restoring and maintaining normal GI-functionality and improves our knowledge on the etiology of antibiotic-induced, noninfectious colitis.

[PMID: 26204547]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has an incomparable efficacy to treat recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, with near 90% of success. We report a 57 years old woman who developed an antibiotic associated diarrhea with a positive polymerase chain reaction test for Clostridium Difficile toxin. She was successfully treated with Vancomycin trice but diarrhea recurred. Therefore a fecal microbiota transplant was performed using solid stools from a relative, diluted in saline and instilled in the distal ileon, with a good clinical response, without recurrence of diarrhea, during a 6-month follow-up.

[PMID: 28195180]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is increasingly being used for treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (R-CDI) that cannot be cured with antibiotics alone. In addition, FMT is being investigated for a variety of indications where restoration or restructuring of the gut microbial community is hypothesized to be beneficial. We sought to develop a stable, freeze-dried encapsulated preparation of standardized fecal microbiota that can be used for FMT with ease and convenience in clinical practice and research. We systematically developed a lyophilization protocol that preserved the viability of bacteria across the taxonomic spectrum found in fecal microbiota and yielded physicochemical properties that enabled consistent encapsulation. We also treated a cohort of R-CDI patients with a range of doses of encapsulated microbiota and analyzed the associated changes in the fecal microbiome of the recipients. The optimized lyophilized preparation satisfied all our preset goals for physicochemical properties, encapsulation ease, stability at different temperatures, and microbiota viability in vitro and in vivo (germ-free mice). The capsule treatment was administered to 49 patients. Overall, 43/49 (88%) of patients achieved a clinical success, defined as no recurrence of CDI over 2 months. Analysis of the fecal microbiome demonstrated near normalization of the fecal microbial community by 1 month following FMT treatment. The simplest protocol using the lowest dose (2.1-2.5 × 10<sup>11</sup> bacteria in 2-3 capsules) without any colon purgative performed equally well in terms of clinical outcomes and microbiota engraftment. A single administration of encapsulated, freeze-dried fecal microbiota from a healthy donor was highly successful in treating antibiotic-refractory R-CDI syndrome.

[PMID: 29076071]
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is one of the most common nosocomial infections. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota due to consumption of antibiotics is a major contributor to CDI. Recently, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been applied to treat CDI. However, FMT has important limitations including uncontrolled exposure to pathogens and standardization issues. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate alternative treatment methods, such as bacteriotherapy, as well as the mechanism through which beneficial bacteria inhibit the growth of C. difficile. Here, we report bile acid-mediated inhibition of C. difficile by Bacteroides strains which can produce bile salt hydrolase (BSH). Bacteroides strains are not commonly used to treat CDI; however, as they comprise a large proportion of the intestinal microbiota, they can contribute to bile acid-mediated inhibition of C. difficile. The inhibitory effect on C. difficile growth increased with increasing bile acid concentration in the presence of Bacteroides ovatus SNUG 40239. Furthermore, this inhibitory effect on C. difficile growth was significantly attenuated when bile acid availability was reduced by cholestyramine, a bile acid sequestrant. The findings of this study are important due to the discovery of a new bacterial strain that in the presence of available bile acids inhibits growth of C. difficile. These results will facilitate development of novel bacteriotherapy strategies to control CDI.

[PMID: 23333862]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is becoming a more widely used technology for treatment of recurrent Clostridum difficile infection (CDI). While previous treatments used fresh fecal slurries as a source of microbiota for FMT, we recently reported the successful use of standardized, partially purified and frozen fecal microbiota to treat CDI. Here we report that high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed stable engraftment of gut microbiota following FMT using frozen fecal bacteria from a healthy donor. Similar bacterial taxa were found in post-transplantation samples obtained from the recipients and donor samples, but the relative abundance varied considerably between patients and time points. Post FMT samples from patients showed an increase in the abundance of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 75-80% of the total sequence reads. Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria were less abundant (< 5%) than that found in patients prior to FMT. Post FMT samples from two patients were very similar to donor samples, with the Bacteroidetes phylum represented by a great abundance of members of the families Bacteroidaceae, Rikenellaceae and Porphyromonadaceae, and were largely comprised of Bacteroides, Alistipes and Parabacteroides genera. Members of the phylum Firmicutes were represented by Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae and unclassified Clostridiales and members of the Firmicutes. One patient subsequently received antibiotics for an unrelated infection, resulting in an increase in the number of intestinal Proteobacteria, primarily Enterobacteriaceae. Our results demonstrate that frozen fecal microbiota from a healthy donor can be used to effectively treat recurrent CDI resulting in restoration of the structure of gut microbiota and clearing of Clostridum difficile.

[PMID: 24939885]
Clostridium difficile infection is one of the most common health care-associated infections, and up to 40% of patients suffer from recurrence of disease following standard antibiotic therapy. Recently, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been successfully used to treat recurrent C. difficile infection. It is hypothesized that FMT aids in recovery of a microbiota capable of colonization resistance to C. difficile. However, it is not fully understood how this occurs. Here we investigated changes in the fecal microbiota structure following FMT in patients with recurrent C. difficile infection, and imputed a hypothetical functional profile based on the 16S rRNA profile using a predictive metagenomic tool. Increased relative abundance of Bacteroidetes and decreased abundance of Proteobacteria were observed following FMT. The fecal microbiota of recipients following transplantation was more diverse and more similar to the donor profile than the microbiota prior to transplantation. Additionally, we observed differences in the imputed metagenomic profile. In particular, amino acid transport systems were overrepresented in samples collected prior to transplantation. These results suggest that functional changes accompany microbial structural changes following this therapy. Further identification of the specific community members and functions that promote colonization resistance may aid in the development of improved treatment methods for C. difficile infection. Within the last decade, Clostridium difficile infection has surpassed other bacterial infections to become the leading cause of nosocomial infections. Antibiotic use, which disrupts the gut microbiota and its capability in providing colonization resistance against C. difficile, is a known risk factor in C. difficile infection. In particular, recurrent C. difficile remains difficult to treat with standard antibiotic therapy. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has provided a successful treatment method for some patients with recurrent C. difficile infection, but its mechanism and long-term effects remain unknown. Our results provide insight into the structural and potential metabolic changes that occur following FMT, which may aid in the development of new treatment methods for C. difficile infection.

[PMID: 26616138]
D-lactic acidosis can occur in patients with short bowel syndrome (SBS) when excessive malabsorbed carbohydrate (CHO) enters the colon and is metabolized by colonic bacteria to D-lactate. D-lactate can be absorbed systemically, and increased serum levels are associated with central nervous system toxicity manifested by confusion, ataxia, and slurred speech. Current therapy, usually directed toward suppressing intestinal bacterial overgrowth and limiting ingested CHO, is not always successful. Fecal transplantation, the infusion of donor feces into a recipient's intestinal tract, has been used for decades to treat recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, and case reports document its use in the successful treatment of constipation, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. The exact mechanism of action is unknown, but it is surmised that the alteration of the intestinal microbiome, as well as the reintroduction of potential beneficial microbes, helps mediate disease. Here we present the case of a child with SBS and recurrent, debilitating D-lactic acidosis, which was successfully treated with fecal transplantation.

[PMID: 23844515]
Clostridium difficile is the etiologic agent of nosocomial and community-acquired diarrhea associated with exposure to antibiotics that disrupt the normal colonic flora. As antibacterials currently used for primary C. difficile infections favor recurrences, new methods able to neutralize the bacterium without affecting the gut microbiota are badly needed. Complementary treatment with probiotic agents to reconstitute the physiologicaL intestinal flora does not yield any consistent benefit. In recent years, fecal transplantation has been used in the English-speaking countries with cure rates of about 87%. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) holds considerable promise as a therapy for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, but well-designed, randomized-controlled trials and Long-term follow-up registries are stilt required. These are needed to identify the right patient, efficacy and safety profile of FMT before this approach can be widely advocated. Another aspect of bad/good parasites are the use of helminth or helminth ova for treating autoimmune diseases, especially those affecting the gut.

[PMID: 26901316]
To assess the cost-effectiveness of six treatment strategies for patients diagnosed with recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in Canada: 1. oral metronidazole; 2. oral vancomycin; 3.oral fidaxomicin; 4. fecal transplantation by enema; 5. fecal transplantation by nasogastric tube; and 6. fecal transplantation by colonoscopy. Public insurer for all hospital and physician services. Ontario, Canada. A decision analytic model was used to model costs and lifetime health effects of each strategy for a typical patient experiencing up to three recurrences, over 18 weeks. Recurrence data and utilities were obtained from published sources. Cost data was obtained from published sources and hospitals in Toronto, Canada. The willingness-to-pay threshold was $50,000/QALY gained. Fecal transplantation by colonoscopy dominated all other strategies in the base case, as it was less costly and more effective than all alternatives. After accounting for uncertainty in all model parameters, there was an 87% probability that fecal transplantation by colonoscopy was the most beneficial strategy. If colonoscopy was not available, fecal transplantation by enema was cost-effective at $1,708 per QALY gained, compared to metronidazole. In addition, fecal transplantation by enema was the preferred strategy if the probability of recurrence following this strategy was below 8.7%. If fecal transplantation by any means was unavailable, fidaxomicin was cost-effective at an additional cost of $25,968 per QALY gained, compared to metronidazole. Fecal transplantation by colonoscopy (or enema, if colonoscopy is unavailable) is cost-effective for treating recurrent CDI in Canada. Where fecal transplantation is not available, fidaxomicin is also cost-effective.

[PMID: 24440934]
By systematic review, we assessed the impact of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) for the treatment of Clostridium difficile (CD)-associated diarrhea. Fecal microbiota microbiota transplantation from a healthy donor into an individual with CD infection (CDI) can resolve symptoms. We conducted systematic searches in PubMed, SCOPUS, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library. The last search was run on February 8, 2013. The following Medical Subject Headings terms and keywords were used alone or in combination: Clostridium difficile; Clostridium infection; pseudomembranous colitis; feces; stools; fecal suspension; fecal transplantation; fecal transfer; fecal infusion; microbiota; bacteriotherapy; enema; nasogastric tube; colonoscopy; gastroscopy; fecal donation; donor. A critical appraisal of the clinical research evidence on the effectiveness and safety of FMT for the treatment of patients with CD-associated diarrhea was made. Twenty full-text case series, 15 case reports, and 1 randomized controlled study were included for the final analysis. Almost all patients treated with donors' fecal infusion experienced recurrent episodes of CD-associated diarrhea despite standard antibiotic treatment. Of a total of 536 patients treated, 467 (87%) experienced resolution of diarrhea. Diarrhea resolution rates varied according to the site of infusion: 81% in the stomach; 86% in the duodenum/jejunum; 93% in the cecum/ascending colon; and 84% in the distal colon. No severe adverse events were reported with the procedure. FMT seems efficacious and safe for the treatment of recurrent CDI. Hospitals should encourage the development of fecal transplantation programs to improve therapy of local patients.

[PMID: 28125667]
Fecal microbiota transplantation is a compelling treatment for recurrent Clostridium difficile infections, with potential applications against other diseases associated with changes in gut microbiota. But variability in fecal bacterial communities-believed to be the therapeutic agent-can complicate or undermine treatment efficacy. To understand the effects of transplant preparation methods on living fecal microbial communities, we applied a DNA-sequencing method (PMA-seq) that uses propidium monoazide (PMA) to differentiate between living and dead fecal microbes, and we created an analysis pipeline to identify individual bacteria that change in abundance between samples. We found that oxygen exposure degraded fecal bacterial communities, whereas freeze-thaw cycles and lag time between donor defecation and transplant preparation had much smaller effects. Notably, the abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii-an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium whose absence is linked to inflammatory bowel disease-decreased with oxygen exposure. Our results indicate that some current practices for preparing microbiota transplant material adversely affect living fecal microbial content and highlight PMA-seq as a valuable tool to inform best practices and evaluate the suitability of clinical fecal material.