[PMID: 23302672]
To describe the clinical features of 6 patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Clinical data including signs and symptoms, electrocardiograms, Holter monitoring electrocardiograms and echocardiography was analyzed. Definite diagnosis was made based on the mutations of RYR2 and CASQ2. From July 2002 to March 2010, 6 consecutive patients referred to our center because of syncope [4 males, mean age (13.0 ± 4.2) years] were diagnosed with CPVT by clinical evaluation and genetic testing. Their electrocardiograms showed T waves with notch or bimodal and tall U waves in right chest leads. There was no J wave, no ST-segment deviation, no prolongation or shortening of QT interval. We captured the so-called "bidirectional and(or) polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (bVT and pVT)" in 2 out of 6 patients by ECG, in 5 out of 6 patients by 24-hours Holter monitor, in 3 out of 6 patients by exercise test. All patients received β blockers and no syncope occurred during the 3 months follow-up after discharge from hospital. CPVT is an inherited cardiac channelopathy characterized by syncope and(or) sudden death relatived to motion. The ECG shows T wave alteration and tall U wave in right chest leads. The mode of its onset is bVT and(or) pVT, and can be captured by Holter easily. β blocker is a safe and effective remedy for suppressing its attack.

[PMID: 23546565]
Optimum management to prevent recurrent kidney stones is uncertain. To evaluate the benefits and harms of interventions to prevent recurrent kidney stones. MEDLINE, Cochrane, and other databases through September 2012 and reference lists of systematic reviews and randomized, controlled trials (RCTs). 28 English-language RCTs that studied treatments to prevent recurrent kidney stones and reported stone outcomes. One reviewer extracted data, a second checked accuracy, and 2 independently rated quality and graded strength of evidence. In patients with 1 past calcium stone, low-strength evidence showed that increased fluid intake halved recurrent composite stone risk compared with no treatment (relative risk [RR], 0.45 [95% CI, 0.24 to 0.84]). Low-strength evidence showed that reducing soft-drink consumption decreased recurrent symptomatic stone risk (RR, 0.83 [CI, 0.71 to 0.98]). In patients with multiple past calcium stones, most of whom were receiving increased fluid intake, moderate-strength evidence showed that thiazides (RR, 0.52 [CI, 0.39 to 0.69]), citrates (RR, 0.25 [CI, 0.14 to 0.44]), and allopurinol (RR, 0.59 [CI, 0.42 to 0.84]) each further reduced composite stone recurrence risk compared with placebo or control, although the benefit from allopurinol seemed limited to patients with baseline hyperuricemia or hyperuricosuria. Other baseline biochemistry measures did not allow prediction of treatment efficacy. Low-strength evidence showed that neither citrate nor allopurinol combined with thiazide was superior to thiazide alone. There were few withdrawals among patients with increased fluid intake, many among those with other dietary interventions and more among those who received thiazide and citrate than among control patients. Reporting of adverse events was poor. Most trial participants had idiopathic calcium stones. Nearly all studies reported a composite (including asymptomatic) stone recurrence outcome. In patients with 1 past calcium stone, increased fluid intake reduced recurrence risk. In patients with multiple past calcium stones, addition of thiazide, citrate, or allopurinol further reduced risk. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

[PMID: 23593205]
Sodium thiosulfate (STS) reduced calcium stone formation in both humans and genetic hypercalciuric stone forming (GHS) rats. We sought to measure urine chemistry changes resulting from STS administration in people. DESIGN SETTING PARTICIPANTS MEASUREMENTS: STS was given to healthy and hypercalciuric stone forming adults. Five normal non-stone forming adults (mean age 33 years), and 5 people with idiopathic hypercalciuria and calcium kidney stones (mean age 66 years) participated. Two baseline 24-hour urine collections were performed on days 2 and 3 of 3 days of self-selected diets. Subjects then drank STS 10 mmol twice a day for 7 days and did urine collections while repeating the self-selected diet. Results were compared by non-parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test. The primary outcome was the resulting change in urine chemistry. STS administration did not cause a significant change in urinary calcium excretion in either group. In both groups, 24 hour urinary ammonium (P = 0.005) and sulfate excretion (P = 0.007) increased, and urinary pH fell (P = 0.005); citrate excretion fell (P<0.05) in hypercalciuric participants but not in non-stone formers. Among stone formers with hypercalciuria, 3 of 5 patients had measurement of serum HCO3 concentration after the STS period: it did not change. The net effect was an increase in supersaturation of uric acid, and no change in supersaturation of calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate. The basis for studies demonstrating that STS prevented stones in rats and people was not reflected by the changes in urine chemistry reported here. Although serum HCO3 did not change, urine tests suggested an acid load in both non-stone forming and hypercalciuric stone-forming participants. The long term safety of STS needs to be determined before the drug can be tested in humans for long-term prevention of stone recurrence.

[PMID: 23880796]
Current recommendations for calcium intake call for 1,000 mg per day for women ages 19-50 and 1,200 mg per day for women over age 50 to ensure bone health. Given recent concerns that calcium supplements may raise risk for cardiovascular disease and kidney stones, women should aim to meet this recommendation primarily by eating a calcium-rich diet and taking calcium supplements only if needed to reach the RDA goal (often only approximately 500 mg per day in supplements is required).

[PMID: 23535174]
Because of high correlations between dairy intake and total dietary calcium, previously reported associations between lower calcium intake and increased kidney stone risk represent de facto associations between milk products and risk. We examined associations between dietary calcium from nondairy and dairy sources, and symptomatic nephrolithiasis. We performed prospective studies in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) in 30,762 men, and in the Nurses' Health Study (NHS) I and II in 94,164 and 101,701 women, respectively. We excluded men 60 years old or older because we previously reported inverse associations between calcium intake and risk only in men younger than 60 years. Food frequency questionnaires were used to assess calcium intake every 4 years. We used Cox proportional hazards regression to adjust for age, body mass index, supplemental calcium, diet and other factors. We documented 5,270 incident kidney stones during the combined 56 years of followup. In participants in the highest vs the lowest quintile of nondairy dietary calcium the multivariate relative risk of kidney stones was 0.71 (95% CI 0.56-0.92, p for trend 0.007) in HPFS, 0.82 (95% CI 0.69-0.98, p trend 0.08) in NHS I and 0.74 (95% CI 0.63-0.87, p trend 0.002) in NHS II. When comparing the highest to the lowest quintile of dairy calcium, the multivariate relative risk was 0.77 (95% CI 0.63-0.95, p trend 0.01) for HPFS, 0.83 (95% CI 0.69-0.99, p trend 0.05) for NHS I and 0.76 (95% CI 0.65-0.88, p trend 0.001) for NHS II. Higher dietary calcium from nondairy or dairy sources is independently associated with a lower kidney stone risk.

[PMID: 24127678]
To investigate upper urinary tract stone composition rates in Australia To investigate changes in stone composition in Australia over the past 30 years The Institute for Clinical Pathology and Medical Research (ICPMR) database was used to obtain - stone composition statistics from 2009-2011 Historical comparisons of stone composition rates were obtained from previous Australian studies; Rofe; 1981, and Baker; 1993 for epidemiological data from the 1970s and 1980s respectively. Stone composition data was separated into gender and age-groups From the 791 stones analysed between 2009 and 2011, calcium oxalate remains the dominant type accounting for 64% of stones in our dataset, which compares to 68% from both the 1970s and 1980s. Uric acid stones contributed 16% of contemporary stone compositions, comparable to 16% in the 1970s and 17% in the 1980s. Struvite stones showed a decreasing trend from 14% in the 1970s, to 12% in the 1980s and 7% in the current data. For struvite stones, while the female 21-30 age-group was the most prolific for struvite stone formation in the 1980s, the peak group in contemporaneous records is 61-70 year-old men. Stone composition in Australia has remained relatively static over the past 30 years. Modifications in diet and body habitus have not resulted in significant changes in the proportion of uric acid and calcium oxalate stones detected. The decreasing trend in the proportion of struvite stones most likely reflects improved management of urinary tract infections within the Australian population.

[PMID: 22857835]
Childhood urolithiasis is an evolving condition with an increasing incidence and prevalence over the last 2 decades. Over that time the underlying cause has shifted from predominantly infectious to metabolic in nature. This review describes the pathophysiology, underlying metabolic abnormalities, clinical presentation, evaluation, and management of childhood urolithiasis. A comprehensive metabolic evaluation is essential for all children with renal calculi, given the high rate of recurrence and the importance of excluding inherited progressive conditions.

[PMID: 24026180]
Idiopathic uric acid nephrolithiasis is characterized by elevated urinary net acid excretion and insufficient buffering by ammonium, resulting in excessively acidic urine and titration of the relatively soluble urate anion to insoluble uric acid. Patients with type 2 diabetes have similar changes in urinary pH, net acid excretion, and ammonium in 24-h urine collections at baseline, even after controlling for dietary factors, and are at increased risk for uric acid nephrolithiasis. However, not all patients with type 2 diabetes develop kidney stones, suggesting that uric acid stone formers may have additional urinary defects, perhaps not apparent at baseline. We performed a metabolic study of 14 patients with idiopathic uric acid nephrolithiasis, 13 patients with type 2 diabetes, and 8 healthy control subjects of similar body mass index. After equilibration on a fixed diet for 5 days, subjects were given a single oral acid load (50 meq ammonium chloride), and urine was collected hourly for 4 h. Uric acid stone formers had a lower ammonium excretory response to acute acid loading compared with diabetic and nondiabetic nonstone formers, suggesting that an ammonium excretory defect unique to uric acid stone formers was unmasked by the acid challenge. The Zucker diabetic fatty rat also did not show impaired urinary ammonium excretion in response to acute acid challenge. A blunted renal ammonium excretory response to dietary acid loads may contribute to the pathogenesis of idiopathic uric acid nephrolithiasis.

[PMID: 16174292]
Recent trends in weight loss diets have led to a substantial increase in protein intake by individuals. As a result, the safety of habitually consuming dietary protein in excess of recommended intakes has been questioned. In particular, there is concern that high protein intake may promote renal damage by chronically increasing glomerular pressure and hyperfiltration. There is, however, a serious question as to whether there is significant evidence to support this relationship in healthy individuals. In fact, some studies suggest that hyperfiltration, the purported mechanism for renal damage, is a normal adaptative mechanism that occurs in response to several physiological conditions. This paper reviews the available evidence that increased dietary protein intake is a health concern in terms of the potential to initiate or promote renal disease. While protein restriction may be appropriate for treatment of existing kidney disease, we find no significant evidence for a detrimental effect of high protein intakes on kidney function in healthy persons after centuries of a high protein Western diet.

[PMID: 23221031]
We aimed to determine whether there is an association between dietary zinc intake (DZI) and prevalent kidney stone disease defined as self-report of any previous episode of kidney stone. We examined The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III), a large US population-based cross-sectional study, and used logistic regression analyses to determine the independent association between DZI and prevalent kidney stone disease. A total of 15,444 men and women over 18 years of age were eligible for analysis. Among them, 710 participants reported a history of kidney stones. Stone formers tended to have higher DZI than non-stone formers among NHANES III participants, though this difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.1). Multivariate adjusted logistic regression analysis revealed that higher DZI (log transformed) was associated with a significantly increased risk of kidney stone disease (odds ratio, OR = 1.41, 95% confidence interval, CI: 1.10-1.81, p = 0.01). After categorizing zinc intake into three groups, those with highest DZI (>15 mg/day) were also associated with a significantly increased risk of kidney stone disease, compared to those with lower DZI (<7 mg/day; OR = 1.70, 95% CI: 1.13-2.57, p = 0.01). Our study suggests that higher DZI is associated with increased risk of kidney stone disease. Future prospective studies are needed to clarify the causal relationship between zinc intake and kidney stone formation.

[PMID: 23732207]
The composition of urine is influenced by diet and changes in dietary factors have been proposed to modify the risk of recurrent nephrolithiasis. Nutrients that have been implicated include calcium, oxalate, sodium, animal protein, magnesium and potassium. There is significant evidence showing that a high calcium diet is associated with a reduction of lithogenic risk. One of the possible mechanisms to explain this apparent paradox is that the higher intake of calcium in the intestine binds with dietary oxalate, reducing its absorption and urinary excretion. Oxalate from the diet seems to provide only a small contribution to excretion and dietary restriction is appropriate only in those with hyperoxaluria and hyperabsorption. Observational studies have shown a positive and independent association between sodium intake and the formation of new kidney stones. Consumption of animal protein creates an acid load that increases urinary excretion of calcium and uric acid and reduced citrate, all factors that could participate in the genesis of stones. Potassium-rich foods increase urinary citrate because of its alkali content. In prospective observational studies, diets rich in magnesium were associated with a lower risk of kidney stone formation in men. In conclusion, diet is a key element in the management of the patient with kidney stones but always subordinated to present metabolic risk factors.

[PMID: 21369385]
Nephrolithiasis is associated with a variety of abnormalities in urinary composition. These abnormal urinary risk factors are due to dietary indiscretions, physiological-metabolic disturbances or both. Stone disease is morbid and costly, and the recurrence rates may be as high as 30-50% after 5 years. Efforts to prevent stone formation are, therefore, essential. Dietary factors play an important role in kidney stone formation. Tailored dietary recommendations based on metabolic evaluation should be offered to patients for the prevention of recurrence of stone formation. Dietary intervention and subsequent evaluations of therapeutic efficacy should be based on results from multiple 24-h urine collections. Urine flow of >1 ml/kg/h almost eliminates the risk of supersaturation for calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate and uric acid, thus protecting from the formation of corresponding kidney stones. In patients with cystenuria, the required urine flow may even be higher and, in cases such as primary xanthinuria, high fluid intake is required. Milk intake in these patients should be within the RDA of calcium and protein. In children, recommendation of a high fluid intake has only limited success. Nevertheless, each patient should be advised about adequate fluid intake to increase urine volume in accordance with body size. Although children with hypocitraturia may benefit from therapeutic agents that raise the urine citrate concentration, all children bearing residual fragments should be counseled on adequate fluid intake along with potassium citrate treatment to prevent stone regrowth or formation.

[PMID: 23634702]
Idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis is a multifactorial disease with a complex pathogenesis due to genetic and environmental factors. The importance of social and health effects of nephrolithiasis is further highlighted by the strong tendency to relapse of the disease. Long-term prospective studies show a peak of disease recurrence within 2-3 years since onset, 40-50% of patients have a recurrence after 5 years and more than 50-60% after 10 years. International nutritional studies demonstrated that nutritional habits are relevant in therapy and prevention approaches of nephrolithiasis. Water, right intake of calcium, low intake of sodium, high levels of urinary citrate are certainly important for the primary and secondary prevention of nephrolithiasis.

[PMID: 11269613]
To determine the effect of substituting equal amounts of dietary protein as animal protein (beef) for plant protein (legumes, seeds, nuts, and grains) on urinary components associated with calcium oxalate precipitability risk. Randomized crossover trial. Twenty-three normocalciuric patients with a history of calcium kidney stones (8 women and 15 men, mean age 50.7+/-14.6 years) with 24-hour urinary calcium < or =10.3 micromol, 24 hour urinary oxalate excretion between 228 and 963 micromol, and a urinary calcium increase of < or =1.0 micromol in 4 hours after a 25 micromol oral calcium load. Four-day, free-living adaptation period, followed by 2-day metabolic unit study. The study compared consumption of 2 servings of beef (43 g protein for women and 50 g for men) daily with an equal amount of protein from plant foods including legumes, nuts, and grains. Tiselius risk index (TRI) for calcium oxalate precipitability calculated from urinary calcium, oxalate, magnesium, citrate, and volume. Paired t tests. Urinary calcium, oxalate, magnesium, citrate, phosphorus, volume, and TRI did not differ between diets. Urinary sodium and potassium were higher for patients on the plant protein diet. After correcting for variations in urinary sodium and potassium between diets, the difference in urinary calcium remained insignificant. TRI was lower on both beef- and plant-protein diets compared with self-selected prestudy diets for all participants. CONCLUSION/APPLICATIONS: Balanced diets containing moderate amounts of either beef or plant protein are equally effective in reducing calcium oxalate kidney stone risk based on changes in urinary composition.

[PMID: 23674806]
Potassium was identified as a shortfall nutrient by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010 Advisory Committee. The committee concluded that there was a moderate body of evidence of the association between potassium intake and blood pressure reduction in adults, which in turn influences the risk of stroke and coronary heart disease. Evidence is also accumulating of the protective effect of adequate dietary potassium on age-related bone loss and reduction of kidney stones. These benefits depend on organic anions associated with potassium as occurs in foods such as fruits and vegetables, in contrast to similar blood pressure-lowering benefits of potassium chloride. Benefits to blood pressure and bone health may occur at levels below current recommendations for potassium intake, especially from diet, but dose-response trials are needed to confirm this. Nevertheless, intakes considerably above current levels are needed for optimal health, and studies evaluating small increases in fruit and vegetable intake on bone and heart outcomes for short periods have had disappointing results. In modern societies, Western diets have led to a decrease in potassium intake with reduced consumption of fruits and vegetables with a concomitant increase in sodium consumption through increased consumption of processed foods. Consumption of white vegetables is associated with decreased risk of stroke, possibly related to their high potassium content. Potatoes are the highest source of dietary potassium, but the addition of salt should be limited. Low potassium-to-sodium intake ratios are more strongly related to cardiovascular disease risk than either nutrient alone. This relationship deserves further attention for multiple target tissue endpoints.

[PMID: 23568066]
Idiopathic hypercalciuria may be associated with urinary tract infection, hematuria, nephrolithiasis and osteopenia. In order to describe the occurrence of these concurrent conditions related to the variation in urinary calcium and hypercalciuria response to sequential therapy, with a normal protein and low sodium diet, potassium citrate and hydrochlorothiazide; 46 patients older than 4 years, with no urinary tract diseases, sphincter control and normal blood creatinine values were followed-up during 43 months. Hypercalciuria was seen to be associated with kidney stones (EAR 47%; RR 3.3), hematuria (EAR 71%; RR 2.5), urinary tract infections (EAR 57%; RR 3), and osteopenia (EAR 33%; RR 3). A normal value of urinary calcium was achieved with sequential therapy in 43 patients, but during follow-up 32 patients discontinued treatment and hypercalciuria recurred in 44% of them, in association with hematuria and urinary tract infection. Sequential therapy reduced hypercalciuria and the incidence of associated diseases.

[PMID: 23438422]
Kidney stones are a common problem worldwide with substantial morbidities and economic costs. Medical therapy reduces stone recurrence significantly. Much progress has been made in the last several decades in improving therapy of stone disease. This review discusses i) the effect of medical expulsive therapy on spontaneous stone passage, ii) pharmacotherapy in the prevention of stone recurrence and iii) future directions in the treatment of kidney stone disease. Fluid intake to promote urine volume of at least 2.5 L each day is essential to prevent stone formation. Dietary recommendations should be adjusted based on individual metabolic abnormalities. Properly dosed thiazide treatment is the standard therapy for calcium stone formers with idiopathic hypercalciuria. Potassium alkali therapy is considered for hypocitraturia, but caution should be taken to prevent potential risk of calcium phosphate stone formation. For absorptive hyperoxaluria, low oxalate diet and increased dietary calcium intake are recommended. Pyridoxine has been shown effective in some cases of primary hyperoxaluria type I. Allopurinol is used in calcium oxalate stone formers with hyperuricosuria. Treatment of cystine stones remains challenging. Tiopronin can be used if urinary alkalinization and adequate fluid intake are insufficient. For struvite stones, complete surgical removal coupled with appropriate antibiotic therapy is necessary.

[PMID: 14552081]
Conventional medical thought several decades ago was to restrict the amount of calcium intake in individuals with a history of calcium oxalate stones. In the past decade, several studies have suggested that increasing the intake of calcium may actually reduce the risk of calcium oxalate stone formation. The largest randomized trial of diet and stone recurrence was recently completed. Interestingly, individuals that had normal calcium intakes and lower intakes of protein and salt had a significantly reduced rate of calcium oxalate stone recurrence. This recent trial along with several past epidemiologic studies should be discussed with patients at high risk of stone recurrence. Currently, health professionals have a wealth of information that can be distributed to individuals at high risk of nephrolithiasis, and simple dietary recommendations may be one of the best ways to reduce the risk of calcium oxalate stones.

[PMID: 23827660]
Cadmium exposure is associated with increased urinary calcium excretion. Hypercalciuria is recognised as a major risk factor for kidney stone formation. Increased prevalence of kidney stones among those occupationally exposed to cadmium has previously been suggested. Food is the main source of cadmium exposure in the general population with tobacco representing an important additional source among smokers. We aimed to assess the association between dietary cadmium exposure and kidney stone incidence in two large population-based, prospective cohorts of men (Cohort of Swedish Men; COSM) and women (The Swedish Mammography Cohort; SMC). Those with a history of kidney stones were excluded. At baseline 1997, men (45-79yrs) and women (48 to 83yrs), completed a self-administered questionnaire on diet and lifestyle. During 12years of follow-up, we ascertained 707 cases of kidney stones in men and 290 in women through linkage of the cohorts to the national inpatient and outpatient registers. Individual dietary cadmium exposure was estimated using dietary data and concentrations of cadmium in food. Hazard ratios (HR) were calculated using the Cox proportional hazards regression models with adjustment for other risk factors. Estimated dietary cadmium exposure was not associated with increased kidney stone incidence among men HR 0.97 (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.77-1.23) or women HR 0.99 (95% CI: 0.89-1.43), comparing the highest tertile with the lowest. In conclusion, our results do not support a strong association between dietary cadmium and kidney stone risk at the exposure levels seen in the general population.