[PMID: 22558428]
Coilin is known as the marker protein for Cajal bodies (CBs), subnuclear domains important for the biogenesis of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) which function in pre-mRNA splicing. CBs associate non-randomly with U1 and U2 gene loci, which produce the small nuclear RNA (snRNA) component of the respective snRNP. Despite recognition as the CB marker protein, coilin is primarily nucleoplasmic, and the function of this fraction is not fully characterized. Here we show that coilin binds double stranded DNA and has RNase activity in vitro. U1 and U2 snRNAs undergo a processing event of the primary transcript prior to incorporation in the snRNP. We find that coilin displays RNase activity within the CU region of the U2 snRNA primary transcript in vitro, and that coilin knockdown results in accumulation of the 3' pre-processed U1 and U2 snRNA. These findings present new characteristics of coilin in vitro, and suggest additional functions of the protein in vivo.

[PMID: 22038794]
Human coilin interacting nuclear ATPase protein (hCINAP) directly interacts with coilin, a marker protein of Cajal Bodies (CBs), nuclear organelles involved in the maturation of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins UsnRNPs and snoRNPs. hCINAP has previously been designated as an adenylate kinase (AK6), but is very atypical as it exhibits unusually broad substrate specificity, structural features characteristic of ATPase/GTPase proteins (Walker motifs A and B) and also intrinsic ATPase activity. Despite its intriguing structure, unique properties and cellular localization, the enzymatic mechanism and biological function of hCINAP have remained poorly characterized. Here, we offer the first high-resolution structure of hCINAP in complex with the substrate ADP (and dADP), the structure of hCINAP with a sulfate ion bound at the AMP binding site, and the structure of the ternary complex hCINAP-Mg(2+) ADP-Pi. Induced fit docking calculations are used to predict the structure of the hCINAP-Mg(2+) ATP-AMP ternary complex. Structural analysis suggested a functional role for His79 in the Walker B motif. Kinetic analysis of mutant hCINAP-H79G indicates that His79 affects both AK and ATPase catalytic efficiency and induces homodimer formation. Finally, we show that in vivo expression of hCINAP-H79G in human cells is toxic and drastically deregulates the number and appearance of CBs in the cell nucleus. Our findings suggest that hCINAP may not simply regulate nucleotide homeostasis, but may have broader functionality, including control of CB assembly and disassembly in the nucleus of human cells.

[PMID: 27317682]
Coilin is a marker protein for subnuclear organelles known as Cajal bodies, which are sites of various RNA metabolic processes including the biogenesis of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles. Through self-associations and interactions with other proteins and RNA, coilin provides a structural scaffold for Cajal body formation. However, despite a conspicuous presence in Cajal bodies, most coilin is dispersed in the nucleoplasm and expressed in cell types that lack these organelles. The molecular function of coilin, particularly of the substantial nucleoplasmic fraction, remains uncertain. We identified coilin loss-of-function mutations in a genetic screen for mutants showing either reduced or enhanced expression of an alternatively spliced GFP reporter gene in Arabidopsis thaliana The coilin mutants feature enhanced GFP fluorescence and diminished Cajal bodies compared with wild-type plants. The amount of GFP protein is several-fold higher in the coilin mutants owing to elevated GFP transcript levels and more efficient splicing to produce a translatable GFP mRNA. Genome-wide RNA-sequencing data from two distinct coilin mutants revealed a small, shared subset of differentially expressed genes, many encoding stress-related proteins, and, unexpectedly, a trend toward increased splicing efficiency. These results suggest that coilin attenuates splicing and modulates transcription of a select group of genes. The transcriptional and splicing changes observed in coilin mutants are not accompanied by gross phenotypic abnormalities or dramatically altered stress responses, supporting a role for coilin in fine tuning gene expression. Our GFP reporter gene provides a sensitive monitor of coilin activity that will facilitate further investigations into the functions of this enigmatic protein.

[PMID: 11302690]
SMN, the affected protein in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), is a cytoplasmic protein that also occurs in nuclear structures called "gems" and is involved in snRNP maturation. Coilin-p80 is a marker protein for nuclear Cajal bodies (coiled bodies; CBs) which are also involved in snRNP maturation, storage or transport. We now show that gems and CBs are present in all fetal tissues, even those that lack gems/CBs in the adult. Most gems and CBs occur as separate nuclear structures in fetal tissues, but their colocalization increases with fetal age and is almost complete in the adult. In adult tissues, up to half of all gems/CBs are inside the nucleolus, whereas in cultured cells they are almost exclusively nucleoplasmic. The nucleolar SMN is often more diffusely distributed, compared with nucleoplasmic gems. Up to 30% of cells in fetal tissues have SMN distributed throughout the nucleolus, instead of forming gems in the nucleoplasm. The results suggest a function for gems distinct from Cajal bodies in fetal nuclei and a nucleolar function for SMN. Spinal cord, the affected tissue in SMA, behaves differently in several respects. In both fetal and adult motor neurons, many gems/CBs occur as larger bodies closely associated with the nucleolar perimeter. Uniquely in motor neurons, gems/CBs are more numerous in adult than in fetal stages and colocalization of gems and CBs occurs earlier in development. These unusual features of motor neurons may relate to their special sensitivity to reduced SMN levels in SMA patients.

[PMID: 10806077]
Cajal bodies (coiled bodies, CBs) are nuclear organelles of unknown function and are characterized by a wide variety of components including various basal transcription and cell cycle proteins, the nucleolar proteins fibrillarin and Nopp140, numerous small nuclear ribonucleoproteins, the survival motor neuron protein complex, and the marker protein, p80 coilin. To gain insight into the role of p80 coilin in CBs, we have cloned the murine gene Coil and have mapped it to the distal portion of chromosome band 11D. The approximately 2.6-kb transcript is detectable in all tissues analyzed, with the highest levels in brain and testis. Sequence analysis shows that, like its human counterpart, the mouse coilin gene is composed of seven exons and spans nearly 30 kb of genomic DNA. The predicted amino acid sequence reveals two conserved N- and C-terminal domains, and comparison with the Xenopus SPH-1 protein reveals that these three genes are indeed orthologous. These results should facilitate gene disruption experiments aimed at creating a genetic model system to study CBs.

[PMID: 14989147]
In vitellogenic oocytes of Tenebrio molitor (inactive stage), numerous fibrogranular nuclear bodies (NBs) are present. Using immunofluorescent microscopy, these NBs were shown to contain pre-mRNA splicing factors (small nuclear [sn] RNPs and SR-protein, SC35) as well as RNA polymerase II. A limited set of NBs also contained coilin, a marker protein for Cajal bodies (CBs). We suggest that in T. molitor oocytes, coilin-containing NBs, which also contain splicing factors and RNA polymerase II, seem to represent CBs. In the species studied, no morphological features of CBs were established as compared with other NBs, which do not contain coilin. Microinjectons in oocytes of myc-tagged coilin mRNA, followed by revealing newly translated protein with antibody specific for this tag, have shown targeting of myc-coilin with CBs. The own and literary data on the morphology and molecular composition of CBs are discussed in terms of searching for criteria for CB identification in cells of different origin, and at active and inactive stages.

[PMID: 16301532]
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by loss of spinal motor neurons. The gene encoding the survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein is mutated in >95% of SMA cases. SMN is the central component of a large oligomeric complex, including Gemins2-7, that is necessary and sufficient for the in vivo assembly of Sm proteins onto the small nuclear (sn)RNAs that mediate pre-mRNA splicing. After cytoplasmic assembly of the Sm core, both SMN and splicing snRNPs are imported into the nucleus, accumulating in Cajal bodies for additional snRNA maturation steps before targeting to splicing factor compartments known as "speckles." In this study, we analyzed the function of individual SMN complex members by RNA interference (RNAi). RNAi-mediated knockdown of SMN, Gemin2, Gemin3, and Gemin4 each disrupted Sm core assembly, whereas knockdown of Gemin5 and Snurportin1 had no effect. Assembly activity was rescued by expression of a GFP-SMN construct that is refractive to RNAi but not by similar constructs that contain SMA patient-derived mutations. Our results also demonstrate that Cajal body homeostasis requires SMN and ongoing snRNP biogenesis. Perturbation of SMN function results in disassembly of Cajal bodies and relocalization of the marker protein, coilin, to nucleoli. Moreover, in SMN-deficient cells, newly synthesized SmB proteins fail to associate with U2 snRNA or accumulate in Cajal bodies. Collectively, our results identify a previously uncharacterized function for Gemin3 and Gemin4 in Sm core assembly and correlate the activity of this pathway with SMA.

[PMID: 10944589]
The Cajal (coiled) body is a discrete nuclear organelle that was first described in mammalian neurons in 1903. Because the molecular composition, structure, and function of Cajal bodies were unknown, these enigmatic structures were largely ignored for most of the last century. The Cajal body has now regained the interest of biologists, due to the isolation of a protein marker, coilin. Despite current widespread use of coilin to identify Cajal bodies in various cell types, its structure and function are still little understood. Here, I would like to discuss what we have learned about coilin and suggest a possible role for coilin in RNA processing and cellular trafficking, especially in relation to Cajal bodies and nucleoli. Although coilin has been investigated primarily in somatic cells, I will emphasize the advantages of using the amphibian oocyte to study nuclear proteins and organelles.

[PMID: 11134083]
Cajal bodies (also known as coiled bodies) are subnuclear organelles that contain specific nuclear antigens, including splicing small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and a subset of nucleolar proteins. Cajal bodies are localized in the nucleoplasm and are often found at the nucleolar periphery. We have constructed a stable HeLa cell line, HeLa(GFP-coilin), that expresses the Cajal body marker protein, p80 coilin, fused to the green fluorescent protein (GFP-coilin). The localization pattern and biochemical properties of the GFP-coilin fusion protein are identical to the endogenous p80 coilin. Time-lapse recordings on 63 nuclei of HeLa(GFP-coilin) cells showed that all Cajal bodies move within the nucleoplasm. Movements included translocations through the nucleoplasm, joining of bodies to form larger structures, and separation of smaller bodies from larger Cajal bodies. Also, we observed Cajal bodies moving to and from nucleoli. The data suggest that there may be at least two classes of Cajal bodies that differ in their size, antigen composition, and dynamic behavior. The smaller size class shows more frequent and faster rates of movement, up to 0.9 microm/min. The GFP-coilin protein is dynamically associated with Cajal bodies as shown by changes in their fluorescence intensity over time. This study reveals an unexpectedly high level of movement and interactions of nuclear bodies in human cells and suggests that these movements may be driven, at least in part, by regulated mechanisms.

[PMID: 16079131]
Coilin is a marker protein for the Cajal body, a subnuclear domain acting as a site for assembly and maturation of nuclear RNA-protein complexes. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify coilin-interacting proteins, we have identified hCINAP (human coilin interacting nuclear ATPase protein), a nuclear factor of 172 amino acids with a P-loop nucleotide binding motif and ATPase activity. The hCINAP protein sequence is highly conserved across its full-length from human to plants and yeast and is ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues and cell lines tested. The yeast orthologue of CINAP is a single copy, essential gene. Tagged hCINAP is present in complexes containing coilin in mammalian cells and recombinant, Escherichia coli expressed hCINAP binds directly to coilin in vitro. The 214 carboxyl-terminal residues of coilin appear essential for the interaction with hCINAP. Both immunofluorescence and fluorescent protein tagging show that hCINAP is specifically nuclear and distributed in a widespread, diffuse nucleoplasmic pattern, excluding nucleoli, with some concentration also in Cajal bodies. Overexpression of hCINAP in HeLa cells results in a decrease in the average number of Cajal bodies per nucleus, consistent with it affecting either the stability of Cajal bodies and/or their rate of assembly. The hCINAP mRNA is an alternatively spliced transcript from the TAF9 locus, which encodes the basal transcription factor subunit TAFIID32. However, hCINAP and TAFIID32 mRNAs are translated from different ATG codons and use distinct reading frames, resulting in them having no identity in their respective protein sequences.

[PMID: 18755223]
The Cajal body, originally identified over 100 years ago as a nucleolar accessory body in neurons, has come to be identified with nucleoplasmic structures, often quite tiny, that contain coiled threads of the marker protein, coilin. The interaction of coilin with other proteins appears to increase the efficiency of several nuclear processes by concentrating their components in the Cajal body. The best-known of these processes is the modification and assembly of U snRNPs, some of which eventually form the RNA splicing machinery, or spliceosome. Over the last 10 years, research into the function of Cajal bodies has been greatly stimulated by the discovery that SMN, the protein deficient in the inherited neuromuscular disease, spinal muscular atrophy, is a Cajal body component and has an essential role in the assembly of spliceosomal U snRNPs in the cytoplasm and their delivery to the Cajal body in the nucleus.

[PMID: 11031238]
Cajal bodies are small nuclear organelles first described nearly 100 years ago by Ramón y Cajal in vertebrate neural tissues. They have since been found in a variety of animal and plant nuclei, suggesting that they are involved in basic cellular processes. Cajal bodies contain a marker protein of unknown function, p80-coilin, and many components involved in transcription and processing of nuclear RNAs. Among these are the three eukaryotic RNA polymerases and factors required for transcribing and processing their respective nuclear transcripts: mRNA, rRNA, and pol III transcripts. A model is discussed in which Cajal bodies are the sites for preassembly of transcriptosomes, unitary particles involved in transcription and processing of RNA. A parallel is drawn to the nucleolus and the preassembly of ribosomes, which are unitary particles involved in translation of proteins.

[PMID: 23274112]
Coilin is widely known as the protein marker of the Cajal body, a subnuclear domain important to the biogenesis of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and telomerase, complexes that are crucial to pre-messenger RNA splicing and telomere maintenance, respectively. Extensive studies have characterized the interaction between coilin and the various other protein components of CBs and related subnuclear domains; however, only a few have examined interactions between coilin and nucleic acid. We have recently published that coilin is tightly associated with nucleic acid, displays RNase activity in vitro, and is redistributed to the ribosomal RNA (rRNA)-rich nucleoli in cells treated with the DNA-damaging agents cisplatin and etoposide. Here, we report a specific in vivo association between coilin and rRNA, U small nuclear RNA (snRNA), and human telomerase RNA, which is altered upon treatment with DNA-damaging agents. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we provide evidence of coilin interaction with specific regions of U snRNA gene loci. We have also utilized bacterially expressed coilin fragments in order to map the region(s) important for RNA binding and RNase activity in vitro. Additionally, we provide evidence of coilin involvement in the processing of human telomerase RNA both in vitro and in vivo.

[PMID: 21072240]
The WRAP53 gene gives rise to a p53 antisense transcript that regulates p53. This gene also encodes a protein that directs small Cajal body-specific RNAs to Cajal bodies. Cajal bodies are nuclear organelles involved in diverse functions such as processing ribonucleoproteins important for splicing. Here we identify the WRAP53 protein as an essential factor for Cajal body maintenance and for directing the survival of motor neuron (SMN) complex to Cajal bodies. By RNA interference and immunofluorescence we show that Cajal bodies collapse without WRAP53 and that new Cajal bodies cannot be formed. By immunoprecipitation we find that WRAP53 associates with the Cajal body marker coilin, the splicing regulatory protein SMN, and the nuclear import receptor importinβ, and that WRAP53 is essential for complex formation between SMN-coilin and SMN-importinβ. Furthermore, depletion of WRAP53 leads to accumulation of SMN in the cytoplasm and prevents the SMN complex from reaching Cajal bodies. Thus, WRAP53 mediates the interaction between SMN and associated proteins, which is important for nuclear targeting of SMN and the subsequent localization of the SMN complex to Cajal bodies. Moreover, we detect reduced WRAP53-SMN binding in patients with spinal muscular atrophy, which is the leading genetic cause of infant mortality worldwide, caused by mutations in SMN1. This suggests that loss of WRAP53-mediated SMN trafficking contributes to spinal muscular atrophy.

[PMID: 23064547]
Cajal bodies (CB) are subnuclear domains that contain various proteins with diverse functions including the CB marker protein coilin. In this study, we investigate the proteolytic activity of calpain on coilin. Here, we report a 28-kDa cleaved coilin fragment detected by two coilin antibodies that is cell cycle regulated, with levels that are consistently reduced during mitosis. We further show that an in vitro calpain assay with full-length or C-terminal coilin recombinant protein releases the same size cleaved fragment. Furthermore, addition of exogenous RNA to purified coilin induces proteolysis by calpain. We also report that the relative levels of this cleaved coilin fragment are susceptible to changes induced by various cell stressors, and that coilin localization is affected by inhibition or knockdown of calpain both under normal and stressed conditions. Collectively, our data suggest that coilin is subjected to regulated specific proteolysis by calpain, and this processing may play a role in the regulation of coilin activity and CB formation.

[PMID: 24358231]
Nuclear bodies are large sub-nuclear structures composed of RNA and protein molecules. The Survival of Motor Neuron (SMN) protein localizes to Cajal bodies (CBs) and nuclear gems. Diminished cellular concentration of SMN is associated with the neurodegenerative disease Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA). How nuclear body architecture and its structural components influence neuronal differentiation remains elusive. In this study, we analyzed the effects of SMN and two of its interaction partners in cellular models of neuronal differentiation. The nuclear 23 kDa isoform of Fibroblast Growth Factor - 2 (FGF-2(23)) is one of these interacting proteins - and was previously observed to influence nuclear bodies by destabilizing nuclear gems and mobilizing SMN from Cajal bodies (CBs). Here we demonstrate that FGF-2(23) blocks SMN-promoted neurite outgrowth, and also show that SMN disrupts FGF-2(23)-dependent transcription. Our results indicate that FGF-2(23) and SMN form an inactive complex that interferes with neuronal differentiation by mutually antagonizing nuclear functions. Coilin is another nuclear SMN binding partner and a marker protein for Cajal bodies (CBs). In addition, coilin is essential for CB function in maturation of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs). The role of coilin outside of Cajal bodies and its putative impacts in tissue differentiation are poorly defined. The present study shows that protein levels of nucleoplasmic coilin outside of CBs decrease during neuronal differentiation. Overexpression of coilin has an inhibitory effect on neurite outgrowth. Furthermore, we find that nucleoplasmic coilin inhibits neurite outgrowth independent of SMN binding revealing a new function for coilin in neuronal differentiation.

[PMID: 22250197]
The nucleus in eukaryotic cells is a highly organized and dynamic structure containing numerous subnuclear bodies. The morphological appearance of nuclear bodies seems to be a reflection of ongoing functions, such as DNA replication, transcription, repair, RNA processing and RNA transport. The integrator complex mediates processing of small nuclear RNA (snRNA), so it might play a role in nuclear body formation. Here, we show that the integrator complex is essential for integrity of the Cajal body. Depletion of INTS4, an integrator complex subunit, abrogated 3'-end processing of snRNA. A defect in this activity caused a significant accumulation of the Cajal body marker protein coilin in nucleoli. Some fractions of coilin still formed nucleoplasmic foci; however, they were free of other Cajal body components, such as survival of motor neuron protein (SMN), Sm proteins and snRNAs. SMN and Sm proteins formed striking cytoplasmic granules. These findings demonstrate that the integrator complex is essential for snRNA maturation and Cajal body homeostasis.

[PMID: 24569877]
Cajal bodies are specialized and dynamic compartments in the nucleus that are involved in the biogenesis of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Because of the dynamic and varied roles of Cajal bodies, it is of great interest to identify the components of Cajal bodies to better understand their functions. We performed a genome-wide screen to identify proteins that colocalize with coilin, the marker protein of Cajal bodies. In this study, we identified and characterized Fam118B as a newly discovered component of Cajal bodies. Fam118B is widely expressed in a variety of cell lines derived from various origins. Overexpression of Fam118B changes the canonical morphology of Cajal bodies, whereas depletion of Fam118B disrupts the localization of components of Cajal bodies, including coilin, the survival of motor neuron protein (SMN) and the Sm protein D1 (SmD1, also known as SNRPD1). Moreover, depletion of Fam118B reduces splicing capacity and inhibits cell proliferation. In addition, Fam118B associates with coilin and SMN proteins. Fam118B depletion reduces symmetric dimethylarginine modification of SmD1, which in turn diminishes the binding of SMN to this Sm protein. Taken together, these data indicate that Fam118B, by regulating SmD1 symmetric dimethylarginine modification, plays an important role in Cajal body formation, snRNP biogenesis and cell viability.

[PMID: 21920476]
Protein phosphorylation by kinases plays a central role in the regulation and coordination of multiple biological processes. In general, knowledge on kinase specificity is restricted to substrates identified in the context of specific cellular responses, but kinases are likely to have multiple additional substrates and be integrated in signaling networks that might be spatially and temporally different, and in which protein complexes and subcellular localization can play an important role. In this report the substrate specificity of atypical human vaccinia-related kinases (VRK1 and VRK2) using a human peptide-array containing 1080 sequences phosphorylated in known signaling pathways has been studied. The two kinases identify a subset of potential peptide targets, all of them result in a consensus sequence composed of at least four basic residues in peptide targets. Linear peptide arrays are therefore a useful approach in the characterization of kinases and substrate identification, which can contribute to delineate the signaling network in which VRK proteins participate. One of these target proteins is coilin; a basic protein located in nuclear Cajal bodies. Coilin is phosphorylated in Ser184 by both VRK1 and VRK2. Coilin colocalizes and interacts with VRK1 in Cajal bodies, but not with the mutant VRK1 (R358X). VRK1 (R358X) is less active than VRK1. Altered regulation of coilin might be implicated in several neurological diseases such as ataxias and spinal muscular atrophies.

[PMID: 11102515]
We have found that coilin, the marker protein for Cajal bodies (coiled bodies, CBs), is a self-interacting protein, and we have mapped the domain responsible for this activity to the amino-terminus. Together with a nuclear localization signal, the self-interaction domain is necessary and sufficient for localization to CBs. Overexpression of various wild-type and mutant coilin constructs in HeLa cells results in disruption of both CBs and survival motor neurons (SMN) gems. Additionally, we have identified a cryptic nucleolar localization signal (NoLS), within the coilin protein, which may be exposed in specific coilin phospho-isoforms. The implications of these findings are discussed in light of the fact that other proteins known to localize within nuclear bodies (e. g., PML, SMN and Sam68) can also self-associate. Thus protein self-interaction appears to be a general feature of nuclear body marker proteins.