[PMID: 27898364]
Niraparib (MK-4827) is a novel poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor currently investigated in phase III clinical trials to treat cancers. The development of a new drug includes the characterisation of absorption, metabolism and excretion (AME) of the compound. AME studies are a requirement of regulatory agencies and for this purpose bioanalytical assays are essential. This article describes the development and validation of a bioanalytical assay for niraparib and its carboxylic acid metabolite M1 in human plasma and urine using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Sample pre-treatment involved protein precipitation for plasma and dilution of urine samples using acetonitrile-methanol (50:50, v/v). Final extracts were injected onto a SunFire C18 column and gradient elution using 20mM ammonium acetate (mobile phase A) and formic acid:acetonitrile:methanol (0.1:50:50, v/v/v) (mobile phase B) was applied. Detection was performed on an API5500 tandem mass spectrometer operating in the positive electrospray ionisation mode applying multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). The assay was successfully validated in accordance with the Food and Drug Administration and latest European Medicines Agency guidelines on bioanalytical method validation and can therefore be applied in pharmacological clinical studies.

[PMID: 26217019]
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARP1, -2, and -3) play important roles in DNA damage repair. As such, a number of PARP inhibitors are undergoing clinical development as anticancer therapies, particularly in tumors with DNA repair deficits and in combination with DNA-damaging agents. Preclinical evidence indicates that PARP inhibitors potentiate the cytotoxicity of DNA alkylating agents. It has been proposed that a major mechanism underlying this activity is the allosteric trapping of PARP1 at DNA single-strand breaks during base excision repair; however, direct evidence of allostery has not been reported. Here the data reveal that veliparib, olaparib, niraparib, and talazoparib (BMN-673) potentiate the cytotoxicity of alkylating agents. Consistent with this, all four drugs possess PARP1 trapping activity. Using biochemical and cellular approaches, we directly probe the trapping mechanism for an allosteric component. These studies indicate that trapping is due to catalytic inhibition and not allostery. The potency of PARP inhibitors with respect to trapping and catalytic inhibition is linearly correlated in biochemical systems but is nonlinear in cells. High-content imaging of γH2Ax levels suggests that this is attributable to differential potentiation of DNA damage in cells. Trapping potency is inversely correlated with tolerability when PARP inhibitors are combined with temozolomide in mouse xenograft studies. As a result, PARP inhibitors with dramatically different trapping potencies elicit comparable in vivo efficacy at maximum tolerated doses. Finally, the impact of trapping on tolerability and efficacy is likely to be context specific. Understanding the context-specific relationships of trapping and catalytic inhibition with both tolerability and efficacy will aid in determining the suitability of a PARP inhibitor for inclusion in a particular clinical regimen.

[PMID: 23810788]
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) is implicated in DNA repair and transcription regulation. Niraparib (MK4827) is an oral potent, selective PARP-1 and PARP-2 inhibitor that induces synthetic lethality in preclinical tumour models with loss of BRCA and PTEN function. We investigated the safety, tolerability, maximum tolerated dose, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles, and preliminary antitumour activity of niraparib. In a phase 1 dose-escalation study, we enrolled patients with advanced solid tumours at one site in the UK and two sites in the USA. Eligible patients were aged at least 18 years; had a life expectancy of at least 12 weeks; had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2 or less; had assessable disease; were not suitable to receive any established treatments; had adequate organ function; and had discontinued any previous anticancer treatments at least 4 weeks previously. In part A, cohorts of three to six patients, enriched for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, received niraparib daily at ten escalating doses from 30 mg to 400 mg in a 21-day cycle to establish the maximum tolerated dose. Dose expansion at the maximum tolerated dose was pursued in 15 patients to confirm tolerability. In part B, we further investigated the maximum tolerated dose in patients with sporadic platinum-resistant high-grade serous ovarian cancer and sporadic prostate cancer. We obtained blood, circulating tumour cells, and optional paired tumour biopsies for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic assessments. Toxic effects were assessed by common toxicity criteria and tumour responses ascribed by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST). Circulating tumour cells and archival tumour tissue in prostate patients were analysed for exploratory putative predictive biomarkers, such as loss of PTEN expression and ETS rearrangements. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00749502. Between Sept 15, 2008, and Jan 14, 2011, we enrolled 100 patients: 60 in part A and 40 in part B. 300 mg/day was established as the maximum tolerated dose. Dose-limiting toxic effects reported in the first cycle were grade 3 fatigue (one patient given 30 mg/day), grade 3 pneumonitis (one given 60 mg/day), and grade 4 thrombocytopenia (two given 400 mg/day). Common treatment-related toxic effects were anaemia (48 patients [48%]), nausea (42 [42%]), fatigue (42 [42%]), thrombocytopenia (35 [35%]), anorexia (26 [26%]), neutropenia (24 [24%]), constipation (23 [23%]), and vomiting (20 [20%]), and were predominantly grade 1 or 2. Pharmacokinetics were dose proportional and the mean terminal elimination half-life was 36·4 h (range 32·8-46·0). Pharmacodynamic analyses confirmed PARP inhibition exceeded 50% at doses greater than 80 mg/day and antitumour activity was documented beyond doses of 60 mg/day. Eight (40% [95% CI 19-64]) of 20 BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers with ovarian cancer had RECIST partial responses, as did two (50% [7-93]) of four mutation carriers with breast cancer. Antitumour activity was also reported in sporadic high-grade serous ovarian cancer, non-small-cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer. We recorded no correlation between loss of PTEN expression or ETS rearrangements and measures of antitumour activity in patients with prostate cancer. A recommended phase 2 dose of 300 mg/day niraparib is well tolerated. Niraparib should be further assessed in inherited and sporadic cancers with homologous recombination DNA repair defects and to target PARP-mediated transcription in cancer. Merck Sharp and Dohme.

[PMID: 23934192]
Excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) is a DNA repair enzyme that is frequently defective in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although low ERCC1 expression correlates with platinum sensitivity, the clinical effectiveness of platinum therapy is limited, highlighting the need for alternative treatment strategies. To discover new mechanism-based therapeutic strategies for ERCC1-defective tumours, we performed high-throughput drug screens in an isogenic NSCLC model of ERCC1 deficiency and dissected the mechanism underlying ERCC1-selective effects by studying molecular biomarkers of tumour cell response. The high-throughput screens identified multiple clinical poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and 2 (PARP1/2) inhibitors, such as olaparib (AZD-2281), niraparib (MK-4827) and BMN 673, as being selective for ERCC1 deficiency. We observed that ERCC1-deficient cells displayed a significant delay in double-strand break repair associated with a profound and prolonged G₂/M arrest following PARP1/2 inhibitor treatment. Importantly, we found that ERCC1 isoform 202, which has recently been shown to mediate platinum sensitivity, also modulated PARP1/2 sensitivity. A PARP1/2 inhibitor-synthetic lethal siRNA screen revealed that ERCC1 deficiency was epistatic with homologous recombination deficiency. However, ERCC1-deficient cells did not display a defect in RAD51 foci formation, suggesting that ERCC1 might be required to process PARP1/2 inhibitor-induced DNA lesions before DNA strand invasion. PARP1 silencing restored PARP1/2 inhibitor resistance in ERCC1-deficient cells but had no effect in ERCC1-proficient cells, supporting the hypothesis that PARP1 might be required for the ERCC1 selectivity of PARP1/2 inhibitors. This study suggests that PARP1/2 inhibitors as a monotherapy could represent a novel therapeutic strategy for NSCLC patients with ERCC1-deficient tumours.

[PMID: 27141070]
Slow progress in improving the outcome of ovarian cancer with chemotherapy over the last decade has stimulated research into molecularly targeted therapy. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors target DNA repair and are specifically active in cells that have impaired repair of DNA by the homologous recombination (HR) pathway. Cells with mutated BRCA function have HR deficiency (HRD), which is also present in a significant proportion of non-BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer. In the last decade, olaparib, the first and most-investigated oral PARP inhibitor, has undergone phase I-III trials as a single agent, in comparison with and in addition to chemotherapy, and as a maintenance therapy following chemotherapy. The greatest benefit to-date has been in the maintenance setting, prolonging the progression-free survival of high-grade serous ovarian cancer with a BRCA1/2 mutation. In this group of patients, olaparib has received approval as maintenance following chemotherapy from the EMA, and accelerated approval as a single agent in women who have had three or more lines of therapy. Olaparib can be given for a prolonged period with few significant side-effects in most patients. Similar trials with other PARP inhibitors (rucaparib, niraparib and veliparib) are in progress and include non-BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer. Second-generation studies are exploring the combination of PARP inhibitors with anti-angiogenic drugs. PARP inhibitors represent a step change in the management of ovarian cancer. BRCA mutations are the first genotypic predictive markers in ovarian cancer and can be used to select patients who will most likely benefit from PARP inhibitors. BRCA testing is now becoming a routine part of the evaluation of women with ovarian cancer, and tests for HRD are being used to evaluate PARP inhibitors in an extended population of non-BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer.

[PMID: 27716873]
Recent advances in our understanding of the molecular biology of epithelial ovarian cancer have led to the development of a number of targeted therapies, including poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. PARP inhibitors are a novel class of therapeutic agents that target tumors with deficiencies in the homologous recombination DNA repair pathway. Early studies have shown significant efficacy for PARP inhibitors in patients with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. It has become evident that BRCA wild-type patients with other defects in the homologous recombination repair pathway benefit from this therapeutic approach. Importantly, companion homologous recombination deficiency scores are being developed to help guide the selection of patients most likely to gain clinical benefit from PARP inhibition. Olaparib, the first and most extensively investigated PARP inhibitor, is now licensed in Europe for maintenance treatment of patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed BRCA-mutated (germline or somatic) high-grade serous ovarian cancer who have responded to platinum-based chemotherapy. In the United States, olaparib is licensed for treatment of patients with germline BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer who have received 3 or more lines of chemotherapy. There are a number of other PARP inhibitors in late phase clinical development in ovarian cancer including rucaparib, niraparib, veliparib, and talazoparib. This review will focus on the current evidence for PARP inhibitors in ovarian cancer and discuss ongoing clinical trials and future research directions in this rapidly evolving area.

[PMID: 27717299]
Niraparib is an oral poly(adenosine diphosphate [ADP]-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 1/2 inhibitor that has shown clinical activity in patients with ovarian cancer. We sought to evaluate the efficacy of niraparib versus placebo as maintenance treatment for patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent ovarian cancer. In this randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial, patients were categorized according to the presence or absence of a germline BRCA mutation (gBRCA cohort and non-gBRCA cohort) and the type of non-gBRCA mutation and were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive niraparib (300 mg) or placebo once daily. The primary end point was progression-free survival. Of 553 enrolled patients, 203 were in the gBRCA cohort (with 138 assigned to niraparib and 65 to placebo), and 350 patients were in the non-gBRCA cohort (with 234 assigned to niraparib and 116 to placebo). Patients in the niraparib group had a significantly longer median duration of progression-free survival than did those in the placebo group, including 21.0 vs. 5.5 months in the gBRCA cohort (hazard ratio, 0.27; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.17 to 0.41), as compared with 12.9 months vs. 3.8 months in the non-gBRCA cohort for patients who had tumors with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) (hazard ratio, 0.38; 95% CI, 0.24 to 0.59) and 9.3 months vs. 3.9 months in the overall non-gBRCA cohort (hazard ratio, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.34 to 0.61; P<0.001 for all three comparisons). The most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events that were reported in the niraparib group were thrombocytopenia (in 33.8%), anemia (in 25.3%), and neutropenia (in 19.6%), which were managed with dose modifications. Among patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent ovarian cancer, the median duration of progression-free survival was significantly longer among those receiving niraparib than among those receiving placebo, regardless of the presence or absence of gBRCA mutations or HRD status, with moderate bone marrow toxicity. (Funded by Tesaro; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01847274 .).

[PMID: 26351319]
Pediatric high-grade astrocytomas (pHGA) and diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPG) are devastating malignancies for which no effective therapies exist. We investigated the therapeutic potential of PARP1 inhibition in preclinical models of pHGA and DIPG. PARP1 levels were characterized in pHGA and DIPG patient samples and tumor-derived cell lines. The effects of PARP inhibitors veliparib, olaparib, and niraparib as monotherapy or as radiosensitizers on cell viability, DNA damage, and PARP1 activity were evaluated in a panel of pHGA and DIPG cell lines. Survival benefit of niraparib was examined in an orthotopic xenograft model of pHGA. About 85% of pHGAs and 76% of DIPG tissue microarray samples expressed PARP1. Six of 8 primary cell lines highly expressed PARP1. Interestingly, across multiple cell lines, some PARP1 protein expression was required for response to PARP inhibition; however, there was no correlation between protein level or PARP1 activity and sensitivity to PARP inhibitors. Niraparib was the most effective at reducing cell viability and proliferation (MTT and Ki67). Niraparib induced DNA damage (γH2AX foci) and induced growth arrest. Pretreatment of pHGA cells with a sublethal dose of niraparib (1 μmol/L) before 2 Gy of ionizing radiation (IR) decreased the rate of DNA damage repair, colony growth, and relative cell number. Niraparib (50 mg/kg) inhibited PARP1 activity in vivo and extended survival of mice with orthotopic pHGA xenografts, when administered before IR (20 Gy, fractionated), relative to control mice (40 vs. 25 days). Our data provide in vitro and in vivo evidence that niraparib may be an effective radiosensitizer for pHGA and DIPG.

[PMID: 26281686]
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases(PARP) synthesize the ADP-ribose polymers onto proteins and play a role in DNA repair. PARP inhibitors block the repair of single-strand breaks, which in turn gives rise to double-strand breaks during DNA replication. Thus, PARP inhibitors elicit synthetic lethality in cancer with BRCA1/2 loss-of-function mutations that hamper homologous recombination repair of double-strand breaks. Olaparib, the first-in-class PARP inhibitor, was approved for treatment of BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer in Europe and the United States in 2014. Other PARP inhibitors under clinical trials include rucaparib, niraparib, veliparib, and the "PARP-trapping" BMN-673. BRCA1/2 sequencing is an FDA-approved companion diagnostics, which predicts the cancer vulnerability to PARP inhibition. Together, synthetic lethal PARP inhibition is a novel promising strategy for cancer intervention even in cases without prominent driver oncogenes.

[PMID: 25685067]
Cells with homologous recombination (HR) deficiency, most notably caused by mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes, are sensitive to PARP inhibition. Microsatellite instability (MSI) accounts for 10-15% of colorectal cancer (CRC) and is hypothesized to lead to HR defects due to altered expression of Mre11, a protein required for double strand break (DSB) repair. Indeed, others have reported that PARP inhibition is efficacious in MSI CRC. Here we examine the response to niraparib, a potent PARP-1/PARP-2 inhibitor currently under clinical evaluation, in MSI versus microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC cell lines in vitro and in vivo. We compiled a large panel of MSI and MSS CRC cell lines and evaluated the anti-proliferative activity of niraparib. In addition to testing single agent cytotoxic activity of niraparib, we also tested irinotecan (or SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan) activity alone and in combination with niraparib in vitro and in vivo. In contrast to earlier reports, MSI CRC cell lines were not more sensitive to niraparib than MSS CRC cell lines¸ suggesting that the MSI phenotype does not sensitize CRC cell lines to PARP inhibition. Moreover, even the most sensitive MSI cell lines had niraparib EC50s greater than 10 fold higher than BRCA-deficient cell lines. However, MSI lines were more sensitive to SN-38 than MSS lines, consistent with previous findings. We have also demonstrated that combination of niraparib and irinotecan was more efficacious than either agent alone in both MSI and MSS cell lines both in vitro and in vivo, and that niraparib potentiates the effect of irinotecan regardless of MSI status. Our results support the clinical evaluation of this combination in all CRC patients, regardless of MSI status.

[PMID: 25758918]
Recent findings indicate that a major mechanism by which poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors kill cancer cells is by trapping PARP1 and PARP2 to the sites of DNA damage. The PARP enzyme-inhibitor complex "locks" onto damaged DNA and prevents DNA repair, replication, and transcription, leading to cell death. Several clinical-stage PARP inhibitors, including veliparib, rucaparib, olaparib, niraparib, and talazoparib, have been evaluated for their PARP-trapping activity. Although they display similar capacity to inhibit PARP catalytic activity, their relative abilities to trap PARP differ by several orders of magnitude, with the ability to trap PARP closely correlating with each drug's ability to kill cancer cells. In this article, we review the available data on molecular interactions between these clinical-stage PARP inhibitors and PARP proteins, and discuss how their biologic differences might be explained by the trapping mechanism. We also discuss how to use the PARP-trapping mechanism to guide the development of PARP inhibitors as a new class of cancer therapy, both for single-agent and combination treatments.

[PMID: 26518726]
PARP-family ADP-ribosyltransferases (PARPs) and sirtuin deacetylases all use NAD(+) as cosubstrate for ADP-ribosyl transfer. PARP inhibitors are important research tools and several are being evaluated in cancer treatment. With the exception of a few tankyrase inhibitors, all current PARP inhibitors mimic the nicotinamide moiety in NAD(+) and block the nicotinamide binding pocket. We report here that while the activities of the four human sirtuin isoforms SIRT1, SIRT2, SIRT3 and SIRT6 are blocked by sirtuin inhibitor Ex527 in vitro, they are unaffected by the seven clinical and commonly used PARP inhibitors niraparib, olaparib, rucaparib, talazoparib, veliparib, PJ34, and XAV939. These findings indicate that PARP inhibitors containing planar nicotinamide mimetics do not bind to sirtuin cofactor sites. In conclusion, a simple commercially available assay can be used to rule out interference of novel PARP inhibitors with sirtuin NAD(+) binding.

[PMID: 26513298]
Inhibition of Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase1 (PARP1) impairs DNA damage repair, and early generation PARP1/2 inhibitors (olaparib, niraparib, etc.) have demonstrated clinical proof of concept for cancer treatment. Here, we describe the development of the novel PARP inhibitor E7449, a potent PARP1/2 inhibitor that also inhibits PARP5a/5b, otherwise known as tankyrase1 and 2 (TNKS1 and 2), important regulators of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling. E7449 inhibits PARP enzymatic activity and additionally traps PARP1 onto damaged DNA; a mechanism previously shown to augment cytotoxicity. Cells deficient in DNA repair pathways beyond homologous recombination were sensitive to E7449 treatment. Chemotherapy was potentiated by E7449 and single agent had significant antitumor activity in BRCA-deficient xenografts. Additionally, E7449 inhibited Wnt/β-catenin signaling in colon cancer cell lines, likely through TNKS inhibition. Consistent with this possibility, E7449 stabilized axin and TNKS proteins resulting in β-catenin de-stabilization and significantly altered expression of Wnt target genes. Notably, hair growth mediated by Wnt signaling was inhibited by E7449. A pharmacodynamic effect of E7449 on Wnt target genes was observed in tumors, although E7449 lacked single agent antitumor activity in vivo, a finding typical for selective TNKS inhibitors. E7449 antitumor activity was increased through combination with MEK inhibition. Particularly noteworthy was the lack of toxicity, most significantly the lack of intestinal toxicity reported for other TNKS inhibitors. E7449 represents a novel dual PARP1/2 and TNKS1/2 inhibitor which has the advantage of targeting Wnt/β-catenin signaling addicted tumors. E7449 is currently in early clinical development.

[PMID: 24970803]
The aim of this study was to assess niraparib (MK-4827), a novel poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, for its ability to radiosensitize human tumor cells. Human tumor cells derived from lung, breast and prostate cancers were tested for radiosensitization by niraparib using clonogenic survival assays. Both p53 wild-type and p53-defective lines were included. The ability of niraparib to alter the repair of radiation-induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) was determined using detection of γ-H2AX foci and RAD51 foci. Clonogenic survival analyses indicated that micromolar concentrations of niraparib radiosensitized tumor cell lines derived from lung, breast, and prostate cancers independently of their p53 status but not cell lines derived from normal tissues. Niraparib also sensitized tumor cells to H2O2 and converted H2O2-induced single strand breaks (SSBs) into DSBs during DNA replication. These results indicate that human tumor cells are significantly radiosensitized by the potent and selective PARP-1 inhibitor, niraparib, in the in vitro setting. The mechanism of this effect appears to involve a conversion of sublethal SSBs into lethal DSBs during DNA replication due to the inhibition of base excision repair by the drug. Taken together, our findings strongly support the clinical evaluation of niraparib in combination with radiation.

[PMID: 25761096]
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) are involved in DNA repair following damage by endogenous or exogenous processes. It has become clear over the past decade that inhibition of PARP in the context of defects in other DNA repair mechanisms provide a tumor specific way to kill cancer cells. We describe the rationale for this approach and the design and discovery of niraparib, a potent PARP-1/2 inhibitor with good cell based activity, selectivity for cancer over normal cells, and oral bioavailability. Niraparib was characterized in a number of preclinical models before moving to phase I clinical trials, where it showed excellent human pharmacokinetics suitable for once a day oral dosing, achieved its pharmacodynamic target for PARP inhibition, and had promising activity in cancer patients. It is currently being tested in phase 3 clinical trials as maintenance therapy in ovarian cancer and as a treatment for breast cancer.

[PMID: 27141062]
For several years, a major obstacle in the systemic treatment of ovarian cancer has been the lack of a therapeutic strategy tailored to specific biomarkers present in the individual patient's tumour. However, considerable progress has been made recently through the development of drugs targeting cells deficient in the key mechanism of double-strand DNA repair, known as homologous recombination (HRD). These drugs, inhibitors of the enzyme poly (ADP) ribose polymerase (PARP), selectively kill HRD cells through a process known as tumour-selective synthetic lethality. Olaparib is the first such agent, now approved for the treatment of ovarian cancer associated with mutations in the BRCA 1/2 genes, since these are characterised by cells with HRD. Importantly, another group of patients with tumours bearing a similar repair deficiency but without BRCA mutations may also be susceptible to PARP inhibition and efforts to develop an HRD assay are therefore a priority so that these patients can be identified as PARPi candidates. In addition, combination strategies are an area of intense research; these include combinations with antiangiogenic agents and with inhibitors of the P13K/AKT pathway and others are likely to merit assessment since resistance to PARP inhibitors will certainly emerge as the next challenge. While olaparib is the first PARP inhibitor to receive approval for ovarian cancer treatment, others including rucaparib and niraparib are clearly effective in this disease and, within the next year or two, the results of ongoing randomised trials will clarify their respective roles. PARP inhibitors are generally well tolerated; regulatory approval at present supports their use as a maintenance therapy (in Europe) and as treatment for advanced recurrent disease (in the United States), but it is likely that these indications will extend as the results of ongoing trials become available. Ten years have elapsed between the first pre-clinical publications and the regulatory approval of PARP inhibitors and the next 10 years promise to be even more productive.

[PMID: 23118055]
Small-molecule inhibitors of PARP are thought to mediate their antitumor effects as catalytic inhibitors that block repair of DNA single-strand breaks (SSB). However, the mechanism of action of PARP inhibitors with regard to their effects in cancer cells is not fully understood. In this study, we show that PARP inhibitors trap the PARP1 and PARP2 enzymes at damaged DNA. Trapped PARP-DNA complexes were more cytotoxic than unrepaired SSBs caused by PARP inactivation, arguing that PARP inhibitors act in part as poisons that trap PARP enzyme on DNA. Moreover, the potency in trapping PARP differed markedly among inhibitors with niraparib (MK-4827) > olaparib (AZD-2281) >> veliparib (ABT-888), a pattern not correlated with the catalytic inhibitory properties for each drug. We also analyzed repair pathways for PARP-DNA complexes using 30 genetically altered avian DT40 cell lines with preestablished deletions in specific DNA repair genes. This analysis revealed that, in addition to homologous recombination, postreplication repair, the Fanconi anemia pathway, polymerase β, and FEN1 are critical for repairing trapped PARP-DNA complexes. In summary, our study provides a new mechanistic foundation for the rational application of PARP inhibitors in cancer therapy.

[PMID: 27614696]
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have yielded encouraging responses in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGSOCs), but the optimal treatment setting remains unknown. We assessed the effect of niraparib on HGSOC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models as well as the relationship between certain markers of homologous recombination (HR) status, including BRCA1/2 mutations and formation of RAD51 foci after DNA damage, and response of these PDXs to niraparib in vivo. Massively parallel sequencing was performed on HGSOCs to identify mutations contributing to HR deficiency. HR pathway integrity was assessed using fluorescence microscopy-based RAD51 focus formation assays. Effects of niraparib (MK-4827) on treatment-naïve PDX tumor growth as monotherapy, in combination with carboplatin/paclitaxel, and as maintenance therapy were assessed by transabdominal ultrasound. Niraparib responses were correlated with changes in levels of poly(ADP-ribose), PARP1, and repair proteins by western blotting. Five PDX models were evaluated in vivo. Tumor regressions were induced by single-agent niraparib in one of two PDX models with deleterious BRCA2 mutations and in a PDX with RAD51C promoter methylation. Diminished formation of RAD51 foci failed to predict response, but Artemis loss was associated with resistance. Niraparib generally failed to enhance responses to carboplatin/paclitaxel chemotherapy, but maintenance niraparib therapy delayed progression in a BRCA2-deficient PDX. Mutations in HR genes are neither necessary nor sufficient to predict response to niraparib. Assessment of repair status through multiple complementary assays is needed to guide PARP inhibitor therapy, design future clinical trials and identify ovarian cancer patients most likely to benefit from PARP inhibition.

[PMID: 24356813]
Anti-PARP drugs were initially developed as catalytic inhibitors to block the repair of DNA single-strand breaks. We recently reported that several PARP inhibitors have an additional cytotoxic mechanism by trapping PARP-DNA complexes, and that both olaparib and niraparib act as PARP poisons at pharmacologic concentrations. Therefore, we have proposed that PARP inhibitors should be evaluated based both on catalytic PARP inhibition and PARP-DNA trapping. Here, we evaluated the novel PARP inhibitor, BMN 673, and compared its effects on PARP1 and PARP2 with two other clinical PARP inhibitors, olaparib and rucaparib, using biochemical and cellular assays in genetically modified chicken DT40 and human cancer cell lines. Although BMN 673, olaparib, and rucaparib are comparable at inhibiting PARP catalytic activity, BMN 673 is ∼100-fold more potent at trapping PARP-DNA complexes and more cytotoxic as single agent than olaparib, whereas olaparib and rucaparib show similar potencies in trapping PARP-DNA complexes. The high level of resistance of PARP1/2 knockout cells to BMN 673 demonstrates the selectivity of BMN 673 for PARP1/2. Moreover, we show that BMN 673 acts by stereospecific binding to PARP1 as its enantiomer, LT674, is several orders of magnitude less efficient. BMN 673 is also approximately 100-fold more cytotoxic than olaparib and rucaparib in combination with the DNA alkylating agents methyl methane sulfonate (MMS) and temozolomide. Our study demonstrates that BMN 673 is the most potent clinical PARP inhibitor tested to date with the highest efficiency at trapping PARP-DNA complexes.

[PMID: 27810860]
Results from a phase III trial indicate that maintenance therapy with the PARP inhibitor niraparib is more effective than placebo in slowing the progression of recurrent platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer. Improved progression-free survival was seen regardless of the presence or absence of germline BRCA mutations, or of homologous recombination deficiency; however, patients who had these mutations or defective DNA repair did better.