[PMID: 32079664]
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated with a significant disease burden and high costs for society. Because the disease has identifiable preclinical stages, screening and prevention have become a possibility in RA. Anticitrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs) are arguably the most likely candidate biomarker to screen for RA. This paper reviews the evidence for the use of ACPAs as a screening test in the broader general population, to identify individuals at high risk of subsequent onset of RA. We will review the diagnostic properties of the test and its positive and negative predictive value in different settings. We will discuss how ACPA testing could effectively be integrated in a broader screening strategy for RA.

[PMID: 16188943]
Anticitrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPA) have an excellent diagnostic performance for rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Despite similarities between RA and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), the prevalence of ACPA in polyarticular JIA is low. We wanted to evaluate the influence of age, disease duration and total immunoglobulin G (IgG) concentration on ACPA positivity in this cohort. Patients with JIA were classified according to age and International League of Associations for Rheumatology classification. Sixty-one JIA patients aged less than 16 yr were included and classified as polyarticular JIA (poly JIA <16; n=23) or non-polyarticular JIA (n=38). In addition, a group of 21 polyarticular JIA patients, aged more than 16 yr (poly JIA >16) and a group of 51 RA patients were included. Antibodies to the synthetic citrullinated peptides pepA and pepB were detected by line immunoassay and antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCP2) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Serum IgG was measured by fixed-time immunonephelometry. No ACPA reactivity was observed in the non-polyarticular group. In poly JIA <16, only 1/23 had anti-CCP2 antibody, whereas in poly JIA >16 patients a significantly higher fraction was detected (6/21). All but one of the anti-CCP2 reactive patients were rheumatoid factor (RF) positive. Assessing anti-CCP2 antibody concentration as a continuous variable, significantly higher titres were found in poly JIA >16 compared with poly JIA <16. No correlation between anti-CCP2 concentration and total IgG was detected. Four patients demonstrated immunoreactivity against pepA and pepB; all of them were anti-CCP2 reactive, poly JIA >16 patients. ACPA are present in low prevalence in polyarticular JIA and are particularly found in the RF-positive subset. With age, a significant increase in anti-CCP2 positivity is observed in polyarticular JIA patients.

[PMID: 22661643]
To increase understanding of the aetiology and pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), genetic and environmental risk factors for RA subsets, defined by the presence or absence of different anticitrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPAs) targeting citrullinated peptides from α-enolase, vimentin, fibrinogen and collagen type II, were investigated. 1985 patients with RA and 2252 matched controls from the EIRA case-control cohort were used in the study. Serum samples were assayed by ELISA for the presence of anticyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP) antibodies and four different ACPA fine specificities. Cross-reactivity between ACPAs was examined by peptide absorption experiments. Genotyping was performed for HLA-DRB1 shared epitope (SE) alleles and the PTPN22 gene, while information regarding smoking was obtained by questionnaire. The association of genetic and environmental risk factors with different subsets of RA was calculated by logistic regression analysis. Limited cross-reactivity was observed between different ACPA fine specificities. In total, 17 RA subsets could be identified based on their different ACPA fine specificity profiles. Large differences in association with genetic and environmental determinants were observed between subsets. The strongest association of HLA-DRB1 SE, PTPN22 and smoking was identified for the RA subset which was defined by the presence of antibodies to citrullinated α-enolase and vimentin. This study provides the most comprehensive picture to date of how HLA-DRB1 SE, PTPN22 and smoking are associated with the presence of specific ACPA reactivities rather than anti-CCP levels. The new data will form a basis for molecular studies aimed at understanding disease development in serologically distinct subsets of RA.

[PMID: 27696777]
Citrullinated proteins have been found within atherosclerotic plaque. However, studies evaluating the association between anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) and imaging measures of atherosclerosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have been limited to seroreactive citrullinated fibrinogen or citrullinated vimentin and have rendered contradictory results. Therefore, our objective was to evaluate this association using an extended panel of ACPAs in a larger sample of RA patients without clinical cardiovascular disease (CVD). ACPAs were identified using a custom Bio-Plex bead assay in 270 patients from 2 independent RA cohorts without clinical CVD, with the first one consisting of 195 patients and the other of 75 patients. Coronary artery calcium (CAC) was assessed by computed tomography as a measure of coronary artery disease. High levels of anti-citrullinated histone H2B antibodies were strongly associated with higher CAC scores, compared with lower antibody levels (P = 0.001); this remained significant after adjustment for traditional CV and RA-specific risk factors (P = 0.03). No association between levels of ACPAs and CAC progression at 3 years was seen (P = 0.09); however, the number of progressors was small (n = 92). Higher levels of ACPAs targeting Cit-histone H2B were associated with higher CAC scores when compared to lower antibody levels, suggesting a potential role for histone citrullination seroreactivity in atherosclerosis.

[PMID: 31565241]
Anticitrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) responses for 22 citrullinated peptides in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were analysed and related to radiological and clinical outcome during the first 2 years in a prospective inception cohort. The ACPA reactivities were assessed in 1022 patients with early RA (symptoms <12 months) using the custom-made microarray chip (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden) in a prospective longitudinal study of observational assessments of Disease Activity Score (DAS28 and its components) and radiology during the first 24 months, accounting for the treatment. Frequency of ACPA reactivities varied between 13.3% and 63.1%. Of the anticyclic citrullinated peptide-2 (anti-CCP2) antibody-negative patients, ACPA reactivities were positive in 32.6%. Smoking, human leucocyte antigen-shared epitope (HLA-SE), anti-CCP2/rheumatoid factor, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 (1858C/T) and DAS28 were significantly associated with number of ACPA reactivities. The ACPA reactivities modified differently the development of DAS28 over 24 months (identified using trajectories). Anti-Filaggrin307-324, anti-hnRNP (Peptide)-Z1 and anti-F4-CIT-R antibodies anticipated lower DAS28 values (p<0.01-0.05), while positivity for anti-Fibrinogen(Fib)β62-78(74), and anti-Fibα563-583 predicted higher DAS28 (p<0.01 both). Interaction between anti-Fibß36-52, anti-Pept-5 and anti-Bla-26 antibodies, respectively, and DAS28 during 24 months decreased significantly the DAS28 values (p<0.01-0.05). Corticosteroids and biologicals were related to DAS28-area under the curve and Larsen score 24 months. Anti-vimentin2-17 antibodies remained significantly associated with Larsen score at baseline and 24 months, respectively, and radiological progression, besides biologicals at 24 months adjusted for sex and age. Several ACPA reactivities modified significantly the DAS28 development during the first 24 months and were significantly associated with Larsen score at baseline, 24 months and radiological progression.

[PMID: 29290168]
Anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) are serological biomarkers associated with early, rapidly progressing rheumatoid arthritis (RA), including more severe disease and joint damage. ACPA testing has become a routine tool for RA diagnosis and prognosis. Furthermore, treatment efficacy has been shown to vary by ACPA-positive status. However, it is not clear if the economic burden of patients with RA varies by ACPA status. To determine if the economic burden of RA varies by patient ACPA status. IMS PharMetrics Plus health insurance claims and electronic medical record (EMR) data from 2010-2015 were used to identify patients with incident RA. Patients were aged ≥ 18 years, had ≥ 1 inpatient or ≥ 2 outpatient claims reporting an RA diagnosis code (ICD-9-CM code 714.0), and had an anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP; a surrogate of ACPA) antibody test within 6 months of diagnosis. Incident patients were defined as those who had no claims with an RA diagnosis code in the 6 months before the first observed RA diagnosis. The primary outcome of interest was RA-related medical expenditures, defined as the sum of payer- and patient-paid amounts for all claims with an RA diagnosis code. Secondary outcomes included health care utilization metrics such as treatment with a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) and physician visits. Generalized linear regression models were used for each outcome, controlling for ACPA-positive status (defined as anti-CCP ≥ 20 AU/mL), age, sex, and Charlson Comorbidity Index score as explanatory variables. Of 647,171 patients diagnosed with RA, 89,296 were incident cases, and 47% (n = 42,285) had an anti-CCP test. After restricting this sample to patients with a linked EMR and reported anti-CCP test result, 859 remained, with 24.7% (n = 212) being ACPA-positive. Compared with ACPA-negative patients, adjusted results showed that ACPA-positive patients were more likely to use either conventional (71.2% vs. 49.6%; P < 0.001) or biologic (20.3% vs. 11.8%; P < 0.001) DMARDs during the first year after diagnosis and had more physician visits (5.58 vs. 3.91 times per year; P < 0.001). Annual RA-associated total expenditures were $7,941 for ACPA-positive and $5,243 for ACPA-negative patients (Δ = $2,698; P = 0.002). RA-associated medical expenditures were $4,380 for ACPA-positive and $3,427 for ACPA-negative patients (Δ = $954; P = 0.168), whereas DMARD expenditures were $3,560 and $1,817, respectively (Δ = $1,743; P = 0.001). RA-related economic burden is higher for patients who are ACPA-positive compared with those who are ACPA-negative. Providers may wish to inform patients diagnosed with ACPA-positive RA about the likely future disease and economic burden in hopes that both stakeholders can be more proactive in addressing them. Funding for this research was contributed by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Patel and Price are employees and stockholders of Bristol-Myers Squibb. Shafrin and Tebeka are employees of Precision Health Economics, a health care consulting firm that received funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb to conduct this study. Michaud has received a grant from Pfizer and is employed by the National Data Bank for Rheumatic Diseases, which has received funds from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Pfizer, and Regeneron. Study concept and design were contributed by Shafrin, Price, Patel, and Michaud. Shafrin, Price, and Patel collected the data, and all authors contributed equally to data analysis. The manuscript was written by Shafrin and Tebeka and revised by Shafrin, Price, Patel, and Michaud.

[PMID: 30297575]
Anti-citrullinated peptides antibodies (ACPA) are specific for rheumatoid arthritis and have been implicated in disease pathogenesis. ACPA examination is a new component of ACR/EULAR 2010 classification criteria for rheumatoid arthritis. ACPA positivity predicts a more erosive disease course with severe joint damage and extra-articular manifestations. To evaluate the benefits of ACPA examination in patients with early undifferentiated arthritis and patients with rheumatoid arthritis. We examined patients with arthritis and tested them for ACPA positivity. In every individual patient we evaluated if ACPA examination was necessary to establish the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, or to change treatment, or if the diagnosis could have been established without ACPA examination (ACR/EULAR 2010 classification criteria was met without ACPA scoring). The study was placed in Slovak Republic. We examined 833 patients with arthritis. There were 43 patients, or 62% of a subgroup of 69 who were ACPA positive whose ACPA examination was not needed-ACR/EULAR criteria was met without ACPA scoring. This number represents 5.1% of the total number examined. There were 15 patients, or 22% of the subgroup and 1.8% of the total whose diagnosis was revised to rheumatoid arthritis due to ACPA positivity-ACR/EULAR criteria were met solely with ACPA scoring. There were 11 patients (16% and 1.3%) whose medication was changed due to ACPA positivity. ACPA examination is useful in 3.1% of all examined patients. When we correlate data on ACPA positive patients, 38% of the patients profit from ACPA examinations. Considering the relatively low price of ACPA testing, this examination should not be excluded.

[PMID: 28826660]
Anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPA) represent an important tool for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and the presence of multiple ACPA specificities is highly correlated with the evolution towards RA. However, little is known about the association of single specificities with disease manifestations and response to therapy in established RA. The aim of this work is to evaluate in a retrospective study the clinico-serological association of ACPA detected using VCP1 and VCP2 (EBV-derived citrullinated peptides) and HCP1 and HCP2 (histone-H4-derived citrulinated peptides) in established RA. In 413 RA patients, anti-VCP1, -VCP2, -HCP1, -HCP2 were measured by ELISA. Patients were evaluated for systemic involvement, disease activity/severity, ongoing and past therapies. Data were analyzed by cluster analysis (CA) and principal component analysis (PCA). Anti-VCP1 were detected in 44% of RA patients; anti-VCP2 in 52%; anti-HCP1 in 46% and anti-HCP2 in 63%. CA and PCA independently demonstrated that ACPA levels are associated with RF positivity, and lung involvement. Subdividing patients in 5 groups according to the number of anti-peptide antibodies, mean antibody level and RF positivity, as well as the frequency of lung involvement, progressively increase in parallel with the number of ACPA specificities. Higher number/levels of ACPA subtypes is associated with lung involvement but not with erosive disease. Moreover, a broader ACPA repertoire may identify patients treated with biological therapy, probably affected by a more severe disease. In conclusion, ACPA typing might be relevant for a better characterization of some disease features in established RA.

[PMID: 29200020]
The aim of this study was to evaluate the presence of autoantibodies to cyclic citrullinated synthetic peptides (ACPAs) in the sputum of patients with long-standing rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Nineteen consecutive RA patients and 16 age- and sex-matched control subjects participated in this cross-sectional study. All underwent complete lung function tests and provided induced sputum. Antibodies to citrullinated (CitP) and the corresponding norleucine-containing (NorP) peptides in the sputum of the RA patients and control subjects, as well as in the serum of the RA patients, were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Patients with RA had the following characteristics: mean disease duration of 12 years, Disease Activity Score for 28 joints of 3.44, and Sharp-van der Heijde score of 57.5. Ten of the 19 RA patients showed high titers of ACPAs in their sera. Four of the seropositive (40%), none of the seronegative RA patients, and only 1 of the control subjects showed detectable levels of ACPAs in their sputum. The ratio between the reactivity with CitP and NorP peptides in the sputum was significantly higher in RA sputum than in control sputum (1.33 ± 1.2 vs. 0.64 ± 0.14, P = 0.02). A positive correlation was found between sputum ACPAs and age, serum ACPAs, sputum anti-NorP, serum anti-CitP/NorP reactivity ratio, and the proportion of neutrophils and lymphocytes in the sputum. No significant correlation was found between sputum ACPAs and disease severity, history of smoking, lung function tests, or treatment for RA. Anticitrullinated protein/peptide antibodies can be detected in the sputum of RA patients and are correlated with the presence in the serum.

[PMID: 24206219]
Anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) constitute a class of autoantibodies found in 60-70% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The most common test for ACPA positivity is based on the occurrence of antibodies that bind to circular citrullinated peptides, so-called CCP, some of which are derived from endogenously citrullinated proteins, like filaggrin. Several lines of evidence suggest that these autoantibodies may confer pathological reactions. They appear years before onset of clinical disease and are associated with worse prognosis and a more erosive disease. Their presence correlates with the most prominent genetic risk factors for RA development, and they were recently described to mediate relevant biological functions such as activation of complement system and induction of osteoclastogenesis. The development of new drugs that specifically target these autoantibodies is an appealing and novel approach. Herein, we briefly review the autoimmune condition of RA, characterized by the presence of ACPA, and we describe how the neutralization of autoantibodies might become a novel pharmacological principle.

[PMID: 27348081]
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune connective tissue disease, associated with the presence of anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA). These antibodies have been found in approximately 70% of patients suffering from RA and they are currently used for diagnosis of RA. Although they exhibit an absolute need for citrulline for antibody reactivity, no precise cognate antigen for these antibodies has been determined. In this study, we analyzed the reactivity of ACPA to various citrullinated peptides by modified enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, in order to determine the dependency of specific amino acids for antibody reactivity. A non-human protein (ovalbumin) and antigens directly related to RA were used as templates for synthesis of non-modified and citrullinated peptides, becoming potential target epitopes. Mainly peptides containing a Cit-Gly motif were recognized by ACPAs, while no particular amino acids N-terminal of citrulline were found to be essential for antibody reactivity. Moreover, ACPA reactivity was not restricted to antigens known to be associated with ACPA-positive RA alone, but also to proteins without relation to RA, primarily illustrating that any protein in theory can be turned into an RA autoantigen, by introducing Cit-Gly motifs. Knowledge about the interaction between ACPAs and their citrullinated targets is important for understanding autoimmune ACPA responses in RA, which are known to contribute to the pathophysiology.

[PMID: 23440041]
Antibodies targeting citrullinated proteins (ACPAs [anticitrullinated protein antibodies]) are commonly found in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), strongly associate with distinct HLA-DR alleles, and predict a more aggressive disease course as compared with seronegative patients. Still, many features of these antibodies, including their site of production and the extent of MHC class II-driven T cell help, remain unclarified. To address these questions, we have used a single B cell-based cloning technology to isolate and express immunoglobulin (Ig) genes from joint-derived B cells of active RA patients. We found ∼25% of synovial IgG-expressing B cells to be specific for citrullinated autoantigens in the investigated ACPA(+) RA patients, whereas such antibodies were not found in ACPA(-) patients. The citrulline-reactive monoclonal antibodies did not react with the unmodified arginine peptides, yet several reacted with more than one citrullinated antigen. A role for active antigen selection of the citrulline-reactive synovial B cells was supported by the strong bias toward amino acid replacement mutations in ACPA(+) antibodies and by their loss of reactivity to citrullinated autoantigens when somatic mutations were reverted to the corresponding germline sequences.

[PMID: 27755123]
This article reviews recent literature on the origin and pathogenic role of anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). ACPAs and ACPA-immune complexes interact with immune cells to facilitate articular inflammation. Findings from recent in vitro and in vivo studies are congruent with epidemiologic observations in RA supporting a pathogenic role of ACPAs. ACPAs target proteins/peptides with citrullinated epitopes and serve as informative RA biomarkers. ACPAs are generated within synovium and possibly at extra-articular sites prior to disease onset. Proximate to RA onset, critical qualitative and quantitative changes to ACPAs occur that drive proinflammatory responses. Unable to induce arthritis alone, the administration of ACPAs enhances the development and severity of inflammation in mice when a mild synovitis is already present. In vitro studies have elucidated several possible mechanisms linking ACPA to disease progression including: first, activation of inflammatory cells by ACPA-immune complexes; second, ACPA-mediated neutrophil cell death producing neutrophil extracellular traps, which drives inflammation and autoimmunity by releasing citrullinated autoantigen; and finally, direct binding of ACPAs to osteoclasts and resulting osteoclastogenesis. Together, these recent investigations have begun to elucidate the different mechanisms by which ACPAs may be directly pathogenic in RA.

[PMID: 25120260]
Anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPAs) are detected in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) sera and because of their strict association with the disease are considered marker antibodies, probably endowed with pathogenic potential. Antibody affinity is one of the parameters affecting pathogenicity. Three diagnostic citrullinated peptides-viral citrullinated peptide 1 (VCP1) and VCP2 derived from Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded proteins and histone citrullinated peptide 1 (HCP1) derived from histone H4-were synthesized as tetrameric multiple antigen peptides and immobilized on sensor chips CM5 type in a Biacore T100 instrument. Specific binding of purified antibodies from RA patients to the three peptides was analyzed by surface plasmon resonance using two arginine-containing sequences as controls. Employing a 1:1 binding model for affinity constant calculation, ACPAs interacted with VCP1 and VCP2 with lower apparent affinity (10(-6) M>KD>10(-7) M) and interacted with HCP1 with higher apparent affinity (KD=10(-8) M). The results indicate that the binding to citrullinated peptides is characterized by wide differences in affinity, with slower association and faster dissociation rates in the case of antibodies to viral citrullinated peptides as compared with antibodies specific for the histone peptide. This biosensor analysis shows the high cross-reactivity of purified ACPAs that bind other citrullinated peptides besides the one used for purification.

[PMID: 24429169]
Anticitrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPA) are implicated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pathogenesis and linked to the shared epitope (SE). Citrulline modification is very similar to a different modified amino acid, homocitrulline. We investigated antihomocitrullinated protein/ peptide antibody (AHCPA) specificity for RA, whether ACPA were also able to bind homocitrullinated targets, and whether the SE could accommodate homocitrullinated peptide. Homocitrullinated fibrinogen was used to screen sera from patients with RA, psoriatic arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus, and healthy subjects for AHCPA using ELISA. Homocitrullination sites on fibrinogen were identified by mass spectrometry. ACPA were affinity-purified using a synthetic citrullinated peptide and tested for binding to homocitrullinated protein/peptide. Inhibition of antihomocitrullinated fibrinogen antibody binding was examined. Homocitrullinated peptide interaction with the SE was studied using computer modeling. IgG antihomocitrullinated fibrinogen antibodies were found specifically in 49% of patients with RA. Enrichment of ACPA by affinity purification from 5 patients with RA also enriched AHCPA. Serum AHCPA was inhibited by citrullinated fibrinogen and more significantly by homocitrullinated fibrinogen. Computer modeling indicated that the SE could accommodate a homocitrullinated peptide without steric hindrance. Mass spectrometry identified that 89/103 lysines of fibrinogen could be homocitrullinated, and 5 peptides that could be both citrullinated and homocitrullinated and are predicted to bind the SE. Antihomocitrullinated fibrinogen antibodies are specific to RA. The presence of AHCPA coincides with ACPA, and AHCPA copurifies with ACPA in affinity purification and is inhibited by citrullinated and homocitrullinated antigens. Thus AHCPA and ACPA are frequently cross-reactive and homocitrullinated proteins/peptides may bind the SE.

[PMID: 25997035]
Anticitrullinated peptide/protein antibodies (ACPA), which are highly specific for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), may be found in some patients with other systemic autoimmune diseases. The clinical significance of ACPA in patients with antisynthetase syndrome (ASS), a systemic disease characterized by the association of myositis, interstitial lung disease, polyarthralgia, and/or polyarthritis, has not yet been evaluated with regard to phenotype, prognosis, and response to treatment. ACPA-positive ASS patients were first identified among a French multicenter registry of patients with ASS. Additionally, all French rheumatology and internal medicine practitioners registered on the Club Rhumatismes et Inflammation web site were asked to report their observations of ASS patients with ACPA. The 17 collected patients were retrospectively studied using a standardized questionnaire and compared with 34 unselected ACPA-negative ASS patients in a case-control study. All ACPA-positive ASS patients suffered from arthritis versus 41% in the control group (P < 0.0001). The number of swollen joints was significantly higher (7.0 ± 5.0 vs 2.9 ± 3.9, P < 0.005), with a distribution resembling that of RA. Radiographic damages were also more frequent in ACPA-positive ASS patients (87% vs 11%, P < 0.0001). Aside from a significantly higher transfer factor for carbon monoxide in ACPA-ASS patients, lung, muscle, and skin involvements had similar incidences, patterns, and severity in both groups. Although Nonbiologic treatments were similarly used in both groups, ACPA-positive patients received biologics more frequently (59% vs 12%, P < 0.0008), mostly due to refractory arthritis (n = 9). Eight patients received anti-Cluster of differentiation 20 (CD20) monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) with good efficacy and tolerance, whereas 2 of the 5 patients treated with antitumor necrosis factor drugs had worsened myositis and/or interstitial lung disease. After a >7-year mean follow-up, extra-articular outcomes and survival were not different. ACPA-positive ASS patients showed an overlapping RA-ASS syndrome, were at high risk of refractory erosive arthritis, and might experience ASS flare when treated with antitumor necrosis factor drugs. In contrast, other biologics such as anti-CD20 mAb were effective in this context, without worsening systemic involvements.

[PMID: 26613769]
Patients with clinically suspect arthralgia (CSA) have, according to their rheumatologists, an increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but their actual outcome is unexplored. This longitudinal study investigated (1) progression from CSA to clinically detectable arthritis and (2) associations of clinical factors, serological factors (among which are anticitrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs)) and MRI-detected subclinical inflammation with arthritis development. 150 patients with CSA were followed for ≥6 months. At baseline, clinical and serological data were collected and unilateral 1.5 T-MRI of metacarpophalangeal (MCP), wrist and metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints was made. MRI scoring was done according to the RA MRI scoring system. Subclinical MRI inflammation was defined based on MRI results of 193 symptom-free persons. During follow-up (median=75 weeks, IQR=41-106 weeks), 30 patients developed clinical arthritis; 87% did so <20 weeks after inclusion. In multivariable analyses, age, localisation of initial symptoms in small and large joints (compared with small joints only), C-reactive protein level, ACPA-positivity and subclinical MRI inflammation significantly associated with arthritis development; ACPA and MRI inflammation were most strongly associated (HR (95% CI) respectively, 6.43 (2.57 to 16.05) and 5.07 (1.77 to 14.50)). After 1-year follow-up, 31% of the patients with MRI inflammation and 71% of the ACPA-positive patients with MRI inflammation had progressed to arthritis. Forty-three per cent of the patients that developed arthritis within 1 year were ACPA-negative; 78% of them had subclinical MRI inflammation at baseline. When MRI inflammation was absent arthritis development was infrequent (6% in all patients with CSA and 3% in ACPA-negative patients with CSA). Subclinical MRI inflammation precedes clinical arthritis with a few months. Subclinical MRI inflammation is, independent of other factors such as ACPA, associated with arthritis development.

[PMID: 25819755]
Anti-citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) is a highly specific autoantibody to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Recent studies have revealed that periodontal disease (PD) is closely associated with RA and production of ACPA in RA. Analyses of associations between PD and ACPA production in a healthy population may deepen our understandings. Here, we analyzed a total of 9554 adult healthy subjects. ACPA and IgM-rheumatoid factor (RF) was quantified and PD status was evaluated using the number of missing teeth (MT), the Community Periodontal Index (CPI) and Loss of Attachment (LA) for these subjects. PD status was analyzed for its association with the positivity and categorical levels of ACPA and RF conditioned for covariates which were shown to be associated with PD, ACPA or RF. As a result, all of MT, CPI and LA showed suggestive or significant associations with positivity (p = 0.024, 0.0042 and 0.037, respectively) and levels of ACPA (p ≤ 0.00031), but none of the PD parameters were associated with those of RF. These association patterns were also observed when we analyzed 6206 non-smokers of the participants. The significant associations between PD parameters and positivity and levels of ACPA in healthy population support the fundamental involvement of PD with ACPA production.

[PMID: 18270852]
Anticitrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPA) are highly specific for rheumatoid arthritis (RA). They can be found early in the disease course and are associated with more severe joint destruction and disease activity. In the last 4 years, important progress has been made in the detection and identification of ACPA, improving antigenic composition and epitope recognition. Consequently, many ACPA-ELISA kits have been developed by several manufacturers and are now commercially available. However, albeit their widespread use in clinical laboratories, the use of some kits has not been accompanied by a clinical validation nor by a comparative evaluation of their diagnostic accuracy. In addition, full automation of ACPA assays featuring ease of use, rapid response, and high productivity is just beginning to appear on the market and also deserves clinical and analytical validation. This review will consider the most relevant characteristics of the ACPA-ELISA assays and will describe the results of a comparative study performed with all the currently available second- and third-generation commercial methods.

[PMID: 23716070]
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is associated with high morbidity and mortality in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Citrullinated proteins are observed in RA lung tissues; however, the association of specific anticitrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPA) with ILD in RA is unknown. RA patients underwent multidetector CT (MDCT) of the chest, from which ILD features and a semiquantitative ILD Score (ILDS; range 0-32) were assessed. Anti-CCP (CCP2) and levels of a panel of antibodies against 17 citrullinated and four non-citrullinated peptides were assessed from concurrent serum samples using a custom Bio-Plex bead array. High level ACPA was defined as ≥the group 75th percentile. Among the 177 RA patients studied, median levels of CCP2 and all specific ACPAs were 46-273% higher among RA patients with versus those without ILD (all p values <0.05), and higher levels correlated with higher ILDS. In contrast, levels of non-citrullinated protein antibodies were not higher in those with ILD. RA patients had a median of 2 high level ACPA reactivities (range 0-16), with each high level ACPA associated, on average, with a 0.10 unit higher ILDS (p=0.001). This association remained significant after adjusting for characteristics associated with ILD (age, gender, current and former smoking, Disease Activity Score for 28 joints, current prednisone and leflunomide use). More high level ACPA were observed in those with versus without pulmonary function restriction or impaired diffusion. Our findings of a broader ACPA repertoire in RA ILD suggest a possible role for ACPA in the pathogenesis of ILD.