[PMID: 17431643]
Abnormal accumulation of Abeta and tau in senile plaques (SP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) is a key event in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we show that T668-phosphorylated cytoplasmic domain of APP (pT668-ACD) accumulates Abeta and tau in AD and its transgenic models. Anti-pT668 immunostaining of AD brain sections with hydrated autoclave enhancement identified SP neurites and NFTs in which pT668-ACD colocalizes with tau. We produced and examined transgenic (Tg) mice that overexpress human APP695, harboring the double Swedish/London mutation, and develop age-dependently Abeta plaques in the brain. All Abeta plaques contain co-accumulations of pT668-ACD, but co-accumulation of tau appears in only a fraction of Abeta plaques in older animals. We also examined the established tau Tg mice that overexpress the smallest human brain tau isoform and develop neuronal accumulations of tau in older animals. Examination of the old tau Tg mice showed that neuronal cells affected by tau accumulation induce co-accumulation of pT668-ACD. We speculate that in AD brains, extracellular Abeta deposition is accompanied by intracellular accumulation of pT668-ACD, followed by tau accumulation in the SP with dystrophic neurites and that neuronal cells affected by tau accumulation induce co-accumulation of pT668-ACD in NFTs. Thus, pT668-ACD is likely to mediate pathological interaction between Abeta and tau.

[PMID: 20409323]
A central feature of Alzheimer's disease is the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) to form beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta) by the beta-secretase and gamma-secretase enzymes. Although this has been shown to occur after endocytosis of APP from the cell surface, the exact compartments of APP processing are not well defined. We have previously demonstrated that APP and gamma-secretase proteins and activity are highly enriched in purified rat liver lysosomes. In order to examine the lysosomal distribution and trafficking of APP in cultured cells, we generated constructs containing APP fused to a C-terminal fluorescent protein tag and N-terminal HA-epitope tag. These were co-transfected with a panel of fluorescent-protein tagged compartment markers. Here we demonstrate using laser-scanning confocal microscopy that although APP is present throughout the endosomal/lysosomal system in transfected Cos7 and neuronal SN56 cell lines as well as in immunostained cultured mouse neurons, it is enriched in the lysosome. We also show that the Swedish and London mutations reduce the amount of APP in the lysosome. Surprisingly, in addition to its expected trafficking from the cell surface to the early and then late endosomes, we find that cell-surface labelled APP is transported rapidly and directly from the cell surface to lysosomes in both Cos7 and SN56 cells. This rapid transit to the lysosome is blocked by the presence of either the London or Swedish mutations. These results demonstrate the presence of a novel, rapid and specific transport pathway from the cell surface to the lysosomes. This suggests that regulation of lysosomal traffic could regulate APP processing and that the lysosome could play a central role in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 10525535]
Mutations of presenilin 1 (PS1) causing Alzheimer's disease selectively increase the secretion of the amyloidogenic betaA4(1-42), whereas knocking out the gene results in decreased production of both betaA4(1-40) and (1-42) amyloid peptides (De Strooper et al. 1998). Therefore, PS1 function is closely linked to the gamma-secretase processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Given the ongoing controversy on the subcellular localization of PS1, it remains unclear at what level of the secretory and endocytic pathways PS1 exerts its activity on APP and on the APP carboxy-terminal fragments that are the direct substrates for gamma-secretase. Therefore, we have reinvestigated the subcellular localization of endogenously expressed PS1 in neurons in vitro and in vivo using confocal microscopy and fine-tuned subcellular fractionation. We show that uncleaved PS1 holoprotein is recovered in the nuclear envelope fraction, whereas the cleaved PS fragments are found mainly in post-ER membranes including the intermediate compartment (IC). PS1 is concentrated in discrete sec23p- and p58/ERGIC-53-positive patches, suggesting its localization in subdomains involved in ER export. PS1 is not found to significant amounts beyond the cis-Golgi. Surprisingly, we found that APP carboxy-terminal fragments also coenrich in the pre-Golgi membrane fractions, consistent with the idea that these fragments are the real substrates for gamma-secretase. Functional evidence that PS1 exerts its effects on gamma-secretase processing of APP in the ER/IC was obtained using a series of APP trafficking mutants. These mutants were investigated in hippocampal neurons derived from transgenic mice expressing PS1wt or PS1 containing clinical mutations (PS1(M146L) and PS1(L286V)) at physiologically relevant levels. We demonstrate that the APP-London and PS1 mutations have additive effects on the increased secretion of betaA4(1-42) relative to betaA4(1-40), indicating that both mutations operate independently. Overall, our data clearly establish that PS1 controls gamma(42)-secretase activity in pre-Golgi compartments. We discuss models that reconcile this conclusion with the effects of PS1 deficiency on the generation of betaA4(1-40) peptide in the late biosynthetic and endocytic pathways.

[PMID: 16426772]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in humans. A pathological hallmark in the brain of an AD patient is extracellular amyloid plaques formed by accumulated beta-amyloid protein (Abeta), a metabolic product of amyloid precursor protein (APP). Studies have revealed a strong genetic linkage in the early-onset familial form (<60 years old) of AD. For example, some mutant APPs are transmitted dominantly and are segregated with inheritance of early onset AD. These mutants facilitate Abeta production. The "Swedish" mutations (APP(SW)) and the "London" mutation (APP(LON)) are examples of these mutants. Selective silencing of these mutant alleles holds therapeutic promise for AD. Here we show that the expression of the mutant APPs was selectively inhibited by RNA interference. The best selectivity was obtained when the mismatches were centrally placed in the antisense strand of small interfering RNAs. Introducing an additional mismatch in the antisense strand may improve the selectivity. The addition of a G at 5' end of the antisense strand may enhance the efficacy of gene silencing by RNA interference. Our results illustrate the guiding principles for selection of targeted sequences to achieve allele-specific silencing. The sequences that are effective to silence APP(SW) and APP(LON) as identified in this study may be useful in both in vivo and in vitro studies to investigate the pathophysiological role of APP(SW) and APP(LON) in AD development.

[PMID: 20523046]
Mutations in the amyloid precursor protein gene were the first to be recognized as a cause of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We describe 2 Italian families showing the missense mutation in exon 17 of the amyloid precursor protein gene on chromosome 21 (Val717Ile), known as London mutation. In 1 family, this mutation was responsible for AD in 3 out of 7 siblings and it is also present in a fourth sibling who has only shown signs of executive dysfunction so far. Two subjects of the other family with AD diagnosis were carriers of the same mutation. All AD subjects showed a cognitive profile characterized by early impairment in long-term memory, shifting abilities and affective symptoms beginning in the fifth decade of life.

[PMID: 15380017]
Transgenic mice over-expressing a mutated form of the human amyloid precursor protein (APP, 695 isoform) bearing a mutation associated with Alzheimer's disease (V642I, so-called London mutation, hereafter APPLd2) and wild-type controls were studied at age periods (3 and 10 months) prior to the overt development of neuritic amyloid plaques. Both 3- and 10-month-old APPLd2 mice had reflex eyelid responses like those of controls, but only younger mice were able to acquire a classical conditioning of eyelid responses in a trace paradigm. In vitro studies on hippocampal slices showed that 10-month-old APPLd2 mice also presented deficits in paired-pulse facilitation and long-term potentiation, but presented a normal synaptic activation of CA1 pyramidal cells by the stimulation of Schaffer collaterals. It is proposed that definite functional changes may appear well in advance of noticeable structural alterations in this animal model of Alzheimer's disease, and that specific learning tasks could have a relevant diagnostic value.

[PMID: 24145776]
Current therapies for Alzheimer's disease only treat the symptoms of the disease. We have previously developed a novel monoclonal antibody, 2B3, which binds to the β-secretase cleavage site in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and reduces the production of amyloid-β (Aβ) in human cell lines. To determine whether the antibody was likely to be effective in mouse models of amyloid pathology in vivo, we investigated whether 2B3 could also bind to APP in mouse primary cortical neurones. Primary cortical neurones were produced from E15.5-17.5 C57Bl/6 wild-type and transgenic APP/V717I (London mutation) embryos. The percentage of the neuronal population was determined by immunocytochemistry. Cells were treated with 10 μg/ml 2B3 or an irrelevant IgG for 48 h and Aβ40 levels determined by ELISA. The population of cells was found to contain over 75% neurones and 2B3 bound effectively to these cells. No differences in Aβ40 were detected between wild-type and transgenic cells. Importantly, 2B3 significantly inhibited the production of Aβ40 by 75.15±1.37% of the media control, whereas an irrelevant IgG only significantly reduced Aβ40 levels by 23.35±5.55% of the media control. The reduction in Aβ40 produced by 2B3 was significantly greater than that caused by the IgG. These data indicate that 2B3 binds to APP in mouse neurones and can inhibit Aβ40, similar to our previous findings. The antibody is probably therefore acting by steric hindrance of β-secretase and these data suggest that it will be effective in mice in vivo and could be an alternative potential therapy for Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 27421117]
One of the major histopathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is cerebral deposits of extracellular β-amyloid peptides. Preclinical studies have pointed to glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptors as a potential novel target in the treatment of AD. GLP-1 receptor agonists, including exendin-4 and liraglutide, have been shown to promote plaque-lowering and mnemonic effects of in a number of experimental models of AD. Transgenic mouse models carrying genetic mutations of amyloid protein precursor (APP) and presenilin-1 (PS1) are commonly used to assess the pharmacodynamics of potential amyloidosis-lowering and pro-cognitive compounds. In this study, effects of long-term liraglutide treatment were therefore determined in two double APP/PS1 transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease carrying different clinical APP/PS1 mutations, i.e. the 'London' (hAPPLon/PS1A246E) and 'Swedish' mutation variant (hAPPSwe/PS1ΔE9) of APP, with co-expression of distinct PS1 variants. Liraglutide was administered in 5 month-old hAPPLon/PS1A246E mice for 3 months (100 or 500 ng/kg/day, s.c.), or 7 month-old hAPPSwe/PS1ΔE9 mice for 5 months (500 ng/kg/day, s.c.). In both models, regional plaque load was quantified throughout the brain using stereological methods. Vehicle-dosed hAPPSwe/PS1ΔE9 mice exhibited considerably higher cerebral plaque load than hAPPLon/PS1A246E control mice. Compared to vehicle-dosed transgenic controls, liraglutide treatment had no effect on the plaque levels in hAPPLon/PS1A246E and hAPPSwe/PS1ΔE9 mice. In conclusion, long-term liraglutide treatment exhibited no effect on cerebral plaque load in two transgenic mouse models of low- and high-grade amyloidosis, which suggests differential sensitivity to long-term liraglutide treatment in various transgenic mouse models mimicking distinct pathological hallmarks of AD.

[PMID: 21389247]
One major hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the massive loss of synapses that occurs at an early clinical stage of the disease. In this study, we characterize alterations in spine density and the expression of synapse-associated immediate early gene Arc (activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein) in the hippocampal CA1 regions of two different amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mouse lines before plaque development and their connection to performance in hippocampus-dependent memory tests. The density of mushroom-type spines was reduced by 34% in the basal dendrites proximal to the soma of CA1 pyramidal neurons in 5.5-month-old Tg2576 mice, carrying the Swedish mutation, compared with wild-type littermates. A similar reduction of 42% was confirmed in the same region of 8-month-old APP/Lo mice, carrying the London mutation. In this strain, the reduction extended to the distal dendritic spines (28%), although no differences were found in apical dendrites in either transgenic mouse line. Both transgenic mice lines presented a significant increase in Arc protein expression in CA1 compared with controls, suggesting rather an overactivity and increased spine turnover that was supported by a significant decrease in number of somatostatin-immunopositive inhibitory interneurons in the stratum oriens of CA1. Behaviorally, the transgenic mice showed decrease freezing in the fear contextual conditioning test and impairment in spatial memory assessed by Morris water maze test. These data indicate that cognitive impairment in APP transgenic mice is correlated with impairment of synaptic connectivity in hippocampal CA1, probably attributable to loss of inhibitory interneurons and subsequent hyperactivity.

[PMID: 22171952]
In the present study, we used a new training paradigm in the intelliCage automatic behavioral assessment system to investigate cognitive functions of the transgenic mice harboring London mutation of the human amyloid precursor protein (APP.V717I). Three groups of animals: 5-, 12- and 18-24-month old were subjected to both Water Maze training and the IntelliCage-based appetitive conditioning. The spatial memory deficit was observed in all three groups of transgenic mice in both behavioral paradigms. However, the APP mice were capable to learn normally when co-housed with the wild-type (WT) littermates, in contrast to clearly impaired learning observed when the transgenic mice were housed alone. Furthermore, in the transgenic mice kept in the Intellicage alone, the cognitive deficit of the young animals was modulated by the circadian rhythm, namely was prominent only during the active phase of the day. The novel approach to study the transgenic mice cognitive abilities presented in this paper offers new insight into cognitive dysfunctions of the Alzheimer's disease mouse model.

[PMID: 16467370]
Although chronic stress is known to be linked with memory and other neurological disorders, little is known about the relationship between chronic stress and the onset or development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this study, we investigated the effects of long-term stress on the onset and severity of cognitive deficits and pathological changes in APPV717I-CT100 mice overexpressing human APP-CT100 containing the London mutation (V717I) after exposure to immobilization stress. We found that chronic immobilization stress accelerated cognitive impairments, as accessed by the Passive avoidance and the Social Transfer of Food Preference (STFP) tests. Moreover, the numbers and densities of vascular and extracellular deposits containing amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) and carboxyl-terminal fragments of amyloid precursor protein (APP-CTFs), which are pathologic markers of AD, were significantly elevated in stressed animals, especially in the hippocampus. Moreover, stressed animals, also showed highly elevated levels of neurodegeneration and tau phosphorylation and increased intraneuronal Abeta and APP-CTFs immunoreactivities in the hippocampus and in the entorhinal and piriform cortex. This study provides the first evidence that chronic stress accelerates the onset and severity of cognitive deficits and that these are highly correlated with pathological changes, which thus indicates that chronic stress may be an important contributor to the onset and development of AD.

[PMID: 24524897]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder characterized by extracellular plaques containing amyloid β (Aβ)-protein and intracellular tangles containing hyperphosphorylated Tau protein. Here, we describe the generation of inducible pluripotent stem cell lines from patients harboring the London familial AD (fAD) amyloid precursor protein (APP) mutation (V717I). We examine AD-relevant phenotypes following directed differentiation to forebrain neuronal fates vulnerable in AD. We observe that over differentiation time to mature neuronal fates, APP expression and levels of Aβ increase dramatically. In both immature and mature neuronal fates, the APPV717I mutation affects both β- and γ-secretase cleavage of APP. Although the mutation lies near the γ-secretase cleavage site in the transmembrane domain of APP, we find that β-secretase cleavage of APP is elevated leading to generation of increased levels of both APPsβ and Aβ. Furthermore, we find that this mutation alters the initial cleavage site of γ-secretase, resulting in an increased generation of both Aβ42 and Aβ38. In addition to altered APP processing, an increase in levels of total and phosphorylated Tau is observed in neurons with the APPV717I mutation. We show that treatment with Aβ-specific antibodies early in culture reverses the phenotype of increased total Tau levels, implicating altered Aβ production in fAD neurons in this phenotype. These studies use human neurons to reveal previously unrecognized effects of the most common fAD APP mutation and provide a model system for testing therapeutic strategies in the cell types most relevant to disease processes.

[PMID: 17215062]
The APP/PS1ki mouse model for Alzheimer's disease (AD) exhibits robust brain and spinal cord axonal degeneration and hippocampal CA1 neuron loss starting at 6 months of age. It expresses human mutant APP751 with the Swedish and London mutations together with two FAD-linked knocked-in mutations (PS1 M233T and PS1 L235P) in the murine PS1 gene. The present report covers a phenotypical analysis of this model using either behavioral tests for working memory and motor performance, as well as an analysis of weight development and body shape. At the age of 6 months, a dramatic, age-dependent change in all of these properties and characteristics was observed, accompanied by a significantly reduced ability to perform working memory and motor tasks. The APP/PS1ki mice were smaller and showed development of a thoracolumbar kyphosis, together with an incremental loss of body weight. While 2-month-old APP/PS1ki mice were inconspicuous in all of these tasks and properties, there is a massive age-related impairment in all tested behavioral paradigms. We have previously reported robust axonal degeneration in brain and spinal cord, as well as abundant hippocampal CA1 neuron loss starting at 6 months of age in the APP/PS1ki mouse model, which coincides with the onset of motor and memory deficits described in the present report.

[PMID: 15197738]
Amyloid precursor protein (AbetaPP), a precursor of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide, is one of the molecules involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Specific mutations in AbetaPP have been found in patients inheriting familial AD (FAD). These mutant AbetaPP proteins cause cell death in neuronal cell lines in vitro, but the molecular mechanism of cytotoxicity has not yet been clarified completely. We analyzed the cytotoxic mechanisms of the London-type AbetaPP mutant, V642I-AbetaPP, in primary cortical neurons utilizing an adenovirus-mediated gene transfer system. Expression of V642I-AbetaPP protein induced degeneration of the primary neurons. This cytotoxicity was blocked by pertussis toxin, a specific inhibitor for heterotrimeric G proteins, Go/i, and was suppressed by an inhibitor of caspase-3/7 and an antioxidant, glutathione ethyl ester. A specific inhibitor for NADPH oxidase, apocynin, but not a xanthine oxidase inhibitor or a nitric oxide inhibitor, blocked V642I-AbetaPP-induced cytotoxicity. Among mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family proteins, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38MAPK, but not extracellular regulated kinase (ERK), were involved in this cytotoxic pathway. The V642I-AbetaPP-induced cytotoxicity was not suppressed by two secretase inhibitors, suggesting that Abeta does not play a major role in this cytotoxicity. Two neuroprotective factors, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and Humanin, protected these primary neurons from V642I-AbetaPP-induced cytotoxicity. Furthermore, interleukin-6 and -11 also attenuated this cytotoxicity. This study demonstrated that the signaling pathway activated by mutated AbetaPP in the primary neurons is the same as that by the other artificial insults such as antibody binding to AbetaPP and the artificial dimerization of cytoplasmic domain of AbetaPP. The potential of neurotrophic factors and cytokines in AD therapy is also indicated.

[PMID: 23747045]
There is pivotal evidence that tau pathology can be triggered by amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology in experimental systems. On the other side, studies on human brain specimen have elucidated that tau pathology may occur before amyloid pathology is present indicating that in principle tau pathology could also trigger Aβ aggregation. To address this question, we have crossed 5XFAD mice coexpressing human mutant APP695 with the Swedish, Florida, and London mutations and human mutant presenilin-1 (PS1) with the M146L and L286V mutations with the PS19 model overexpressing human mutant tau with the P301S mutation. The resulting triple transgenic model 5XFAD/PS19 has been characterized at 3 and 9 months of age. A dramatic aggravation of hyperphosphorylated tau pathology together with a dramatically increased inflammatory response and a loss of synapses and hippocampal CA1 neurons in aged 5XFAD/PS19 mice were observed. Extracellular amyloid deposits were unaltered. These data support the assumption of tau pathology being downstream of amyloid pathology, suggesting that both pathologies together trigger the severe neuron loss in the hippocampus in the 5XFAD/PS19 mouse model.

[PMID: 15314265]
The 140-amino-acid protein alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) is the major constituent of Lewy bodies. The protein interacts with several intracellular signal transduction pathways. Reasons for onset of abnormal aggregation of alpha-syn are unclear. Metal ions, oxidative stress, and beta-amyloid 1-42 (Abeta1-42) are important induction factors for alpha-syn aggregation. beta-Synuclein (beta-syn) can counteract alpha-syn aggregation. Cross-breeding of beta-syn transgenic mice with animals overexpressing alpha-syn significantly decreased alpha-syn-positive neuronal inclusion bodies and improved motor function. This was an important proof of concept for the role of beta-syn in regulating alpha-syn aggregation. A drug discovery program based on peptide derivatives (N-terminal amino acids 1-15) of beta-syn was initiated. For screening, tissue culture models simulating disease-specific conditions were utilized. They protected against growth factor withdrawal, Abeta toxicity, and oxidative stress. Three peptides were selected (KEGV, SMAKEGV, MDFMKGLSMAKE) for in vivo studies because they also decreased expression of Abeta1-40 and Abeta1-42. First, in vivo experiments were made in human amyloid precursor protein (APP [Swedish and London mutation]) transgenic mice, as well as alpha-syn transgenic mice. Treatment was performed with the peptides as an intraperitoneal injection or as intranasal droplets for 2 mo. Behavioral studies in APP transgenic mice were performed after 1 and 2 mo of treatment and showed clear effects of these peptides.

[PMID: 19771217]
Allele-specific gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) is therapeutically useful for specifically suppressing the expression of alleles associated with disease. To realize such allele-specific RNAi (ASPRNAi), the design and assessment of small interfering RNA (siRNA) duplexes conferring ASP-RNAi is vital, but is also difficult. Here, we show ASP-RNAi against the Swedish- and London-type amyloid precursor protein (APP) variants related to familial Alzheimer's disease using two reporter alleles encoding the Photinus and Renilla luciferase genes and carrying mutant and wild-type allelic sequences in their 3'-untranslated regions. We examined the effects of siRNA duplexes against the mutant alleles in allele-specific gene silencing and off-target silencing against the wild-type allele under heterozygous conditions, which were generated by cotransfecting the reporter alleles and siRNA duplexes into cultured human cells. Consistently, the siRNA duplexes determined to confer ASP-RNAi also inhibited the expression of the bona fide mutant APP and the production of either amyloid beta 40- or 42-peptide in Cos-7 cells expressing both the full-length Swedish- and wild-type APP alleles. The present data suggest that the system with reporter alleles may permit the preclinical assessment of siRNA duplexes conferring ASP-RNAi, and thus contribute to the design and selection of the most suitable of such siRNA duplexes.

[PMID: 25108425]
Accumulation and deposition of β-amyloid peptides (Aβ) in the brain is a central event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Besides the parenchymal pathology, Aβ is known to undergo active transport across the blood-brain barrier and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a prominent feature in the majority of AD. Although impaired cerebral blood flow (CBF) has been implicated in faulty Aβ transport and clearance, and cerebral hypoperfusion can exist in the pre-clinical phase of Alzheimer's disease (AD), it is still unclear whether it is one of the causal factors for AD pathogenesis, or an early consequence of a multi-factor condition that would lead to AD at late stage. To study the potential interaction between faulty CBF and amyloid accumulation in clinical-relevant situation, we generated a new amyloid precursor protein (APP) knock-in allele that expresses humanized Aβ and a Dutch mutation in addition to Swedish/London mutations and compared this line with an equivalent knock-in line but in the absence of the Dutch mutation, both crossed onto the PS1M146V knock-in background. Introduction of the Dutch mutation results in robust CAA and parenchymal Aβ pathology, age-dependent reduction of spatial learning and memory deficits, and CBF reduction as detected by fMRI. Direct manipulation of CBF by transverse aortic constriction surgery on the left common carotid artery caused differential changes in CBF in the anterior and middle region of the cortex, where it is reduced on the left side and increased on the right side. However these perturbations in CBF resulted in the same effect: both significantly exacerbate CAA and amyloid pathology. Our study reveals a direct and positive link between vascular and parenchymal Aβ; both can be modulated by CBF. The new APP knock-in mouse model recapitulates many symptoms of AD including progressive vascular and parenchymal Aβ pathology and behavioral deficits in the absence of APP overexpression.

[PMID: 20025930]
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is strongly related to the onset of Alzheimer's disease. It possesses cleavage sites for beta- and gamma-secretases, and the resulting cleaved products (amyloid-beta peptides) are capable of causing neurotoxicity. Such cleavage is promoted by the Swedish and London mutations (APPSwe/Lon) inside the APP gene. Here, we characterized APPSL transgenic mice (APPSL-Tg) to determine the effects of this mutation. We observed that both the amount of insoluble amyloid-beta and the ratio of amyloid-beta 42/40 increased promptly in the brain during 6-16 months of age. Amyloid-beta plaques were observed in whole brain sections at 12 months. In contrast, the spatial memory assessed by the Morris water maze task was already impaired at 3 months, which suggested that the APPSL-Tg mice may represent an early-onset model of familial Alzheimer's disease. Furthermore, the levels of LAMP-1, a marker protein of lysosome, increased in the brain at 28 months. Such LAMP-1 protein was detected around the amyloid-beta plaques at the hippocampal regions of the APPSL-Tg mice. Our results suggested that the increase in LAMP-1 was enhanced by the accumulation of amyloid-beta occurring during aging. Our findings coincided with the pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 10500121]
The major constituent of senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease is a 42-aa peptide, referred to as beta-amyloid (Abeta). Abeta is generated from a family of differentially spliced, type-1 transmembrane domain (TM)-containing proteins, called APP, by endoproteolytic processing. The major, relatively ubiquitous pathway of APP metabolism in cell culture involves cleavage by alpha-secretase, which cleaves within the Abeta sequence, thus precluding Abeta formation and deposition. An alternate secretory pathway, enriched in neurons and brain, leads to cleavage of APP at the N terminus of the Abeta peptide by beta-secretase, thus generating a cell-associated beta-C-terminal fragment (beta-CTF). A pathogenic mutation at codons 670/671 in APP (APP "Swedish") leads to enhanced cleavage at the beta-secretase scissile bond and increased Abeta formation. An inhibitor of vacuolar ATPases, bafilomycin, selectively inhibits the action of beta-secretase in cell culture, suggesting a requirement for an acidic intracellular compartment for effective beta-secretase cleavage of APP. beta-CTF is cleaved in the TM domain by gamma-secretase(s), generating both Abeta 1-40 (90%) and Abeta 1-42 (10%). Pathogenic mutations in APP at codon 717 (APP "London") lead to an increased proportion of Abeta 1-42 being produced and secreted. Missense mutations in PS-1, localized to chromosome 14, are pathogenic in the majority of familial Alzheimer's pedigrees. These mutations also lead to increased production of Abeta 1-42 over Abeta 1-40. Knockout of PS-1 in transgenic animals leads to significant inhibition of production of both Abeta 1-40 and Abeta 1-42 in primary cultures, indicating that PS-1 expression is important for gamma-secretase cleavages. Peptide aldehyde inhibitors that block Abeta production by inhibiting gamma-secretase cleavage of beta-CTF have been discovered.