[PMID: 19909521]
Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) can be present in numerically abnormal karyotypes like in a 'Turner-syndrome karyotype' mos 45,X/46,X,+mar. Here we report the first case of an sSMC found in Turner syndrome karyotypes (sSMCT) derived from chromosome 14 in a Turner syndrome patient. According to cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic characterization the karyotype was 46,X,+del(14)(q11.1). The present case is the third Turner syndrome case with an sSMCT not derived from the X- or the Y-chromosome. More comprehensive characterization of such sSMCT might identify them to be more frequent than only ~0.6% in Turner syndrome cases according to available data.

[PMID: 20197675]
Turner's syndrome, also known as 'monosomy X', is a genetic disorder that occurs in 1/2,500 female births and is hypothesized to result from haploinsufficiency of certain genes expressed from both sex chromosomes that escape X inactivation. While the classic karyotype related to Turner's syndrome is 45,X, the majority of those affected actually have a mosaic chromosomal complement, most often with a second normal cell line (46,XX). The resulting phenotype is variable and related to the underlying chromosomal pattern, but it is characterized by three cardinal features: short stature (around 100%), ovarian failure (>90%) and congenital lymphedema (>80%). In this paper we report a molecular and cytogenetic investigation of a 26-year-old female with non-mosaic 45,X karyotype, who has a stature of 170 cm without GH treatment, and whose only apparent Turner feature is gonadal dysgenesis. The only possible explanation for the absence of Turner phenotype is the hidden mosaicism combined with an untreated gonadal dysgenesis. Our results support the theory that significant ascertainment bias exists in our understanding of Turner's syndrome.

[PMID: 697225]
Seven women in three generations of a family have been affected by Turner syndrome. Turner phenotype in this family is the result of deletion of the entire short arm of one X chromosome. The short arm deletion is transmitted by carriers of a balanced X-1 translocation. Autoradiographic findings showed that the deleted X chromosome was late labeling in those persons with Turner syndrome, whereas the normal X chromosome was late replicating in carriers of the balanced translocation. The results of Xga typing of erythrocytes suggest that the Xg locus is on the short arm of the X chromosome. Because of the clinical implications, we believe that families of persons with structural chromosomal abnormalities should be studied to exclude familial transmission.

[PMID: 15797949]
Turner syndrome (TS) is the most common genetic problem affecting women and occurs when an X chromosome is completely deleted, portions of an X chromosome are deleted, or chromosomal mosaicism occurs. Girls with TS may also have occult Y chromosome sequences. Whereas some girls with TS are identified in infancy or early childhood, many girls with TS are not detected until after 10 yr of age, resulting in delayed evaluation and treatment. To prevent the delayed recognition and treatment of TS, a quantitative method of genotyping that can be performed as part of newborn screening is needed. To screen for sex chromosome abnormalities, we assembled a panel of informative single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers that span the X chromosome from the dbSNP database. Pyrosequencing assays suitable for quantitative assessment of signal strength from single nucleotides were designed and used to genotype 46,XX; 46,XY; 45,X; and TS mosaics, examining zygosity and signal strength for individual alleles. Pyrosequencing assays were also designed for the detection of Y chromosome material. With just four informative SNP markers for the X chromosome, all TS girls with 45,X, partial X chromosome deletions, or mosaicism were identified with 100% sensitivity. In mosaic individuals, Y chromosomal material was detected with 100% sensitivity. These results suggest that inexpensive high-throughput screening is possible for TS and other sex chromosome disorders using quantitative genotyping approaches.

[PMID: 25800473]
Turner syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal disorder caused by complete or partial X chromosome monosomy that manifests various clinical features depending on the karyotype and on the genetic background of affected girls. This study aimed to systematically investigate the key clinical features of TS in relationship to karyotype in a large pediatric Turkish patient population. Our retrospective study included 842 karyotype-proven TS patients aged 0-18 years who were evaluated in 35 different centers in Turkey in the years 2013-2014. The most common karyotype was 45,X (50.7%), followed by 45,X/46,XX (10.8%), 46,X,i(Xq) (10.1%) and 45,X/46,X,i(Xq) (9.5%). Mean age at diagnosis was 10.2±4.4 years. The most common presenting complaints were short stature and delayed puberty. Among patients diagnosed before age one year, the ratio of karyotype 45,X was significantly higher than that of other karyotype groups. Cardiac defects (bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of the aorta and aortic stenosis) were the most common congenital anomalies, occurring in 25% of the TS cases. This was followed by urinary system anomalies (horseshoe kidney, double collector duct system and renal rotation) detected in 16.3%. Hashimoto's thyroiditis was found in 11.1% of patients, gastrointestinal abnormalities in 8.9%, ear nose and throat problems in 22.6%, dermatologic problems in 21.8% and osteoporosis in 15.3%. Learning difficulties and/or psychosocial problems were encountered in 39.1%. Insulin resistance and impaired fasting glucose were detected in 3.4% and 2.2%, respectively. Dyslipidemia prevalence was 11.4%. This comprehensive study systematically evaluated the largest group of karyotype-proven TS girls to date. The karyotype distribution, congenital anomaly and comorbidity profile closely parallel that from other countries and support the need for close medical surveillance of these complex patients throughout their lifespan.

[PMID: 20017317]
To identify the origin and study the morphology of small supernumerary marker chromosome (sSMC) in Turner syndrome with 45, X/46, X, + mar karyotype. Using the conventional chromosome G-banding technique, 10 cases of Turner syndrome with 45, X/46, X, + mar chromosome karyotype were obtained, dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization was applied to study the origin and morphology of the sSMC. In the 10 cases of Turner syndrome with 45, X/46, X, + mar karyotype, the sSMC of 7 cases was derived from X chromosome [sSMC(X)], the sSMC of 2 cases was derived from Y chromosome [sSMC(Y)] and the remaining 1 case was derived from the autosome. There were 4 cases of ring(r) chromosomes and 3 of centric minutes (min) in the 7 sSMC (X) cases. In the 2 sSMC(Y), one case was dicentric (dic) and the other was centric minute (min). The sSMC originated from the autosome was a centric minute (min). The origin of sSMC of Turner syndrome with 45, X/46, X, + mar karyotype was almost all from sex chromosomes, and rarely from autosomes. sSMC can exist as isodicentric, ring, or centric minute. The molecular cytogenetic features of the sSMC can provide useful information for genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis and treatment of the Turner syndrome patients with a 45, X/46, X, + mar karyotype.

[PMID: 8517687]
Monosomy for the X chromosome is the most frequent cause of Turner's syndrome, a common clinical syndrome associated with particular physical and neurobehavioral features. The results from comprehensive assessment of prepubertal monozygotic female twins discordant for X monosomy are presented. Zygosity was established with DNA Fingerprinting and no evidence of chromosomal mosaicism was seen in either child. Physical features in the affected twin were relatively mild with respect to the full spectrum of physical malformations and disabilities associated with Turner's syndrome. The neurobehavioral phenotypes of the twins were compared. Although both sisters scored in the superior range of intelligence, the affected twin's Performance IQ was 18 points less than her sister, whereas Verbal IQ showed only a 3-point difference between the sisters. Other relative differences were noted within the executive, visuospatial, and visuomotor domains of function. Behavioral evaluation indicated greater problems with attention, hyperactivity, and anxiety in the affected twin. Quantitative analysis of brain anatomy revealed evidence of both general and regional effects of X monosomy on neurodevelopment. Cerebrospinal fluid volume was increased by 25% in the affected twin compared with her sister with a corresponding decrease in gray matter volume. The right frontal, right parietal-occipital, and left parietal-perisylvian regions showed the greatest discrepancy between the sisters with respect to increased cerebrospinal fluid and decreased gray matter volumes in twin with X monosomy. Differences in the posterior fossa were also noted with a 50% relative increase in the volumes of the fourth ventricle and cisterna magna and a 10 to 15% relative reduction in size of the cerebellar vermis, pons, and medulla in the affected twin. The association between the neurobehavioral and neuroanatomical findings in the affected twin is discussed. The unique nature of the naturally occurring genetic phenomenon seen in this twin pair provides an opportunity to more fully elucidate the neurobehavioral phenotype associated with X monosomy and Turner's syndrome.

[PMID: 26757887]
Turner's syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal defect with partial or total absence of the X chromosome. Our objective is to report our experience in Greece with patients suffering from TS and trying to conceive; therefore, we present four patients with TS, who underwent In vitro fertilization (ICSI) with donor oocytes in order to get pregnant. Three out of four patients managed to conceive and bring pregnancy to completion. It was shown that patients diagnosed in childhood or adolescence with TS have the possibility to undergo hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and thus, secondary sexual characteristics as well as uterus of almost normal size can develop. Assisted reproduction techniques (ART), predominantly with donated oocytes, could give these patients the possibility to have children.

[PMID: 16821224]
Turner's syndrome is defined as a congenital disease determining by quantitative and/or structural aberrations of one from two X chromosomes with frequent presence of mosaicism. Clinically it is characterized by growth and body proportion abnormalities, gonadal dysgenesis resulting in sexual infantilism, primary amenorrhoea, infertility, characteristic stigmata, anomalies of heart, renal and bones and the presence of some diseases like Hashimoto thyroiditis with hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus type 2, osteoporosis, hypertension. Turner's syndrome occurs in 1:2000 to 1:2500 female livebirth. The most frequent X chromosome aberrations in patients with phenotype of Turner syndrome are as follows: X monosomy - 45,X; mosaicism (50-75%), including 45,X/46,XX (10-15%), 45,X/46,XY (2-6%), 45,X/46,X,i(Xq), 45,X/46,X,del(Xp), 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX; aberration of X structure: total or partial deletion of short arm of X chromosome (46,X,del(Xp)) isochromosom of long arm of X chromosome (46,X,(i(Xq)), ring chromosome (46, X,r(X)), marker chromosome (46,X+m). Searching of X chromosome and mapping and sequencing of genes located at this chromosome (such as SHOX, ODG2, VSPA, SOX 3) have made possible to look for linkage between phenotypes and adequate genes or regions of X chromosome. In this paper current data concerning correlation between phenotype and karyotype in patients with TS have been presented.

[PMID: 17663292]
Turner's syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal disorder that results from the loss of the entire or a part of the X-chromosome and occurs in 1/2,500 female births. According to the majority of specific reports, intelligence in TS is generally found to be normal and the prevalence of mental retardation does not seem to be increased in TS except for those patients with a small ring X-chromosome. We evaluated 33 girls with TS with chronological age from 6-18 years. Intellectual assessment included the WISC III and the WAIS-R scales. Our results showed: 1) mean full scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) was significantly lower than expected based on normative data (p < 0.0005); 2) no correlation was present between height and general intellectual ability; 3) mean performance intelligence quotient (PIQ) was significantly lower than both mean verbal intelligence quotient (VIQ) and FSIQ (p < 0.0025 and p < 0.01, respectively), and most patients had a VIQ-PIQ discrepancy; 4) the frequency of mental retardation in our study group was significantly higher than that observed in the general population (15.1% vs 2.3%, p < 0.025); 5) a significant association was found between karyotype and VIQ, and the best score was achieved in the subgroup of patients with structural abnormalities of the X-chromosome. In the light of these findings we conclude that the clinical picture in TS may encompass a slightly reduced FSIQ, VIQ and especially an inadequate PIQ, but this neurocognitive profile is not significantly affected by statural impairment. Since these neurocognitive defects can be responsible for misdiagnosed school difficulties, we suggest that girls with TS should receive specialized educational support and multidisciplinary care.

[PMID: 8151646]
A case of mosaic Turner's syndrome with a 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX karyotype, who was also a fragile X obligate carrier as the mother of an affected boy, was identified by molecular diagnosis. Complete haplotyping and direct DNA analysis showed that the X chromosome in all metaphases was the normal X. At the age of 57, she is mentally normal. Her external appearance was typical of Turner's syndrome. This report shows that molecular studies in conjunction with cytogenetic analysis can help in the clinical diagnosis of a rare case and can show the uniqueness of a case such as the one here described.

[PMID: 10689047]
X-monosomy is a form of Turner syndrome (TS) in which an entire X chromosome is missing. It is usually assumed that neuropsychological deficits in females with TS result from insufficient dosage of gene products from alleles on the sex chromosomes. If so, then parental origin of the single X chromosome should be immaterial. However, if there are imprinted genes on the X chromosome affecting brain development, neuropsychological development will depend on the parental origin of the single X chromosome. We contrasted verbal and visuospatial memory in females with a single paternal X chromosome (45,X(p)) and those with a single maternal X (45,X(m)). Neither group showed any impairment on immediate story recall; if anything, performance was above control levels. Groups did not differ on a measure of delayed recall. However, when delayed recall was considered after adjusting for level of immediate recall, 45,X(m) females showed enhanced verbal forgetting relative to controls over a delay. On the Rey figure, both groups were poor at copying the figure, but, after adjusting scores for initial copy score and strategy, only the 45,X(p) females showed disproportionate forgetting relative to controls. We propose there may be one or more imprinted genes on the X chromosome that affect the development of lateralised brain regions important for memory function.

[PMID: 3625764]
The proposition that finger print variability between individuals might be reduced by the absence of an X-chromosome in Turner's syndrome was rejected. In the present study of 58 XO patients, aged 15-50 years, relatives of several cases, unrelated female control samples and three unrelated male samples were investigated. The higher mean value of the TRC among patients supported the hypothesis forwarded by Penrose that an added X- or Y-chromosome reduces the TRC and a missing one increasing it. The figures do not speak against the hypothesis that genes affecting the TRC are located on the X-chromosome. A summary of the major dermatoglyphic investigations in Turner's syndrome is presented.

[PMID: 23602925]
Children with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS), Fragile X syndrome (FXS), or Turner syndrome (TS) are considered to belong to distinct genetic groups, as each disorder is caused by separate genetic alterations. Even so, they have similar cognitive and behavioral dysfunctions, particularly in visuospatial and numerical abilities. To assess evidence for common underlying neural microstructural alterations, we set out to determine whether these groups have partially overlapping white matter abnormalities, relative to typically developing controls. We scanned 101 female children between 7 and 14years old: 25 with 22q11.2DS, 18 with FXS, 17 with TS, and 41 aged-matched controls using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Anisotropy and diffusivity measures were calculated and all brain scans were nonlinearly aligned to population and site-specific templates. We performed voxel-based statistical comparisons of the DTI-derived metrics between each disease group and the controls, while adjusting for age. Girls with 22q11.2DS showed lower fractional anisotropy (FA) than controls in the association fibers of the superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi, the splenium of the corpus callosum, and the corticospinal tract. FA was abnormally lower in girls with FXS in the posterior limbs of the internal capsule, posterior thalami, and precentral gyrus. Girls with TS had lower FA in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus, right internal capsule and left cerebellar peduncle. Partially overlapping neurodevelopmental anomalies were detected in all three neurogenetic disorders. Altered white matter integrity in the superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi and thalamic to frontal tracts may contribute to the behavioral characteristics of all of these disorders.

[PMID: 1240972]
A 7-year-old girl was admitted to the hospital for anaemia, secondary to intestinal blood los (melaena). She was found to have 45,X Turner's syndrome. Her identical twin sister also had Turner's syndrome with a 45,X chromosome complement. According to various criteria the probability of monozygosity was 0.9905. Although the incidence of twinning is greater than usual in families of patients with Turner's syndrome, affected cases have only been observed in twin sisters on six occasions. It seems therefore that the 45,X chromosome complement itself is not a factor predisposing to twinning, but that in some families, a factor is at play, which cuases either twinning or the 45,X aneuploidy, or both.

[PMID: 11807897]
Turner syndrome is a chromosomal disorder in which all or part of one X chromosome is missing. The meiotic or mitotic origin of most cases remains unknown due to the difficulty in detecting hidden mosaicism and to the lack of meiotic segregation studies. We analyzed 15 Turner patients, 10 with a 45,X whereas the rest had a second cell line with abnormal X-chromosomes: a pseudodicentric, an isochromosome, one large and one small ring, and the last with a long arm deletion. Our aims were: to detect X cryptic mosaicism in patients with a 45,X constitution; to determine the parental origin of the abnormality; to infer the zygotic origin of the karyotype and to suggest the timing and mechanism of the error(s) leading to the formation of abnormal X chromosomes from maternal origin. Molecular investigation did not revealed heterozygosity for any microsatellite, excluding X mosaicism in the 45,X cases. Parental origin of the single X chromosome was maternal in 90% of these patients. Three of the structurally abnormal Xs were maternally derived whereas the other two were paternal. These results allowed us to corroborate breakpoints in these abnormal X chromosomes and suggest that the pseudodicentric chromosome originated from post-zygotic sister chromatid exchange, whereas the Xq deleted chromosome probably arose after a recombination event during maternal meiosis.

[PMID: 22711287]
Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by the complete or partial absence of an X chromosome in affected women. Individuals with TS show characteristic difficulties with executive functions, visual-spatial and mathematical cognition, with relatively intact verbal skills, and congruent abnormalities in structural development of the posterior parietal cortex (PPC). The functionally heterogeneous PPC has recently been investigated using connectivity-based clustering methods, which sub-divide a given region into clusters of voxels showing similar structural or functional connectivity to other brain regions. In the present study, we extended this method to compare connectivity-based clustering between groups and investigate whether functional networks differentially recruit the PPC in TS. To this end, we parcellated the PPC into sub-regions based on temporal correlations with other regions of the brain. fMRI data were collected from 15 girls with TS and 14 typically developing (TD) girls, aged 7-14, while they performed a visual-spatial task. Temporal correlations between voxels in the PPC and a set of seed regions were calculated, and the PPC divided into clusters of voxels showing similar connectivity. It was found that in general the PPC parcellates similarly in TS and TD girls, but that regions in bilateral inferior parietal lobules, and posterior right superior parietal lobule, were reliably recruited by different networks in TS relative to TD participants. These regions showed weaker correlation in TS with a set of regions involved in visual processing. These results suggest that abnormal development of visuospatial functional networks in TS may relate to the well documented cognitive difficulties in this disorder.

[PMID: 12667526]
Women with Turner's syndrome (TS), who lack a complete X-chromosome, show an impairment in remembering faces and in classifying "fear" in face images. Could their difficulties extend to the processing of gaze? Three tasks, all of which rely on the ability to make use of the eye-region of a pictured face, are reported. Women with TS were impaired at judging mental state from images of the upper face ("reading the mind in the eyes"). They were also specifically impaired at interpreting "fear" from displays of the eye-region of the face. However, they showed normal susceptibility to direction of gaze as an attentional cue (social cueing), since they were as sensitive as controls to the validity of the cue, under conditions where it should be ignored. In this task, unlike those of reading the upper face for intention or expression, PIQ accounted for a significant amount of individual variance in task performance. The processing of displays of the eye region affording social and affective information is specifically affected in TS. We speculate that amygdala dysfunction is likely to be implicated in this anomalous behaviour. The presence in the female karyotype of two complete X-chromosomes is protective for some socio-cognitive abilities related to the modulation of behaviour by the interpretation of gaze.

[PMID: 26322078]
Turner syndrome is a chromosomal abnormality in which there is complete or partial absence of the X chromosome. Turner syndrome effects 1 in every 2000 live births. Short stature is a cardinal feature of Turner Syndrome and the standard treatment is recombinant human growth hormone. When growth hormone is started at an early age a normal adult height can be achieved. With delayed diagnosis young women with Turner Syndrome may not reach a normal height. Adjuvant therapy with oxandrolone is used but there is no consensus on the optimal timing of treatment, the duration of treatment and the long term adverse effects of treatment. The objective of this review and meta-analysis is to examine the effect of oxandrolone on adult height in growth hormone treated Turner syndrome patients. Eligible trials were identified by a literature search using the terms: Turner syndrome, oxandrolone. The search was limited to English language randomized-controlled trials after 1980. Twenty-six articles were reviewed and four were included in the meta-analysis. A random effects model was used to calculate an effect size and confidence interval. The pooled effect size of 2.0759 (95 % CI 0.0988 to 4.0529) indicates that oxandrolone has a positive effect on adult height in Turner syndrome when combined with growth hormone therapy. In conclusion, the addition of oxandrolone to growth hormone therapy for treatment of short stature in Turner syndrome improves adult height. Further studies are warranted to investigate if there is a subset of Turner syndrome patients that would benefit most from growth hormone plus oxandrolone therapy, and to determine the optimal timing and duration of such therapy.

[PMID: 20122165]
X monosomic mice (39,XO) have a remarkably mild phenotype when compared to women with Turner syndrome (45,XO). The generally accepted hypothesis to explain this discrepancy is that the number of genes on the mouse X chromosome which escape X inactivation, and thus are expressed at higher levels in females, is very small. However this hypothesis has never been tested and only a small number of genes have been assayed for their X-inactivation status in the mouse. We performed a global expression analysis in four somatic tissues (brain, liver, kidney and muscle) of adult 40,XX and 39,XO mice using the Illumina Mouse WG-6 v1_1 Expression BeadChip and an extensive validation by quantitative real time PCR, in order to identify which genes are expressed from both X chromosomes. We identified several genes on the X chromosome which are overexpressed in XX females, including those previously reported as escaping X inactivation, as well as new candidates. However, the results obtained by microarray and qPCR were not fully concordant, illustrating the difficulty in ascertaining modest fold changes, such as those expected for genes escaping X inactivation. Remarkably, considerable variation was observed between tissues, suggesting that inactivation patterns may be tissue-dependent. Our analysis also exposed several autosomal genes involved in mitochondrial metabolism and in protein translation which are differentially expressed between XX and XO mice, revealing secondary transcriptional changes to the alteration in X chromosome dosage. Our results support the prediction that the mouse inactive X chromosome is largely silent, while providing a list of the genes potentially escaping X inactivation in rodents. Although the lower expression of X-linked genes in XO mice may not be relevant in the particular tissues/systems which are affected in human X chromosome monosomy, genes deregulated in XO mice are good candidates for further study in an involvement in Turner Syndrome phenotype.