[PMID: 11287619]
CTF4 and CTF18 are required for high-fidelity chromosome segregation. Both exhibit genetic and physical ties to replication fork constituents. We find that absence of either CTF4 or CTF18 causes sister chromatid cohesion failure and leads to a preanaphase accumulation of cells that depends on the spindle assembly checkpoint. The physical and genetic interactions between CTF4, CTF18, and core components of replication fork complexes observed in this study and others suggest that both gene products act in association with the replication fork to facilitate sister chromatid cohesion. We find that Ctf18p, an RFC1-like protein, directly interacts with Rfc2p, Rfc3p, Rfc4p, and Rfc5p. However, Ctf18p is not a component of biochemically purified proliferating cell nuclear antigen loading RF-C, suggesting the presence of a discrete complex containing Ctf18p, Rfc2p, Rfc3p, Rfc4p, and Rfc5p. Recent identification and characterization of the budding yeast polymerase kappa, encoded by TRF4, strongly supports a hypothesis that the DNA replication machinery is required for proper sister chromatid cohesion. Analogous to the polymerase switching role of the bacterial and human RF-C complexes, we propose that budding yeast RF-C(CTF18) may be involved in a polymerase switch event that facilities sister chromatid cohesion. The requirement for CTF4 and CTF18 in robust cohesion identifies novel roles for replication accessory proteins in this process.

[PMID: 24255107]
Chromosome transmission fidelity 4 (Ctf4) is a conserved protein required for DNA replication. In this report, interactions between human Ctf4 (hCtf4) and the replicative helicase containing the cell division cycle 45 (Cdc45)/minichromosome maintenance 2-7 (Mcm2-7)/Go, Ichi, Nii, and San (GINS) (CMG) proteins [human CMG (hCMG) complex] were examined. The hCtf4-CMG complex was isolated following in vitro interaction of purified proteins (hCtf4 plus the hCMG complex), coinfection of Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells with viruses expressing the hCMG complex and hCtf4, and from HeLa cell chromatin after benzonase and immunoprecipitation steps. The stability of the hCtf4-CMG complex depends upon interactions between hCtf4 and multiple components of the hCMG complex. The hCtf4-CMG complex, like the hCMG complex, contains DNA helicase activity that is more salt-resistant than the helicase activity of the hCMG complex. We demonstrate that the hCtf4-CMG complex contains a homodimeric hCtf4 and a monomeric hCMG complex and suggest that the homodimeric hCtf4 acts as a platform linking polymerase α to the hCMG complex. The role of the hCMG complex as the core of the replisome is also discussed.

[PMID: 20381454]
Ctf4p (chromosome transmission fidelity) has been reported to function in DNA metabolism and sister chromatid cohesion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this study, a ctf4(S143F) mutant was isolated from a yeast genetic screen to identify replication-initiation proteins. The ctf4(S143F) mutant exhibits plasmid maintenance defects which can be suppressed by the addition of multiple origins to the plasmid, like other known replication-initiation mutants. We show that both ctf4(S143F) and ctf4Delta strains have defects in S phase entry and S phase progression at the restrictive temperature of 38 degrees C. Ctf4p localizes in the nucleus throughout the cell cycle but only starts to bind chromatin at the G1/S transition and then disassociates from chromatin after DNA replication. Furthermore, Ctf4p interacts with Mcm10p physically and genetically, and the chromatin association of Ctf4p depends on Mcm10p. Finally, deletion of CTF4 destabilizes Mcm10p and Pol alpha in both mcm10-1 and MCM10 cells. These data indicate that Ctf4p facilitates Mcm10p to promote the DNA replication.

[PMID: 9199353]
We have used DNA polymerase alpha affinity chromatography to identify factors involved in eukaryotic DNA replication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Two proteins that bound to the catalytic subunit of DNA polymerase alpha (Pol1 protein) are encoded by the essential genes CDC68/SPT16 and POB3. The binding of both proteins was enhanced when extracts lacking a previously characterized polymerase binding protein, Ctf4, were used. This finding suggests that Cdc68 and Pob3 may compete with Ctf4 for binding to Pol1. Pol1 and Pob3 were coimmunoprecipitated from whole-cell extracts with antiserum directed against Cdc68, and Pol1 was immunoprecipitated from whole-cell extracts with antiserum directed against the amino terminus of Pob3, suggesting that these proteins may form a complex in vivo. CDC68 also interacted genetically with POL1 and CTF4 mutations; the maximum permissive temperature of double mutants was lower than for any single mutant. Overexpression of Cdc68 in a pol1 mutant strain dramatically decreased cell viability, consistent with the formation or modulation of an essential complex by these proteins in vivo. A mutation in CDC68/SPT16 had previously been shown to cause pleiotropic effects on the regulation of transcription (J. A. Prendergrast et al., Genetics 124:81-90, 1990; E. A. Malone et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5710-5717, 1991; A. Rowley et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5718-5726, 1991), with a spectrum of phenotypes similar to those caused by mutations in the genes encoding histone proteins H2A and H2B (Malone et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5710-5717, 1991). We show that at the nonpermissive temperature, cdc68-1 mutants arrest as unbudded cells with a 1C DNA content, consistent with a possible role for Cdc68 in the prereplicative stage of the cell cycle. The cdc68-1 mutation caused elevated rates of chromosome fragment loss, a phenotype characteristic of genes whose native products are required for normal DNA metabolism. However, this mutation did not affect the rate of loss or recombination for two intact chromosomes, nor did it affect the retention of a low-copy-number plasmid. The previously uncharacterized Pob3 sequence has significant amino acid sequence similarity with an HMG1-like protein from vertebrates. Based on these results and because Cdc68 has been implicated as a regulator of chromatin structure, we postulate that polymerase alpha may interact with these proteins to gain access to its template or to origins of replication in vivo.

[PMID: 17761813]
The MCM2-7 helicase complex is loaded on DNA replication origins during the G1 phase of the cell cycle to license the origins for replication in S phase. How the initiator primase-polymerase complex, DNA polymerase alpha (pol alpha), is brought to the origins is still unclear. We show that And-1/Ctf4 (Chromosome transmission fidelity 4) interacts with Mcm10, which associates with MCM2-7, and with the p180 subunit of DNA pol alpha. And-1 is essential for DNA synthesis and the stability of p180 in mammalian cells. In Xenopus egg extracts And-1 is loaded on the chromatin after Mcm10, concurrently with DNA pol alpha, and is required for efficient DNA synthesis. Mcm10 is required for chromatin loading of And-1 and an antibody that disrupts the Mcm10-And-1 interaction interferes with the loading of And-1 and of pol alpha, inhibiting DNA synthesis. And-1/Ctf4 is therefore a new replication initiation factor that brings together the MCM2-7 helicase and the DNA pol alpha-primase complex, analogous to the linker between helicase and primase or helicase and polymerase that is seen in the bacterial replication machinery. The discovery also adds to the connection between replication initiation and sister chromatid cohesion.

[PMID: 12455694]
The fission yeast minichromosome loss mutant mcl1-1 was identified in a screen for mutants defective in chromosome segregation. Missegregation of the chromosomes in mcl1-1 mutant cells results from decreased centromeric cohesion between sister chromatids. mcl1+ encodes a beta-transducin-like protein with similarity to a family of eukaryotic proteins that includes Ctf4p from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, sepB from Aspergillus nidulans, and AND-1 from humans. The previously identified fungal members of this protein family also have chromosome segregation defects, but they primarily affect DNA metabolism. Chromosomes from mcl1-1 cells were heterogeneous in size or structure on pulsed-field electrophoresis gels and had elongated heterogeneous telomeres. mcl1-1 was lethal in combination with the DNA checkpoint mutations rad3delta and rad26delta, demonstrating that loss of Mcl1p function leads to DNA damage. mcl1-1 showed an acute sensitivity to DNA damage that affects S-phase progression. It interacts genetically with replication components and causes an S-phase delay when overexpressed. We propose that Mcl1p, like Ctf4p, has a role in regulating DNA replication complexes.

[PMID: 23334284]
Cohesion between sister chromatids, mediated by the chromosomal cohesin complex, is a prerequisite for their alignment on the spindle apparatus and segregation in mitosis. Budding yeast cohesin first associates with chromosomes in G1. Then, during DNA replication in S-phase, the replication fork-associated acetyltransferase Eco1 acetylates the cohesin subunit Smc3 to make cohesin's DNA binding resistant to destabilization by the Wapl protein. Whether stabilization of cohesin molecules that happen to link sister chromatids is sufficient to build sister chromatid cohesion, or whether additional reactions are required to establish these links, is not known. In addition to Eco1, several other factors contribute to cohesion establishment, including Ctf4, Ctf18, Tof1, Csm3, Chl1 and Mrc1, but little is known about their roles. Here, we show that each of these factors facilitates cohesin acetylation. Moreover, the absence of Ctf4 and Chl1, but not of the other factors, causes a synthetic growth defect in cells lacking Eco1. Distinct from acetylation defects, sister chromatid cohesion in ctf4Δ and chl1Δ cells is not improved by removing Wapl. Unlike previously thought, we do not find evidence for a role of Ctf4 and Chl1 in Okazaki fragment processing, or of Okazaki fragment processing in sister chromatid cohesion. Thus, Ctf4 and Chl1 delineate an additional acetylation-independent pathway that might hold important clues as to the mechanism of sister chromatid cohesion establishment.

[PMID: 19430531]
Mutations in the ELG1 gene of yeast lead to genomic instability, manifested in high levels of genetic recombination, chromosome loss, and gross chromosomal rearrangements. Elg1 shows similarity to the large subunit of the Replication Factor C clamp loader, and forms a RFC-like (RLC) complex in conjunction with the 4 small RFC subunits. Two additional RLCs exist in yeast: in one of them the large subunit is Ctf18, and in the other, Rad24. Ctf18 has been characterized as the RLC that functions in sister chromatid cohesion. Here we present evidence that the Elg1 RLC (but not Rad24) also plays an important role in this process. A genetic screen identified the cohesin subunit Mcd1/Scc1 and its loader Scc2 as suppressors of the synthetic lethality between elg1 and ctf4. We describe genetic interactions between ELG1 and genes encoding cohesin subunits and their accessory proteins. We also show that defects in Elg1 lead to higher precocious sister chromatid separation, and that Ctf18 and Elg1 affect cohesion via a joint pathway. Finally, we localize both Ctf18 and Elg1 to chromatin and show that Elg1 plays a role in the recruitment of Ctf18. Our results suggest that Elg1, Ctf4, and Ctf18 may coordinate the relative movement of the replication fork with respect to the cohesin ring.

[PMID: 19805216]
In eukaryotes, the activation of the prereplicative complex and assembly of an active DNA unwinding complex are critical but poorly understood steps required for the initiation of DNA replication. In this report, we have used bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays in HeLa cells to examine the interactions between Cdc45, Mcm2-7, and the GINS complex (collectively called the CMG complex), which seem to play a key role in the formation and progression of replication forks. Interactions between the CMG components were observed only after the G(1)/S transition of the cell cycle and were abolished by treatment of cells with either a CDK inhibitor or siRNA against the Cdc7 kinase. Stable association of CMG required all three components of the CMG complex as well as RecQL4, Ctf4/And-1, and Mcm10. Surprisingly, depletion of TopBP1, a homologue of Dpb11 that plays an essential role in the chromatin loading of Cdc45 and GINS in yeast cells, did not significantly affect CMG complex formation. These results suggest that the proteins involved in the assembly of initiation complexes in human cells may differ somewhat from those in yeast systems.

[PMID: 20980819]
DNA replication in eukaryotic cells is tightly regulated to ensure faithful inheritance of the genetic material. While the replicators, replication origins and many replication-initiation proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been identified and extensively studied, the detailed mechanism that controls the initiation of DNA replication is still not well understood. It is likely that some factors involved in or regulating the initiation of DNA replication have not been discovered. To identify novel DNA replication-initiation proteins and their regulators, we developed a sensitive and comprehensive phenotypic screen by combining several established genetic strategies including plasmid loss assays with plasmids containing a single versus multiple replication origins and colony color sectoring assays. We isolated dozen of mutants in previously known initiation proteins and identified several novel factors, including Ctf1p Ctf3p, Ctf4p, Ctf18p, Adk1p and Cdc60p, whose mutants lose plasmid containing a single replication origin at high rates but lose plasmid carrying multiple replication origins at lower rates. We also show that overexpression of replication initiation proteins causes synthetic dosage lethality or growth defects in ctf1 and ctf18 mutants and that Ctf1p and Ctf18p physically interact with ORC, Cdt1p and MCM proteins. Furthermore, depletion of both Ctf1p and Ctf18p prevents S phase entry, retards S phase progression, and reduces pre-RC formation during the M-to-G₁ transition. These data suggest that Ctf1p and Ctf18p together play important roles in regulating the initiation of DNA replication.

[PMID: 24805245]
Efficient duplication of the genome requires the concerted action of helicase and DNA polymerases at replication forks to avoid stalling of the replication machinery and consequent genomic instability. In eukaryotes, the physical coupling between helicase and DNA polymerases remains poorly understood. Here we define the molecular mechanism by which the yeast Ctf4 protein links the Cdc45-MCM-GINS (CMG) DNA helicase to DNA polymerase α (Pol α) within the replisome. We use X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy to show that Ctf4 self-associates in a constitutive disk-shaped trimer. Trimerization depends on a β-propeller domain in the carboxy-terminal half of the protein, which is fused to a helical extension that protrudes from one face of the trimeric disk. Critically, Pol α and the CMG helicase share a common mechanism of interaction with Ctf4. We show that the amino-terminal tails of the catalytic subunit of Pol α and the Sld5 subunit of GINS contain a conserved Ctf4-binding motif that docks onto the exposed helical extension of a Ctf4 protomer within the trimer. Accordingly, we demonstrate that one Ctf4 trimer can support binding of up to three partner proteins, including the simultaneous association with both Pol α and GINS. Our findings indicate that Ctf4 can couple two molecules of Pol α to one CMG helicase within the replisome, providing a new model for lagging-strand synthesis in eukaryotes that resembles the emerging model for the simpler replisome of Escherichia coli. The ability of Ctf4 to act as a platform for multivalent interactions illustrates a mechanism for the concurrent recruitment of factors that act together at the fork.

[PMID: 16962805]
Two identical sister copies of eukaryotic chromosomes are synthesized during S phase. To facilitate their recognition as pairs for segregation in mitosis, sister chromatids are held together from their synthesis onward by the chromosomal cohesin complex. Replication fork progression is thought to be coupled to establishment of sister chromatid cohesion, facilitating identification of replication products, but evidence for this has remained circumstantial. Here we show that three proteins required for sister chromatid cohesion, Eco1, Ctf4, and Ctf18, are found at, and Ctf4 travels along chromosomes with, replication forks. The ring-shaped cohesin complex is loaded onto chromosomes before S phase in an ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction. Cohesion establishment during DNA replication follows without further cohesin recruitment and without need for cohesin to re-engage an ATP hydrolysis motif that is critical for its initial DNA binding. This provides evidence for cohesion establishment in the context of replication forks and imposes constraints on the mechanism involved.

[PMID: 21470422]
Proper coordination of the functions at the DNA replication fork is vital to the normal functioning of a cell. Specifically the precise coordination of helicase and polymerase activity is crucial for efficient passage though S phase. The Ctf4 protein has been shown to be a central member of the replication fork and links the replicative MCM helicase and DNA polymerase α primase. In addition, it has been implicated as a member of a complex that promotes replication fork stability, the Fork Protection Complex (FPC), and as being important for sister chromatid cohesion. As such, understanding the role of Ctf4 within the context of a multicellular organism will be integral to our understanding of its potential role in developmental and disease processes. We find that Drosophila Ctf4 is a conserved protein that interacts with members of the GINS complex, Mcm2, and Polymerase α primase. Using in vivo RNAi knockdown of CTF4 in Drosophila we show that Ctf4 is required for viability, S phase progression, sister chromatid cohesion, endoreplication, and coping with replication stress. Ctf4 remains a central player in DNA replication. Our findings are consistent with what has been previously reported for CTF4 function in yeast, Xenopus extracts, and human tissue culture. We show that Ctf4 function is conserved and that Drosophila can be effectively used as a model to further probe the precise function of Ctf4 as a member of the replication fork and possible roles in development.

[PMID: 19496828]
Ctf4 is a protein conserved in eukaryotes and a constituent of the replisome progression complex. It also plays a role in the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. In our current study, we demonstrate that the replication checkpoint is activated in the absence of Ctf4, and that the interaction between the MCM helicase-go ichi ni san (GINS) complex and DNA polymerase alpha (Pol alpha)-primase is destabilized specifically in a ctf4Delta mutant. An in vitro interaction between GINS and DNA Pol alpha was also found to be mediated by Ctf4. The same interaction was not affected in the absence of the replication checkpoint mediators Tof1 or Mrc1. In ctf4Delta cells, DNA pol alpha became significantly unstable and was barely detectable at the replication forks in HU. In contrast, the quantities of helicase and DNA pol epsilon bound to replication forks were almost unchanged but their localizations were widely and abnormally dispersed in the mutant cells compared with wild type. These results lead us to propose that Ctf4 is a key connector between DNA helicase and Pol alpha and is required for the coordinated progression of the replisome.

[PMID: 19661920]
The eukaryotic replisome is a crucial determinant of genome stability, but its structure is still poorly understood. We found previously that many regulatory proteins assemble around the MCM2-7 helicase at yeast replication forks to form the replisome progression complex (RPC), which might link MCM2-7 to other replisome components. Here, we show that the RPC associates with DNA polymerase alpha that primes each Okazaki fragment during lagging strand synthesis. Our data indicate that a complex of the GINS and Ctf4 components of the RPC is crucial to couple MCM2-7 to DNA polymerase alpha. Others have found recently that the Mrc1 subunit of RPCs binds DNA polymerase epsilon, which synthesises the leading strand at DNA replication forks. We show that cells lacking both Ctf4 and Mrc1 experience chronic activation of the DNA damage checkpoint during chromosome replication and do not complete the cell cycle. These findings indicate that coupling MCM2-7 to replicative polymerases is an important feature of the regulation of chromosome replication in eukaryotes, and highlight a key role for Ctf4 in this process.

[PMID: 20089864]
Ctf4/AND-1 is a highly conserved gene product required for both DNA replication and the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. In this report, we examined the mechanism of action of human Ctf4 (hCtf4) in DNA replication both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings show that the purified hCtf4 exists as a dimer and that the hCtf4 SepB domain likely plays a primary role determining the dimeric structure. hCtf4 binds preferentially to DNA template-primer structures, interacts directly with the replicative DNA polymerases (alpha, delta, and epsilon), and markedly stimulates the polymerase activities of DNA polymerases alpha and epsilon in vitro. Depletion of hCtf4 in HeLa cells by small interfering RNA resulted in G(1)/S phase arrest. DNA fiber analysis revealed that cells depleted of hCtf4 exhibited a rate of DNA replication slower than cells treated with control small interfering RNA. These findings suggest that in human cells, hCtf4 plays an essential role in DNA replication and its ability to stimulate the replicative DNA polymerases may contribute to this effect.

[PMID: 19910927]
Dia2 is an F-box protein, which is involved in the regulation of DNA replication in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The function of Dia2, however, remains largely unknown. In this study, we report that Dia2 is associated with the replication fork and regulates replication fork progression. Using modified yeast two-hybrid screening, we have identified components of the replisome (Mrc1, Ctf4 and Mcm2), as Dia2-binding proteins. Mrc1 and Ctf4 were ubiquitinated by SCF(Dia2) both in vivo and in vitro. Domain analysis of Dia2 revealed that the leucine-rich repeat motif was indispensable for the regulation of replisome progression, whereas the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motif was involved in the interaction with replisome components. In addition, the TPR motif was shown to be involved in Dia2 stability; deleting the TPR stabilized Dia2, mimicking the effect of DNA damage. ChIP-on-chip analysis illustrated that Dia2 localizes to the replication fork and regulates fork progression on hydroxyurea treatment. These results demonstrate that Dia2 is involved in the regulation of replisome activity through a direct interaction with replisome components.

[PMID: 15226378]
Cohesion between sister chromatids mediated by a multisubunit complex called cohesin is established during DNA replication and is essential for the orderly segregation of chromatids during anaphase. In budding yeast, a specialized replication factor C called RF-C(Ctf18/Dcc1/Ctf8) and the DNA-polymerase-alpha-associated protein Ctf4 are required to maintain sister-chromatid cohesion in cells arrested for long periods in mitosis. We show here that CTF8, CTF4 and a helicase encoded by CHL1 are required for efficient sister chromatid cohesion in unperturbed mitotic cells, and provide evidence that Chl1 functions during S-phase. We also show that, in contrast to mitosis, RF-C(Ctf18/Dcc1/Cft8), Ctf4 and Chl1 are essential for chromosome segregation during meiosis and for the viability of meiotic products. Our finding that cells deleted for CTF8, CTF4 or CHL1 undergo massive meiosis II non-disjunction suggests that the second meiotic division is particularly sensitive to cohesion defects. Using a functional as well as a cytological assay, we demonstrate that CTF8, CHL1 and CTF4 are essential for cohesion between sister centromeres during meiosis but dispensable for cohesin's association with centromeric DNA. Our finding that mutants in fission yeast ctf18 and dcc1 have similar defects suggests that the involvement of the alternative RF-C(Ctf18/Dcc1/Ctf8) complex in sister chromatid cohesion might be highly conserved.

[PMID: 14742710]
Cohesion establishment and maintenance are carried out by proteins that modify the activity of Cohesin, an essential complex that holds sister chromatids together. Constituents of the replication fork, such as the DNA polymerase alpha-binding protein Ctf4, contribute to cohesion in ways that are poorly understood. To identify additional cohesion components, we analyzed a ctf4Delta synthetic lethal screen performed on microarrays. We focused on a subset of ctf4Delta-interacting genes with genetic instability of their own. Our analyses revealed that 17 previously studied genes are also necessary for the maintenance of robust association of sisters in metaphase. Among these were subunits of the MRX complex, which forms a molecular structure similar to Cohesin. Further investigation indicated that the MRX complex did not contribute to metaphase cohesion independent of Cohesin, although an additional role may be contributed by XRS2. In general, results from the screen indicated a sister chromatid cohesion role for a specific subset of genes that function in DNA replication and repair. This subset is particularly enriched for genes that support the S-phase checkpoint. We suggest that these genes promote and protect a chromatin environment conducive to robust cohesion.

[PMID: 1448101]
Potential DNA replication accessory factors from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have previously been identified by their ability to bind to DNA polymerase alpha protein affinity matrices (J. Miles and T. Formosa, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:1276-1280, 1992). We have now used genetic methods to characterize the gene encoding one of these DNA polymerase alpha-binding proteins (POB1) to determine whether it plays a role in DNA replication in vivo. We find that yeast cells lacking POB1 are viable but display a constellation of phenotypes indicating defective DNA metabolism. Populations of cells lacking POB1 accumulate abnormally high numbers of enlarged large-budded cells with a single nucleus at the neck of the bud. The average DNA content in a population of cells lacking POB1 is shifted toward the G2 value. These two phenotypes indicate that while the bulk of DNA replication is completed without POB1, mitosis is delayed. Deleting POB1 also causes elevated levels of both chromosome loss and genetic recombination, enhances the temperature sensitivity of cells with mutant DNA polymerase alpha genes, causes increased sensitivity to UV radiation in cells lacking a functional RAD9 checkpoint gene, and causes an increased probability of death in cells carrying a mutation in the MEC1 checkpoint gene. The sequence of the POB1 gene indicates that it is identical to the CTF4 (CHL15) gene identified previously in screens for mutations that diminish the fidelity of chromosome transmission. These phenotypes are consistent with defective DNA metabolism in cells lacking POB1 and strongly suggest that this DNA polymerase alpha-binding protein plays a role in accurately duplicating the genome in vivo.