[PMID: 22107858]
The clinical presentation of dural arteriovenous fistulas (DAVFs), in particular the associated risk of intracranial hemorrhage, shows a strong correlation with their pattern of venous drainage. The two most commonly used and clinically accepted DAVF classifications are the Merland-Cognard classification and the Borden classification, both based on the morphology of the venous drainage. A revised classification that grades DAVFs through a combination of angiographic and clinical features has also been proposed. This article offers a review of these various classification schemes, and discusses their application to treatment decision making.

[PMID: 20678361]
The natural history of aggressive intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulae (ICDAVF) is unknown. Despite this, the recently proposed classification scheme of Borden et al (Borden(*)) has the potential to predict aggressive lesion behavior after presentation for any lesion, but has so far been untested. In addition, they discuss a new but logical treatment strategy for aggressive ICDAVF based on the elimination of retrograde leptomeningeal venous drainage (RLVD). Our similar philosophy and substantial experience with these lesions, provides a unique opportunity to test these hypotheses. A cohort of 46 Borden(*) grade II and III ICDAVF was selected from a series of 102 ICDAVF seen at a single institution between 1984 and 1995. Patients with these lesions, presumed to have an aggressive course were all offered treatment. Conservative therapy was chosen by 14 (30%) patients, 22 (47%) had surgery, and 20 (43%) had embolisation either as sole treatment or prior to surgery. During the follow-up period (249 lesion months) for the conservatively treated group, Jour (29%) patients died. Excluding presentation, these patients were observed to have interval rates of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), non haemorrhagic neurological deficit (NHND), and mortality, of 19.2%, 10.9%, and 19.3% / lesion year respectively. The 11 patients who had embolisation alone were followed for a total of 344 months after treatment. All nine patients who had lesion obliteration, or subtotal obliteration with elimination of RLVD, as confirmed by angiography, experienced improvement or complete clinical recovery. Two patients had subtotal obliteration without elimination of RLVD. One died from interval ICH and the other experienced a delayed NHND. Twenty-five surgical operations were performed on 23 ICDAVF in 22 patients. Resection of the ICDAVF was performed in 9 patients, and 16 patients were treated with surgical disconnection alone. Complications occurred in 3/9 (33%) patients who had their lesions resected and none of the disconnected group. Failure to achieve angiographic obliteration of RLVD in 2 patients treated with resection was associated with an adverse outcome in both cases (death, and interval NHND). All 16 (100%) of the disconnected group were shown to have undergone angiographic obliteration with excellent clinical outcome. Untreated, Borden(*) grade II and III ICDAVF have a poor natural history. Also, persistence of RLVD after inadequate treatment results in adverse outcomes. Embolisation usually improves the safety of surgical access and may lead to obliteration on its own in some cases. For the aggressive ICDAVF, surgery is required in most cases, and our data confirm that surgical disconnection alone results in cure of all Borden(*) grade III ICDAVF, and in grade II lesions, ifnot cure, conversion to a benign grade I lesion.

[PMID: 20678360]
The recently proposed classification scheme of Borden, Wu, and Shucart (Borden(*)) should have the ability to identify those intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulae (ICDAVF) which will continue to behave in a benign fashion. We examine for the first time the natural history of benign ICDAVF, including the predictive ability of this grading scale, and the implications for lesion management. A cohort of 55 Borden(*) grade I lesions was selected from a heterogeneous series of 102 consecutive lCDAVF seen at one institution between 1984 and 1995. Data were collected prospectively from 1991. Grade 1 lesions were those whose nidus drained directly into a dural venous sinus (DVS) or meningeal vein. The absence of retrograde leptomeningeal venous drainage (RLVD) was an important feature. Intracranial haemorrhage (ICH), non haemorrhagic neurological deficit (NHND), and death were considered aggressive features. There were 23 cavernous sinus, 2 foramen magnum, 1 middle cranial fossa, and 29 transverse sinus lesions. One patient received obliterative surgical treatment. Thirty-two lesions were observed only, and 22 patients developed symptoms or signs requiring palliative embolisation. Two minor complications occurred following embolisation: transient pulmonary aedema (1), and an asymptomatic pericallosal artery embolus (1). Follow-up was available on 48 (89%) patients for a total of 133 patient years (mean 33 months). This included 26 of the 32 patients observed and all 22 of the patients embolised. Aggressive interval behavior was seen in only one patient. Symptom improvement or resolution was observed in the majority of patients, whether observed only [21/26 (81%) j, or whether they required embolisation for symptom palliation [19/22 (86%)). Overall, 53 of the 54 (98%) of ICDAVF behaved in a benign fashion in the follow-up period. The predictable benign natural history of patients identified as Borden(*) grade I at presentation mandates a conservative approach to these ICDAVF. In some patients, when symptom severity demands, palliative embolisation is an effective and safe therapy.

[PMID: 22374275]
This paper mainly focuses on our preliminary experience and short-term outcome evaluation of embolisation of non-cavernous dural arteriovenous fistulas (ncsDAVFs) and cavernous sinus dural arteriovenous fistulas (csDAVFs) using Onyx 18 (ev3, Plymouth, MN), and in combination with coils, via arterial and venous approaches, respectively. Between August 2008 and March 2010, 21 DAVFs (11 ncsDAVFs and 10 csDAVFs; age range: 28-68 years; 12 females and 9 males) were undertaken. Borden classification showed Type III in 1 and Type II in 10 ncsDAVFs, and Type II in 4 and Type I in 6 csDAVFs. Onyx 18 was used in 11 ncsDAVFs (10 via single feeder and 1 via 2 feeders). Onyx 18 or in combination with coils was used in 10 csDAVFs (9 via the inferior petrosal sinus and 1 via the superior ophthalmic vein). Total occlusion in immediate angiography was achieved in 18 cases (85.7%; 10 ncsDAVFs and 8 csDAVFs), and near-total occlusion in 1 ncsDAVF and 2 csDAVFs. Onyx 18 was migrated into normal vasculature in two ncsDAVFs without any sequelae. One csDAVF had VI cranial nerve palsy post-operatively, which completely recovered 2 weeks post-embolisation. Follow-up angiography at 3-12 months showed complete occlusion in 20 cases (95.2%; 10 ncsDAVFs and 10 csDAVFs). One ncsDAVF (4.8%) recurred after 3 months and was successfully re-embolised. Preliminary results achieved after embolising 11 ncsDAVFs and 10 csDAVFs using Onyx 18 and in combination with coils via arterial and venous pathways, respectively, appeared to be safe, feasible and effective, as 95.2% of cases were totally occluded without any clinical sequelae.

[PMID: 23582488]
To analyse the clinical, radiological and therapeutic variables of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulae (DAVF) treated at our institution, and to assess the validity of the Borden and Cognard classifications and their correlation with the presenting symptoms. The DAVF identified were retrospectively analysed. They were classified according to their location, drainage pattern and the Borden and Cognard classifications. We recorded the different treatments, their complications and efficacy. There were 81DAVF identified between 1975 and 2012. The cavernous sinus (CS) location was the most frequent one. The Borden and Cognard classifications showed an interobserver Kappa index of 0.72 and 0.76 respectively. The odds ratio of aggressive presentation in the presence of cortical venous drainage (CVD) was 19.3 (2.8-132.4). No location, once adjusted by venous drainage pattern, showed significant association with an aggressive presentation. Endovascular transarterial treatment of cavernous sinus DAVF achieved symptomatic improvement of 78%, with a complication rate of 5%. The DAVF of non-CS locations, with CVD, treated surgically were angiographically shown cured in 100% of the cases, with no treatment-related complications. The presence of CVD was significantly associated with aggressive presentations. The Borden and Cognard classifications showed little interobserver variability. Endovascular treatment for CS DAVF is safe and relatively effective. Surgical treatment of non-CS DAVF with CVD is safe, effective and the first choice treatment in our environment.

[PMID: 23570149]
We investigated the operative methods and the angiographical classification in eight patients with dural arteriovenous fistulas involving transverse-sigmoid sinuses. There were two men and six women with a mean age of 68.3 (range 61-73) years. The initial symptoms were focal neurological deficits (aphasia, hemiparesis, hemianopsia) because of intracranial haematoma in four patients, dementia in two, headache in one and pulsatile tinnitus in one. Preoperatively, transarterial coil embolisaton was performed in four patients and transvenous coil embolisation in three. Finally total removal was performed in all patients. In all patients angiogram showed the presence of sinus occlusion diagnosed in the late venous phase and retrograde flow from the sinuses to the cortical veins. According to Borden's classification, three patients were classified as Type II-C (or C'), four patients as Type III-D and one patient as Type E. The volume of blood loss did not change either with or without preoperative transarterial coil embolisation. There was no new procedure-related morbidity. The presence of sinus occlusion diagnosed in the late venous phase and retrograde flow from the sinuses to the cortical veins indicate that total removal is possible.

[PMID: 25479123]
The goal of this study was to evaluate the obliteration rate of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas (DAVFs) in patients treated with stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), and to compare obliteration rates between cavernous sinus (CS) and noncavernous sinus (NCS) DAVFs, and between DAVFs with and without cortical venous drainage (CVD). A systematic literature review was performed using PubMed. The CS DAVFs and the NCS DAVFs were categorized using the Barrow and Borden classification systems, respectively. The DAVFs were also categorized by location and by the presence of CVD. Statistical analyses of pooled data were conducted to assess complete obliteration rates in CS and NCS DAVFs, and in DAVFs with and without CVD. Nineteen studies were included, comprising 729 patients harboring 743 DAVFs treated with SRS. The mean obliteration rate was 63% (95% CI 52.4%-73.6%). Complete obliteration for CS and NCS DAVFs was achieved in 73% and 58% of patients, respectively. No significant difference in obliteration rates between CS and NCS DAVFs was found (OR 1.72, 95% CI 0.66-4.46; p=0.27). Complete obliteration in DAVFs with and without CVD was observed in 56% and 75% of patients, respectively. A significantly higher obliteration rate was observed in DAVFs without CVD compared with DAVFs with CVD (OR 2.37, 95% CI 1.07-5.28; p=0.03). Treatment with SRS offers favorable rates of DAVF obliteration with low complication rates. Patients harboring DAVFs that are refractory or not amenable to endovascular or surgical therapy may be safely and effectively treated using SRS.

[PMID: 23811958]
The aetiology of dural arteriovenous fistula (DAVF) is not well known, but it has been suggested that abnormality in angiogenesis plays a pathological role. Abnormality in angiogenesis is also involved in diabetes mellitus (DM). The purpose of this study was to quantify the relation between DAVF and DM in a Korean population. Medical records of 192 patients with DAVF between 2002 and 2011 were reviewed. Age, sex and the presence of DM, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, stroke, coronary artery disease and cancers were compared between DAVF and control subjects. Data for control were obtained from the Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. The relationship of DM and DAVF location, presenting symptoms (benign vs. aggressive) and classification (Borden and Geibprasert) were assessed using the Pearson's chi-square test. Prevalence of DM was higher in DAVF patients (19.8 %) than in controls (9.5 %; p = 0.004). Univariate analysis showed that DM (odds ratio (OR), 2.356; 95 % confidence interval (CI), 1.634-3.399; p < 0.001) and age (OR, 1.022; 95 % CI, 1.012-1.032; p < 0.001) increased the odds of DAVF. This was supported by multivariate analysis (DM: OR, 2.092; 95 % CI, 1.391-3.145; p = 0.0004 and Age: OR, 1.021; 95 % CI, 1.009-1.033; p = 0.001). When these analyses were repeated after stratification by sex, there was no relation between age and DAVF in men. Borden II and III (p = 0.038) and aggressive symptoms (p = 0.023) were related to DM. There was a positive relation between DM and DAVF in a Korean population. DAVFs with aggressive symptoms and behaviour were more commonly related to DM.

[PMID: 20966056]
The criterion standard to diagnose and classify cranial DAVFs is DSA. Since this is invasive, relatively expensive and time-consuming, a noninvasive alternative is of interest. We aimed to evaluate the capabilities and pitfalls of 4D-CTA in a consecutive series of patients who presented with a newly diagnosed cranial DAVF, as demonstrated by conventional DSA. Eleven patients were included in this study after biplane DSA demonstrated a cranial DAVF. They subsequently underwent 4D-CTA imaging by using a 320-detector CT scanner. DSA and 4D-CTA studies were independently read by 2 blinded observers, by using a standardized scoring sheet. 4D-CTA results were analyzed with DSA as the criterion standard. In 10 cases, there was full agreement between DSA and 4D-CTA regarding the Borden classification. However, in the remaining patient, a slow-filling DAVF with a low shunt volume was missed by both readers on 4D-CTA. In all 10 detected cases, ≥ 1 of the major contributing arteries could be identified with 4D-CTA. Although, by using DSA, the 2 observers identified additional arterial feeders in 7 and 8 cases, respectively, these discrepancies did not influence clinical decision making. Although novel 4D-CTA imaging may not rule out a small slow-flow DAVF, it appears to be a valuable new adjunct in the noninvasive diagnostic work-up, treatment planning, and follow-up of patients with cranial DAVFs.

[PMID: 20176602]
Intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas constitute a rare though potentially devastating disease. Because the arterial (high-pressure) blood flow drains directly into the low-pressure venous system, there is a high risk of bleeding and associated neurological deficit. The classifications by Borden and Cognard underline the correlation between bleeding risk and venous drainage pattern of the fistula. There are different treatment options for this vascular pathology, which always poses a challenge for the physicians involved to offer the optimal treatment for an individual patient. This case report illustrates how combining forces between the neurosurgical and endovascular team benefits outcome. Simultaneously, this contributes to the growing amount of evidence that a new endovascular technique with transarterial ONYX embolisation enables complete obliteration of the vascular malformation.

[PMID: 20849795]
The results of treatment of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas (DAVFs) since Onyx became available as an embolic agent at our institution is reported. An algorithm is presented for treatment of DAVFs with Onyx, and the role of endovascular transvenous, surgical, and radiosurgical approaches are presented. Thirty-two patients with DAVFs treated between November 2005 and November 2008 by endovascular embolization, surgery, or radiosurgery were identified by a retrospective chart review. Treatment strategies were based on the location or complexity of the fistula and the patient's clinical status. Data collected included DAVF characteristics, obliteration rates, complications, and outcomes. The results were analyzed and correlated with the treatment modality. Presenting symptoms were as follows: hemorrhage (n = 12 patients), headaches (n = 12), tinnitus (n = 5), orbital symptoms (n = 7), and seizures (n = 1). Thirty patients were treated by endovascular embolization (transarterial only with Onyx-21, transvenous only with platinum coils-6, transarterial [Onyx] and transvenous [coils]-3). Five patients (4 after incomplete/failed embolization) had surgical excision of the fistula. Three patients were treated with Gamma Knife radiosurgery (primary-1, 2 after incomplete/failed embolization). The locations of the fistulas were transverse sigmoid (10 patients), petrotentorial (7 patients), indirect carotid cavernous fistula (7 patients), parasagittal/falcine (3 patients), middle fossa dura (3 patients), torcula (1 patient), and anterior fossa dura (1 patient). The distribution of patients according to Borden classification was I-6, II-13, and III-13. Complete obliteration of the fistula was achieved in 26/32 (81%) patients after multimodal treatment. All surgical cases had complete obliteration. In the high-risk group with cortical venous reflux, 23/26 (89%) patients were cured. Endovascular complications included a stuck microcatheter tip with fracture of the tip in two patients and cranial nerves V and VII palsies in one patient. At last follow-up (range 1-36 months), 24 patients had modified Rankin score of 0-2, 5 patients had modified Rankin score of 3-5, and 3 patients were dead. Two patients died during admission due to the insult of the hemorrhage, and one died after an accidental fall with subsequent traumatic subdural hematoma. Multimodality treatment of DAVFs has high success rates for cure at our center. Transarterial embolization with Onyx has become the primary treatment for intracranial DAVFs at our center and is associated with high safety profile and efficacy. Transvenous coil embolization is still preferred in DAVFs with supply from arterial branches supplying cranial nerves, predominant internal carotid artery feeders and potential extracranial-intracranial collateral anastomosis. In our series, patients with incompletely treated DAVFs were treated with surgery and those with partially treated type I fistulas had radiosurgery for palliation.

[PMID: 25516093]
The commonly used Borden and Cognard classification systems for the prediction of clinical behavior of cranial dural arteriovenous shunts focus on the venous drainage, particularly the presence of leptomeningeal venous drainage, and on the direction of flow, particularly the presence of retrograde flow. In addition, the latter includes ectasia and spinal drainage as criteria of two distinct grades. However, none of the above classifications (a) differentiates direct from exclusive leptomeningeal venous drainage, (b) considers cortical venous congestion as a factor potentially associated with an aggressive clinical course, and (c) anticipates ectasia in shunts with a mixed dural-cortical venous drainage (type 2). In this study, we analyzed the angiographic images of 107 consecutive patients having a cranial dural arteriovenous fistula with leptomeningeal venous drainage, based on a newly developed scheme. This scheme, symbolized with the acronym "DES," groups the dural shunts according to three factors: directness and exclusivity of leptomeningeal venous drainage and signs of venous strain. According to the combination of the three factors, eight different groups were distinguished. All analyzed cases could be assigned to one of these groups. Directness of leptomeningeal venous drainage expresses the exact site of the shunt (bridging vein vs sinus wall), whereas exclusivity expresses venous outlet restrictions. All bridging vein shunts had a direct leptomeningeal venous drainage. Almost all bridging vein shunts and all "isolated" sinus shunts had an exclusive leptomeningeal venous drainage. Venous strain, manifested as ectasia and/or congestion, denotes the decompensation of the cerebral venous system due to the shunt reflux. The comparison of the presented concept with the currently used classifications highlighted the advantages of the former and the weaknesses of the latter.

[PMID: 25746311]
The efficacy and limitations of transarterial acrylic glue embolization for the treatment of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas (DAVFs) were investigated. Thirty-four DAVFs treated by transarterial embolization using n-butyl cyanoacrylate were retrospectively reviewed. The locations of DAVFs were the transverse-sigmoid sinus in 11, tentorium in 10, cranial vault in 9, and superior sagittal sinus, jugular bulb, foramen magnum, and middle cranial fossa in 1 each. Borden classification was type I in 7, type II in 3, and type III in 24. Eight patients had undergone prior transvenous coil embolization. Complete obliteration rate was 56% immediately after embolization, 71% at follow-up angiography, and 85% after additional treatments (1 transvenous embolization and 4 direct surgery). Complications occurred in three patients, consisting of asymptomatic vessel perforations during cannulation in two patients and leakage of contrast medium resulting in medullary infarction in one patient. Transarterial glue embolization is highly effective for Borden type III DAVF with direct cortical venous drainage, but has limitations for Borden type I and II DAVFs in which the affected sinus is part of the normal venous circulation. Onyx is a new liquid embolic material and is becoming the treatment of choice for DAVF. The benefits of glue embolization compared to Onyx embolization are high thrombogenicity, and relatively low risks of cranial nerve palsies and of excessive migration into the draining veins of high flow fistula. Transarterial glue embolization continues to be useful for selected patients, and complete cure can be expected in most patients with fewer complications if combined with transvenous embolization or direct surgery.

[PMID: 25354667]
This study was to evaluate the value of four-dimensional computed tomography angiography (4D-CTA) in the diagnosis of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistula (DAVF). This study included 16 patients who were diagnosed to have intracranial DAVF by digital subtraction angiography (DSA). The 4D-CTA was performed by Aquilion ONE multi-detector CT scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems, Japan) equipped with 320 × 0.5 mm detector rows. Standard biplane fluoroscopy equipments (Infinix, Toshiba Medical Systems, Japan and ADVANTX LC/LP, GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) were applied in the diagnosis of intra-arterial DSA. Examinations were performed to evaluate the findings of DSA and 4D-CTA in each patient. The examination results were read by two independent readers in a blind manner. All results were documented on standardized scoring sheets. In all 16 cases, the same diagnosis results of intracranial DAVF were obtained from DSA and 4D-CTA. The results of subtype (Borden and Cognard classification), venous reflux and fistula sites were also accurately exhibited in 4D-CTA. In addition, there was a little discrepancy in identifying smaller and specific arterial branches and in distinguishing fistula type (focal or diffuse) using 4D-CTA. Good-to-excellent agreements were made between 4D-CTA and DSA. Therefore, 4D-CTA could be a feasible tool for the characterization of intracranial DAVF, with respect to determining fistula site and venous drainage.

[PMID: 15842944]
Tentorial dural arteriovenous fistulae are uncommon but life-threatened lesions. We present our experience of 5 cases with tentorial dural arteriovenous fistulae, review the relevant literature and present the rationale of our current management strategy. The data of five patients with tentorial DAVF treated in Huashan Hospital between June 2002 and May 2003 were reviewed retrospectively, including their ill history, neuroimagings, operation records and follow-up data. There were 3 females and 2 males with age from 25 to 52 years (average, 42.6 years). Clinical manifestations were acute subarachnoid hemorrhage in 2 cases, progressing neurological deficits in 3 cases. MRI and DSA were major diagnostic and follow-up modalities. Borden classification type II was in 1 case, type III in 4 cases. According to DAVF location, tentorial marginal type were in 3 cases, tentorial lateral type 1 case, tentorial medial type 1 case. Two patients had transarterial embolization preoperatively. All patients underwent craniotomy with the coagulation of the nidus and tentorium, disconnection of leptomeningeal venous drainage. The surgical approaches were via trans-anterior-petrous approach in 3 cases, transpterional subdural approach 1 case, transoccipital and transtentorial approach 1 case. All patients had clinical improvement, there was no surgical mortality and morbidity. Postoperative DSA confirmed obliteration of DAVF in 3 cases, MRI demonstrated the thrombosis of venous aneurysm and the disappearance of previous brainstem edema, partial thrombosis of venous aneurysm in 1 case. Follow-up study ranging from 1 to 2 year showed no recurrence and all patients resume their full activities. Tentorial DAVF is an aggressive vascular lesion, causing subarachnoid hemorrhage and progressive neurological deficits. Prompt diagnosis and definite treatment for tentorial DAVF are mandatory. Obliteration of the nidus and/or leptomeningeal venous drainage should be the goal of treatment. Microsurgical procedures with/without endovascular intervention are the best choice of treatment.

[PMID: 26246101]
The purpose of this article is to prospectively test the hypothesis that time-resolved CT angiography (TRCTA) on a Toshiba 320-slice CT scanner enables the same characterization of cerebral vascular malformation (CVM) including arteriovenous malformation (AVM), dural arteriovenous fistula (DAVF), pial arteriovenous fistula (PAVF) and developmental venous anomaly (DVA) compared to digital subtraction angiography (DSA). Eighteen (eight males, 10 females) consecutive patients (11 AVM, four DAVF, one PAVF, and two DVA) underwent 19 TRCTA (Aquillion one, Toshiba) for suspected CVM diagnosed on routine CT or MRI. One patient with a dural AVF underwent TRCTA and DSA twice before and after treatment. Of the 18 patients, 13 were followed with DSA (Artis, Siemens) within two months of TRCTA. Twenty-three sequential volume acquisitions of the whole head were acquired after injection of 50 ml contrast at the rate of 4 ml/sec. Two patients with DVA did not undergo DSA. Two TRCTA were not assessed because of technical problems.TRCTAs were independently reviewed by two neuroradiologists and DSA by two other neuroradiologists and graded according to the Spetzler-Martin classification, Borden classification, overall diagnostic quality, and level of confidence. Weighted kappa coefficients (k) were calculated to compare reader's assessment of DSA vs TRCTA. There was excellent (k = 0.83 and 1) to good (k = 0.56, 0.61, 0.65 and 0.67) agreement between the different possible pairs of neuroradiologists for the assessment of vascular malformations. TRCTA may be a sufficient noninvasive substitute for conventional DSA in certain clinical situations.

[PMID: 8893721]
A number of classification schemes for intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) have been published that claim to predict which lesions will present in a benign or aggressive fashion based on radiological anatomy. We have tested the validity of two proposed classification schemes for the first time in a large single-institution study. A series of 102 intracranial dural AVFs in 98 patients assessed at a single institution was analyzed. All patients were classified according to two grading scales: the more descriptive schema of Cognard, et al. (Cognard) and that recently proposed by Borden, et al. (Borden). According to the Borden classification, 55 patients were Type I, 18 Type II, and 29 Type III. Using the Cognard classification, 40 patients were Type I, 15 Type IIA, eight Type IIB, 10 Type IIA+B, 13 Type III, 12 Type IV, and four Type V. Intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) or nonhemorrhagic neurological deficit was considered an aggressive presenting clinical feature. A total of 16 (16%) of 102 intracranial dural AVFs presented with hemorrhage. Eleven of these hemorrhages (69%) occurred in either anterior cranial fossa or tentorial lesions. When analyzed according to the Borden classification, none (0%) of 55 Type I intracranial dural AVFs, two (11%) of 18 Type II, and 14 (48%) of 29 Type III intracranial dural AVFs presented with hemorrhage (p < 0.0001). After exclusion of visual or cranial nerve deficits that were clearly related to cavernous sinus intracranial dural AVFs, nonhemorrhagic neurological deficits were a feature of presentation in one (2%) of 55 Type I, five (28%) of 18 Type II, and nine (31%) of 29 Type III patients (p < 0.0001). When combined, an aggressive clinical presentation (ICH or nonhemorrhagic neurological deficit) was seen most commonly in intracranial dural AVFs located in the tentorium (11 (79%) of 14) and the anterior cranial fossa (three (75%) of four), but this simply reflected the number of higher grade lesions in these locations. Aggressive clinical presentation strongly correlated with Borden types: one (2%) of 55 Type I, seven (39%) of 18 Type II, and 23 (79%) of 29 Type III patients (p < 0.0001). A similar correlation with aggressive presentation was seen with the Cognard classification: none (0%) of 40 Type I, one (7%) of 15 Type IIA, three (38%) of eight Type IIB, four (40%) of 10 Type IIA+B, nine (69%) of 13 Type III, 10 (83%) of 12 Type IV, and four (100%) of four Type V (p < 0.0001). No location is immune from harboring lesions capable of an aggressive presentation. Location itself only raises the index of suspicion for dangerous venous anatomy in some intracranial dural AVFs. The configuration of venous anatomy as reflected by both the Cognard and Borden classifications strongly predicts intracranial dural AVFs that will present with ICH or nonhemorrhagic neurological deficit.

[PMID: 26120845]
To investigate which clinical and angioarchitectural features were associated with the occurrence of intracranial hemorrhage in patients with intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas (DAVFs). We retrospectively reviewed the clinical and angioarchitectural features of 236 consecutive patients diagnosed with DAVF in our department from April 2009 to November 2013. Two groups of patients, with or without intracranial hemorrhage as clinical presentation at the initial diagnosis, were analysed to identify the differences in clinical and angioarchitectural features in univariate analysis. A multivariate logistic regression model was also developed to assess the independent contribution of the potential risk factors. Associations were considered significant for p<0.05. Fifty-six patients (23.7%) presented with intracranial hemorrhage at the initial diagnosis of DAVF. In univariate analysis, male patients (p = 0.002), patients with medical history of smoking (p<0.001) or alcohol consumption (p = 0.022), and DAVFs located at the tentorium (p = 0.010), frontalbasal (p = 0.007), foramen magnum (p = 0.043) or cerebral convexity (p<0.001) were associated with an increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage. A higher risk of hemorrhagic occurrence was also observed in DAVFs with superficial cortical venous drainage (p<0.001), deep venous drainage (p = 0.003), occluded venous sinus (p<0.032), or higher Borden type (p<0.001). A multivariate logistic regression model showed that intracranial hemorrhage in patients with DAVFs was correlated with higher Borden classification (OR 5.880; 95% CI, 3.370-10.257; p<0.001). Venous drainage pattern was the only independent risk factor of intracranial hemorrhage in our patients with intracranial DAVF. The other potential risk factors may be confounding factors in predicting intracranial hemorrhage.

[PMID: 16286391]
Venous drainage patterns are a major determinant of clinical outcome in intracranial dural arteriovenous fistula (DAVF) patients. In this study, we sought to identify MR imaging finding differences between DAVF types classified on the basis of venous drainage patterns. Twenty-seven patients diagnosed as having DAVFs by conventional angiography were included. Medical records (n = 27), and MR imaging (n = 27) and MR angiography (MRA; n = 11) findings were retrospectively reviewed. MR imaging findings included flow void cluster, engorged ophthalmic vein/proptosis, white matter hyperintensity, intracranial hemorrhage, dilated leptomeningeal or medullary vessels, venous pouch, and leptomeningeal or medullary vascular enhancements. MRA findings included identifiable fistula, venous flow-related enhancement, and prominent extracranial vessels. Patients' presentations and MR imaging findings were compared among angiographic type I, II, and III cases (according to Borden's classification), and MRA findings were compared between cases with and without retrograde leptomeningeal venous drainage (RLVD). Patient presentations were aggressive in one (13%) of the type I cases, 5 (50%) of the type II cases, and 8 (100%) of the type III cases (P = .002). Aggressive presentations included hemorrhage, focal neurologic deficits, seizures, intracranial hypertension, and an altered mental status. MR images showed significantly higher frequencies of dilated leptomeningeal or medullary vessels in a higher type [0 in type I, 5 (42%) in type II, and 7 (100%) in type III], and of leptomeningeal or medullary vascular enhancements [0 in type I, 4 (33%) in type II, and 7 (100%) in type III]. By using MRA, fistulas were identified only in cases with RLVD (5 [83%]). Venous flow-related enhancement was present in 10 cases (91%). A sole false-negative case on MRA, as compared with conventional angiography, resulted from nonvisualization of the slow venous flow (8%). No false-positive fistula was found at the other intracranial sites in all cases. Overall, MRA assessment for DAVF was adequate for both fistula and venous flow-related enhancement in 10 cases (91%) and inadequate in a remaining case because of the fistular location out of field. MR imaging demonstration of leptomeningeal or medullary vascular dilation and enhancements may be associated with features that are considered predictors of a poor outcome and indicates a need for urgent therapy in intracranial dural AVF patients. MRA is a complementary tool for the identification of dural AVF with venous flow-related enhancement.

[PMID: 19408992]
This article presents a modification to the existing classification scales of intracranial dural arteriovenous fistulas based on newly published research regarding the relationship of clinical symptoms and outcome. The 2 commonly used scales, the Borden-Shucart and Cognard scales, rely entirely on angiographic features for categorization. The most critical anatomical feature is the identification of cortical venous drainage (CVD; Borden-Shucart Types II and III and Cognard Types IIb, IIa + b, III, IV, and V), as this feature identifies lesions at high risk for future hemorrhage or ischemic neurological injury. Yet recent data has emerged indicating that within these high-risk groups, most of the risk for future injury is in the subgroup presenting with intracerebral hemorrhage or nonhemorrhagic neurological deficits. The authors have defined this subgroup as symptomatic CVD. Patients who present incidentally or with symptoms of pulsatile tinnitus or ophthalmological phenomena have a less aggressive clinical course. The authors have defined this subgroup as asymptomatic CVD. Based on recent data the annual rate of intracerebral hemorrhage is 7.4-7.6% for patients with symptomatic CVD compared with 1.4-1.5% for those with asymptomatic CVD. The addition of asymptomatic CVD or symptomatic CVD as modifiers to the Borden-Shucart and Cognard systems improves their accuracy for risk stratification of patients with high-grade dural arteriovenous fistulas.