[PMID: 21209713]
The two major autoimmune thyroid diseases (ATDs) include Graves' disease (GD) and autoimmune thyroiditis (AT); both of which are characterized by infiltration of the thyroid by T and B cells reactive to thyroid antigens, by the production of thyroid autoantibodies and by abnormal thyroid function (hyperthyroidism in GD and hypothyroidism in AT). While the exact etiology of thyroid autoimmunity is not known, it is believed to develop when a combination of genetic susceptibility and environmental encounters leads to breakdown of tolerance. It is important to recognize thyroid dysfunction at an early stage by maintaining an appropriate index of suspicion.

[PMID: 23734615]
Williams syndrome (WS) is a neurodevelopmental genetic disorder associated with high rates of anxiety and social issues. We examined diurnal cortisol, a biomarker of the stress response, in adults with WS in novel and familiar settings, and compared these profiles to typically developing (TD) adults. WS and TD participants had similar profiles in a familiar setting, while participants with WS had elevated cortisol late in the day in the novel setting when social demands were higher. The cortisol awakening response in WS was associated with parent-reported levels of somatic complaints and social difficulties. Results suggest that adults with WS have a typical diurnal cortisol profile that may be sensitive to social and activity transitions throughout the day.

[PMID: 18204753]
A 16-year-old male adolescent diagnosed to have the Williams-Beuren syndrome was referred to our obesity outpatient clinic, due to his morbid obesity (body mass index 39.2 kilograms per square metre) and gluttony. After several unsuccessful dietary treatments, we started therapy with sibutramine. As growth hormone (GH) deficiency was diagnosed by an additional GH-stimulation test, we commenced with a GH-treatment. This well-tolerated combination therapy led to a remarkable weight loss of 10 kg and a growth-rate acceleration of 3.7 cm/year. Nine months after stopping the treatment with sibutramine, a partial weight gain was noticed. This case report justifies further research work on a combination therapy with sibutramine and GH for similar cases.

[PMID: 22719898]
The molecular and neural mechanisms regulating human social-emotional behaviors are fundamentally important but largely unknown; unraveling these requires a genetic systems neuroscience analysis of human models. Williams Syndrome (WS), a condition caused by deletion of ~28 genes, is associated with a gregarious personality, strong drive to approach strangers, difficult peer interactions, and attraction to music. WS provides a unique opportunity to identify endogenous human gene-behavior mechanisms. Social neuropeptides including oxytocin (OT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) regulate reproductive and social behaviors in mammals, and we reasoned that these might mediate the features of WS. Here we established blood levels of OT and AVP in WS and controls at baseline, and at multiple timepoints following a positive emotional intervention (music), and a negative physical stressor (cold). We also related these levels to standardized indices of social behavior. Results revealed significantly higher median levels of OT in WS versus controls at baseline, with a less marked increase in AVP. Further, in WS, OT and AVP increased in response to music and to cold, with greater variability and an amplified peak release compared to controls. In WS, baseline OT but not AVP, was correlated positively with approach, but negatively with adaptive social behaviors. These results indicate that WS deleted genes perturb hypothalamic-pituitary release not only of OT but also of AVP, implicating more complex neuropeptide circuitry for WS features and providing evidence for their roles in endogenous regulation of human social behavior. The data suggest a possible biological basis for amygdalar involvement, for increased anxiety, and for the paradox of increased approach but poor social relationships in WS. They also offer insight for translating genetic and neuroendocrine knowledge into treatments for disorders of social behavior.

[PMID: 7789182]
The human calcitonin receptor (CTR) is a transmembrane peptide with dual action as a receptor for the hormone calcitonin and as an extracellular calcium sensor. Therefore, CTR dysfunction could lead to disorders of calcium metabolism associated with hypercalcemia, such as the Williams syndrome (WS). WS is a developmental disorder caused by a deletion at chromosome 7q11.23 that includes the elastin locus (ELN). We have mapped the CTR gene (CALCR) to chromosome band 7q21.3 by polymerase chain reaction and single-strand conformation analysis of somatic cell hybrids as well as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to metaphase chromosome spreads. Two-color FISH cohybridizing CTR and ELN probes confirmed that CALCR maps telomeric to ELN. Subsequent analysis of chromosome spreads from four WS patients revealed deletion of the ELN locus in all of them and normal hybridization of CTR probes to both chromosome 7 homologues, indicating that CALCR lies outside the deleted region.

[PMID: 10378390]
Growth retardation is a consistent finding in Williams-Beuren syndrome. The cause of short stature in this syndrome is unknown. Endocrine studies have failed to reveal abnormalities in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor I axis. We report a boy with confirmed Williams-Beuren syndrome, who was found to have classical growth hormone deficiency and responded well to growth hormone therapy. Although growth hormone deficiency is not likely to be a common cause of short stature in Williams-Beuren syndrome, we nevertheless recommend evaluation of the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor I axis in all cases.

[PMID: 15751610]
Pre- and postnatal growth retardation of unknown pathogenesis is a common clinical feature in patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). However, growth hormone deficiency (GHD) has not been considered a major cause of growth retardation. There is only one patient in the literature with confirmed GHD who responded well to human growth hormone (hGH) therapy. We report a female infant with confirmed WBS who, through provocative testing, was found to have GHD and who responded satisfactorily to hGH therapy. Height SDS was -4.2 at the age of 12 months when hGH was initiated and increased to -0.8 at the age of 4.25 years. The pathogenesis of GHD in our patient is unclear. Nevertheless, the elevated levels of prolactin and the response of hGH to growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) administration are indicative of a hypothalamic rather than pituitary defect. In conclusion, GH deficiency might contribute to the growth failure in a number of patients with WBS and in such cases hGH therapy will most likely improve final height.

[PMID: 16181239]
To evaluate the prevalence of abnormalities of thyroid function and morphology in a cohort of patients with Williams syndrome (WS). Serum concentrations of free-T3, free-T4, TSH, thyroperoxidase antibodies (TPOA) and thyroglobulin antibodies (TgA), as well as ultrasonographic data, of 20 patients with WS (12 females and eight males), aged 1.7-34.9 years, were evaluated. Three cases (15%) of subclinical hypothyroidism were identified. Overt hypothyroidism was diagnosed in two cases (10%). Thyroid antibodies were negative in all patients. Fourteen patients (70%) showed thyroid hypoplasia involving the entire gland. In these patients, the left thyroid lobe appeared usually, but not significantly, reduced compared with the right thyroid lobe. One patient (5%) showed thyroid hemiagenesis. Only five patients (25%) showed a thyroid with normal volume, and of these five, one patient showed marked thyroid hypoplasia of the left lobe. In all WS patients with diagnosis of subclinical or overt hypothyroidism, thyroid hypoplasia was detected. No cases of subclinical or overt hypothyroidism were found in WS with normal thyroid volume. This study confirms the presence of alterations of thyroid function in WS and also suggests the frequent occurrence of abnormalities of thyroid morphology in these patients. Patients with WS should be monitored for thyroid function and a thyroid ultrasound screening should be considered, especially in those patients with changes in thyroid function.

[PMID: 20425788]
A standard oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was administered to 28 adults with Williams syndrome (WS). Three quarters of the WS subjects showed abnormal glucose curves, meeting diagnostic criteria for either diabetes or the pre-diabetic state of impaired glucose tolerance. Fasting mean glucose and median insulin levels did not differ significantly in the total WS cohort versus age-gender-BMI matched controls, though the glucose area under the curve was greater in the WS subjects. HbA1c levels were not as reliable as the OGTT in diagnosing the presence of diabetes. Given the high prevalence of impaired glucose regulation, adults with WS should be screened for diabetes, and when present should be treated in accordance with standard medical practice. Hemizygosity for a gene mapping to the Williams syndrome chromosome region (WSCR) is likely the major factor responsible for the high frequency of diabetes in WS. Syntaxin-1A is a prime candidate gene based on its location in the WSCR, its role in insulin release, and the presence of abnormal glucose metabolism in mouse models with aberrantly expressed Stx-1a.

[PMID: 16473313]
Williams syndrome (WS) is a well-known microdeletion syndrome characterized by specific facial features, retardation in growth and development, typical personality and cardiac defects. Poor growth potential is further affected by central precocious puberty (CPP) which is frequent in these patients. A WS patient with CPP is presented, whose pubertal development and bone age progression were arrested by administration of GnRH analogues. The case is reported to discuss the role of GnRH analogues for management of CPP in patients with WS.

[PMID: 16596673]
Thyroid involvement in Williams syndrome (WS) was recently reported in two small groups of patients, both showing an increased prevalence of elevation of TSH serum concentration; in one of the two reports, 70% of the patients demonstrated a hypoplasia of thyroid gland as well. In our institution, we currently follow a large population of WS patients who periodically undergo a multispecialist clinical evaluation that includes ultrasound evaluation of the thyroid gland, and levels of FT3, FT4, TSH, and anti-thyroid antibodies. Here, we report on the prevalence of thyroid structural and functional anomalies, in a population of 95 WS patients, half of them followed for more than 5 years. Our study confirms the increased incidence of both elevated TSH serum values (37.9% in our sample) and thyroid gland hypoplasia (74.7%). Moreover, we demonstrated that TSH elevation declines with age. For this reason, we suggest that a complete thyroid evaluation be performed in every patient with WS, and that this medical complication should be periodically searched for in follow-up visits.

[PMID: 15108207]
The authors report a female presenting with congenital heart defects, liver hemangiomas, and facial dysmorphisms admitted to hospital at 3 months of age because of feeding difficulties and poor growth. She had hypotonia and large tongue, "coarse" face, and umbilical hernia in presence of complex congenital cardiovascular malformations. In spite of normal neonatal screening we performed serum levels of thyroid hormones. Thyrotropin level was very high (>50 microU/ml; normal value 0.2-4 microU/ml), while serum free T(3) (FT3) and free T(4) (FT4) levels were normal (FT3 3.6 pg/ml, normal value 2.8-5.6 pg/ml; FT4 11.6 pg/ml, normal value 6.6-14 pg/ml); antithyroid autoantibodies were absent. Thyroid scintigraphy with sodium 99m Tc pertechnetate showed a small ectopic thyroid located in sublingual position, so treatment with L-thyroxine 37.5 microg/24 hr was started with rapid improvement of the clinical picture. At 17 months of age the patient developed the complete characteristic phenotype of Williams syndrome (WS); the clinical diagnosis was proven by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis which showed hemizygous deletion of the elastin gene on chromosome 7. Recently a case of thyroid hemiagenesis in a child with WS has been reported; our patient underscores the association of hypothyroidism and WS. Moreover, our case shows that clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism may be present and the treatment may be necessary as it is in isolated congenital hypothyroidism.

[PMID: 3164411]
Supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) may occur as an isolated autosomal dominant trait or as a feature of Williams syndrome. It has been suggested that a defect in calcitonin function may play a role in Williams syndrome. We have excluded calcitonin as a candidate gene for SVAS using a gene specific probe.

[PMID: 17188616]
To verify the prevalence of morpho-volumetric and functional thyroid abnormalities in young patients with Williams syndrome (WS). Ninety-two patients with WS (49 boys and 43 girls, 0.2-17.2 years of age) underwent evaluation of thyroid function by means of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), fT3, and fT4 measurement. Thyroid ultrasonography was performed in 37 patients. Thyroid antibodies (thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin) were measured in all patients with abnormal thyroid function tests. None of our patients had overt hypothyroidism; 29 patients (31.5%) had subclinical hypothyroidism. Thyroid antibodies were absent in all patients. The prevalence of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism was significantly higher in the younger patients. Ultrasonography revealed morphological or volumetric abnormalities of the thyroid gland in 67.5% of patients; these abnormalities were more frequently observed in the older children. Subclinical hypothyroidism is a frequent but stable finding in young children with WS. The great majority of patients with WS >10 years, either with normal or hypoplastic thyroid, have normal thyroid function. Therefore, we suggest yearly monitoring of thyroid function and sonographic studies at least once in patients with WS. Treatment should be reserved for the patients with overt hypothyroidism or for those whose thyroid function shows signs of progressive deterioration.

[PMID: 1867260]
We have investigated the possibility of mutations in the calcitonin/calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) gene in children with Williams syndrome. Involvement of the calcitonin/CGRP gene in Williams syndrome is postulated on the basis that Williams syndrome children often have infantile hypercalcemia and deficient expression of calcitonin, a hormone that lowers serum calcium levels. To test the hypothesis that mutations in the calcitonin/CGRP gene might be responsible for the reduced calcitonin levels, we examined the calcitonin/CGRP gene structure in Williams syndrome children. Analysis of white blood cell DNA by Southern blot hybridizations in 5 individuals did not show any detectable large deletions or rearrangements in the calcitonin/CGRP gene locus. The possibility of small deletions or point mutations within the exon encoding the mature calcitonin hormone is unlikely based on ribonuclease protection assays with patient DNA amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. These findings suggest that the calcitonin deficiency might be due either to mutations elsewhere in the gene or to defects in the cellular machinery needed for calcitonin synthesis and/or secretion.

[PMID: 4056970]
Williams syndrome is associated with neonatal hypercalcemia of unclear pathogenesis. To learn more about the hormonal control of calcium metabolism in patients with Williams syndrome, we studied five such children, with intravenous calcium and parathyroid hormone infusions as provocative stimuli. These patients were found to have significantly higher mean baseline calcium concentrations, delayed clearance of calcium after intravenous calcium loading, and blunted calcitonin responses after calcium infusion, compared with a group of seven normal children. No abnormalities of vitamin D metabolite concentrations were found, either before or after parathyroid hormone stimulation. Our studies demonstrate that patients with Williams syndrome have a defect in the synthesis or release of immunoreactive calcitonin. A deficiency of calcitonin may explain the abnormalities of calcium metabolism seen in these patients and can serve as an important endocrine marker for Williams syndrome.

[PMID: 18824871]
In the Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), disorders of the thyroid function and morphology have been reported and programs of thyroid screening and surveillance are recommended. However, the frequency of biochemical thyroid assessment, particularly in the first year of life, is being debated. In this report we describe an infant with WBS and congenital hypothyroidism, due to an important thyroid hypoplasia. The patient, a 1-month-old female, negative at primary neonatal thyroid screening, was referred to our hospital for dyspnea. Thyroid function tests showed a raised TSH (42 mIU/l; normal range 0.5-4 mIU/l) with a low FT(4) concentration (10.21 pmol/l; normal range: 10.29-24.45 pmol/l). Ultrasound examination of the neck showed a significant thyroid hypoplasia, whereas (99m)Tc-pertechnetate thyroid scintigraphy evidenced a thyroid gland in normal position, with reduced shape and overall weak fixation. Therefore, treatment with L-thyroxinewas started. Thyroid hypoplasia is a frequent characteristic of WBS and abnormalities of thyroid function are common in patients with this feature. Therefore, the possibility of congenital hypothyroidism should always be taken into consideration too and, even if congenital hypothyroidism neonatal screening is negative, thyroid (morphology and function) evaluation should be regularly assessed when the diagnosis is made and, thereafter, every year in the first years of life.

[PMID: 10405448]
A girl with Williams syndrome (WS) presented with elevated thyrotropin (TSH) levels (7.0 microU/ml), normal free thyroid hormone concentrations, and absent antithyroid autoantibodies. Thyroid ultrasonography and scintigraphy showed hemiagenesis of the left lobe and no evidence of ectopic tissue. TSH response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) injection (200 microg/mq, i.v.) was exaggerated and prolonged, suggesting subclinical hypothyroidism. The biological activity of circulating TSH was slightly below the normal range [TSH bioactivity (B) to immunoreactivity (I) ratio (TSH B/I) = 0.4, normal: 0.6-2.2]. These abnormalities are similar to those seen in patients with hypothalamic hypothyroidism. Thyroid function is not a recognized manifestation of WS and is not routinely investigated. However, abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis and thyroid dysgenesis have been found in other WS cases. Genes mapping at 7q11.23, contiguous to the chromosomal region deleted in most WS patients, may be involved in the development of the thyroid gland, contributing to the complex phenotype of WS.

[PMID: 3405972]
We describe a 28-week-old fetus with severe non-immune hydrops. Intrauterine cord blood sampling revealed hypercalcaemia of 3.4 mmol/l (n = 2.6 +/- 0.1). Subsequently, a postmortem examination revealed supravalvular aortic and pulmonary artery stenosis together with extensive arterial calcification. The maternal calcium, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, and parathyroid hormone levels were normal at delivery. This is the first time that hypercalcaemia has been diagnosed in utero. We speculate on the fact that the disorder resulted as a consequence of abnormal vitamin D metabolism in the fetoplacental unit, and that it might be related to the Williams syndrome.

[PMID: 8835601]
A 31-year-old man who had been under regular hemodialysis for 6 months was diagnosed as Williams syndrome (WS) by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) chromosomal analysis. The association of WS and chronic renal failure (CRF) is only rarely encountered. Endocrinological examinations revealed hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Prolonged and exaggerated responses of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) to insulin-induced hypoglycemia and corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) were also noted. While most of the endocrinological abnormalities observed in this patient could be attributed to altered endocrine circumstances in CRF, some findings stand in contrast. Furthermore, the testicular biopsy specimen showed severe hypospermatogenesis. Endocrine disorders observed in this patient may be at least in part, responsible for various clinical features underlying WS.