[PMID: 20832171]
Although the formalin test is a widely used model of persistent pain, the primary afferent fiber types that underlie the cellular and behavioral responses to formalin injection are largely unknown. Here we used a combined genetic and pharmacological approach to investigate the effect of ablating subsets of primary afferent nociceptors on formalin-induced nocifensive behaviors and spinal cord Fos protein expression. Intrathecal capsaicin-induced ablation of the central terminals of TRPV1+neurons greatly reduced the behavioral responses and Fos elicited by low-dose (0.5%) formalin. In contrast, genetic ablation of the MrgprD-expressing subset of non-peptidergic unmyelinated afferents, which constitute a largely non-overlapping population, altered neither the behavior nor the Fos induced by low-dose formalin. Remarkably, nocifensive behavior following high-dose (2%) formalin was unchanged in mice lacking either afferent population, or even in mice lacking both populations, which together make up the great majority of C-fiber nociceptors. Thus, at high doses, which are routinely used in the formalin test, formalin-induced "pain" behavior persists in the absence of the vast majority of C-fiber nociceptors, which points to a contribution of a large spectrum of afferents secondary to non-specific formalin-induced tissue and nerve damage.

[PMID: 28114822]
pH-sensitive nonionic surfactant vesicles (niosomes) by polysorbate-20 (Tween-20) or polysorbate-20 derivatized by glycine (added as pH sensitive agent), were developed to deliver Ibuprofen (IBU) and Lidocaine (LID). For the physical-chemical characterization of vesicles (mean size, size distribution, zeta potential, vesicle morphology, bilayer properties and stability) dynamic light scattering (DLS), small angle X-ray scattering and fluorescence studies were performed. Potential cytotoxicity was evaluated on immortalized human keratinocyte cells (HaCaT) and on immortalized mouse fibroblasts Balb/3T3. In vivo antinociceptive activity (formalin test) and anti-inflammatory activity tests (paw edema induced by zymosan) in murine models were performed on drug-loaded niosomes. pH-sensitive niosomes were stable in the presence of 0 and 10% fetal bovine serum, non-cytotoxic and able to modify IBU or LID pharmacological activity in vivo. The synthesis of stimuli responsive surfactant, as an alternative to add pH-sensitive molecules to niosomes, could represent a promising delivery strategy for anesthetic and anti-inflammatory drugs.

[PMID: 1688935]
Previous experiments have shown that noxious stimulation increases expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in subpopulations of spinal cord neurons. c-fos expression was assessed by immunostaining for Fos, the nuclear phosphoprotein product of the c-fos gene. In this study, we examined the effect of systemic morphine on Fos-like immunoreactivity (FLI) evoked in the formalin test, a widely used model of persistent pain. Awake rats received a subcutaneous 150 microliters injection of 5% formalin into the plantar aspect of the right hindpaw. The pattern of nuclear FLI was consistent with the known nociceptive primary afferent input from the hindpaw. Dense labeling was recorded in the superficial dorsal horn (laminae I and IIo) and in the neck of the dorsal horn (laminae V and VI), areas that contain large populations of nociceptive neurons. Sparse labeling was noted in lamina IIi and in the nucleus proprius (laminae III and IV), generally considered to be nonnociceptive areas of the cord. Fos immunoreactivity was also evoked in the ventromedial gray, including laminae VII, VIII, and X. There was no labeling in lamina IX of the ventral horn. Since FLI was time dependent and distributed over several spinal segments, we focused our analysis where maximal staining was found (L3-L5) and at the earliest time point of the peak Fos immunoreactivity (2 hr). Twenty minutes prior to the formalin injection, the rats received morphine (1.0, 2.5, 5.0, or 10 mg/kg, s.c.) or saline vehicle. Two hours later, the rats were killed, their spinal cords removed, and 50 microns transverse sections of the lumbar enlargement were immunostained with a rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against Fos. Prior treatment with morphine sulfate profoundly suppressed formalin-evoked FLI in a dose-dependent and naloxone-reversible manner. The dose-response relationship of morphine-induced suppression of FLI varied in different laminae. To quantify the effect of morphine on FLI, labeled neurons in sections taken from the L4/5 level of each rat were plotted with a camera lucida and counted. Staining in the neck of the dorsal horn (laminae V and VI) and in more ventral laminae VII, VIII, and X, was profoundly suppressed by doses of morphine which also suppress formalin-evoked behavior. Although the labeling was also significantly reduced in laminae I and II, at the highest doses of morphine there was substantial residual labeling in the superficial dorsal horn. These data indicate that analgesia from systemic opiates involves differential regulation of nociceptive processing in subpopulations of spinal nociceptive neurons.

[PMID: 22453493]
The essential oil of Eugenia caryophyllata (clove oil; Family: Myrtaceae) is used in dental care as an antiseptic and analgesic. The study aims to evaluate the effect of clove oil on experimental models of pain and cognition in mice. To observe the acute effects of clove oil at different doses, the elevated plus maze was used for the assessment of cognition, and the tail flick and formalin tests were used for the study of pain. The formalin test showed that clove oil (0.1 ml/kg, i.p.) demonstrated significantly reduced pain response in both the phases. The lower doses (0.025 and 0.05 ml/kg, i.p.) reduced the formalin-induced pain response significantly in the second phase only. The tail-flick test showed variable response. The dose 0.1 ml/kg, clove oil, significantly decreased the tail-flick latency at 30 min and this effect was reversed by naloxone (1 mg/kg). On the contrary, the dose 0.025 ml/kg of clove oil, at 30 and 60 min increased the mean tail-flick latency compared to control group, but this effect was not statistically significant. Yet naloxone significantly (p < 0.05) reversed the effect of clove oil 0.025 ml/kg at 30 min. Clove oil (0.025 and 0.05 ml/kg, i.p.) significantly reversed the scopolamine-induced retention memory deficit induced by scopolamine, but clove oil (0.1 ml/kg, i.p.) significantly reversed both acquisition as well as retention deficits in elevated plus maze induced by the scopolamine. Clove oil exhibits reduced pain response by a predominantly peripheral action as evidenced by formalin test and the tail flick test showed the involvement of opioid receptors. Clove oil also significantly improved scopolamine-induced retention memory deficit at all doses.

[PMID: 3347367]
Systemic administration of naloxone usually produces either hyperalgesia or no change in nociception depending on the animal species used and/or the pain test employed. This study, however, demonstrates that naloxone produces a dose-dependent analgesia in the formalin pain test using an inbred strain of albino mouse. Female BALB/c, C57BL/6 and CD1 mice were injected subcutaneously with naloxone HCl in saline (0.1 10.0 mg/kg) or saline alone, and tested for analgesia using the formalin test. Naloxone produced a statistically significant dose-dependent analgesia in the BALB/c mice, with an ED50 of 0.24 mg/kg and almost total analgesia at doses of 1 mg/kg or greater. No changes in pain behaviour were observed in the C57BL/6 or CD1 strains of mice. We believe this to be the first report of analgesia following administration of doses of naloxone normally used for opioid antagonism. To determine if this effect was specific to the formalin test, the 3 strains of mice were injected subcutaneously with naloxone HCl and tested in the tail-flick test. Naloxone had no analgesic action in this test in any of the strains.

[PMID: 23308208]
The formalin test is increasingly applied as a model of inflammatory pain using high formalin concentrations (5-15%). However, little is known about the effects of low formalin concentrations on related behavioural responses. To examine this, rat pups were subjected to various concentrations of formalin at four developmental stages: 7, 13, 22, and 82 days of age. At postnatal day (PND) 7, sex differences in flinching but not licking responses were observed with 0.5% formalin evoking higher flinching in males than in females. A dose response was evident in that 0.5% formalin also produced higher licking responses compared to 0.3% or 0.4% formalin. At PND 13, a concentration of 0.8% formalin evoked a biphasic response. At PND 22, a concentration of 1.1% evoked higher flinching and licking responses during the late phase (10-30 min) in both males and females. During the early phase (0-5 min), 1.1% evoked higher licking responses compared to 0.9% or 1% formalin. 1.1% formalin produced a biphasic response that was not evident with 0.9 or 1%. At PND 82, rats displayed a biphasic pattern in response to three formalin concentrations (1.25%, 1.75% and 2.25%) with the presence of an interphase for both 1.75% and 2.25% but not for 1.25%. These data suggest that low formalin concentrations induce fine-tuned responses that are not apparent with the high formalin concentration commonly used in the formalin test. These data also show that the developing nociceptive system is very sensitive to subtle changes in formalin concentrations.

[PMID: 8731171]
While the formalin test is a widely used behavioral model of tonic chemogenic pain, little is known about the responses of primary afferent nociceptors to formalin. Formalin (2.5%, 50 microliters) was injected either directly in or adjacent to the mechanical receptive fields of single C-fibers isolated from the saphenous nerve of pentobarbital-anesthetized rats. The average formalin-evoked response in C-fibers (n = 29) over time was biphasic. This biphasic time course of the C-fiber response to formalin is similar to that of the behavioral response in the awake animal and is compatible with the hypothesis that increased C-fiber activity contributes to the behavioral response in phase 2, as well as in phase 1 of the formalin test.

[PMID: 8628579]
The rat paw formalin test is a model of prolonged pain due to mild tissue injury. There is some evidence suggesting that morphine does not produce antinociception in the formalin test via the brain-stem and spinal cord circuitry normally associated with antinociception. Furthermore, morphine appears to require an intact forebrain in order to function as an analgesic for formalin pain. In the 2 experiments reported here, we investigated the possibility that the central nucleus of the amygdala (Ce) contributes to the production of morphine antinociception (MA) in the formalin test. Nociception in this test occurs in 2 phases, with the 1st phase occurring 0-5 min after formalin injection and the 2nd phase beginning 10-15 min after injection and continuing for approximately 1 h. In Exp. 1, bilateral neurotoxic lesions of the Ce, but not lesions of the adjacent basolateral nucleus (BL), reliably attenuated MA (7 mg/kg morphine sulfate) during the 2nd phase of the formalin test without affecting baseline nociception. These results were obtained regardless of whether the rating scale method or flinch-frequency method of nociceptive scoring was used. During the 1st phase, Ce lesions reliably attenuated MA as measured by the flinch-frequency method, but not as measured by the rating scale method. In Exp. 2, Ce lesions also reliably attenuated the antinociception produced by 12 mg/kg morphine sulfate during the 2nd phase of the formalin test. Antinociception appeared to be almost completely re-instated, however, if the dose of morphine was raised to 20 mg/kg. The results indicate that neurons originating from the Ce contribute to the production of MA during the 2nd phase, and possibly the 1st phase, of the formalin test, especially at relatively lower doses of morphine. This suggests that in addition to coordinating conditioned antinociceptive responses, the amygdala may be a component of endogenous antinociceptive circuitry. These and other issues are discussed with reference to the spino-ponto-amygdaloid nociceptive pathway, and the proposed role of the amygdala in the mediation of defense reactions.

[PMID: 23583574]
The present study analyzed the potential antinociceptive effect of the antimigraine drugs sumatriptan, dihydroergotamine or methysergide in rats submitted to the formalin test. Moreover, by using selective antagonists, the role of 5-HT1B/1D serotonergic receptors was investigated in the antinociception induced by these antimigraine drugs. The formalin test was used to assess the nociceptive activity. Overt pain-like behavior (flinching, 1h) and evoked nociception (long-lasting secondary mechanical allodynia and hyperalgesia, 6 days) were determined in the same rat. Ipsilateral, but not contralateral, pre-treatment (in μg/paw) with sumatriptan (10-300), methysergide (1-30) or dihydroergotamine (1-30) significantly prevented flinching behavior (at 1h) as well as secondary allodynia and hyperalgesia (at day 6) induced by formalin. Interestingly, the antinociceptive (flinching), antiallodynic and antihyperalgesic effects of sumatriptan were completely prevented by peripheral pre-treatment with selective antagonists at the 5-HT1B (SB 224289; 100) or 5-HT1D (BRL 15572; 100) receptors. In contrast, the acute antinociceptive effects of methysergide and dihydroergotamine were partially prevented by SB 224289 and BRL 15572. The antiallodynic and antihyperalgesic effects of both drugs were completely prevented by BRL 15572 and partially prevented by SB 224289. Given alone, SB 224289 or BRL 15572 did not modify per se the long-lasting secondary allodynia and hyperalgesia. The above findings suggest that: (i) the antimigraine drugs sumatriptan, methysergide and dihydroergotamine reduce the acute and chronic nociception induced by formalin; and (ii) this antinociceptive effect results from activation of peripheral 5-HT1B/1D serotonergic receptors.

[PMID: 1484716]
Subcutaneous injection of dilute formalin induces pain in humans and behaviors indicative of pain in animals. The formalin test, which is based on these observations, is now widely used as a model of pain produced by tissue injury, but the neural mechanisms of pain and analgesia in this test have not been identified. Rats with transections of the brain rostral or caudal to the pons show behavioral reactions to formalin similar to those of normal rats, although the temporary abatement of pain 10-15 min after formalin is absent in transected animals. Doses of morphine that suppress the behavioral response to formalin in normal rats are not antinociceptive in the formalin test in decerebrate rats although sedation, catalepsy and inhibition of the tail-flick reflex still occur. These results suggest that the response to formalin is organized in the brain stem but the antinociceptive effect of morphine in this test is mediated by the diencephalon or forebrain.

[PMID: 24847424]
There are many reports about the role of rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) in modulating stress-induced analgesia (SIA). In the previous study we demonstrated that temporal inactivation of RVM by lidocaine potentiated stress-induced analgesia. In this study, we investigated the effect of permanent lesion of the RVM on SIA by using formalin test as a model of acute inflammatory pain. Three sets of experiments were conducted: (1) Application of stress protocol (2) Formalin injection after exposing the animals to the swim stress (3) Either the relevant vehicle or dopamine receptor 1 (D1) agonist R-SKF38393 was injected into the RVM to cause a lesion. For permanent lesion of RVM, R-SKF38393 was injected into the RVM. Forced swim stress in water was employed in adult male rats. Nociceptive responses were measured by formalin test (50µl injection of formalin 2% subcutaneously into hind paw) and pain related behaviors were monitored for 90 min. In the unstressed rats, permanent lesion of the RVM by R-SKF38393 decreased formalin-induced nociceptive behaviors in phase 1, while in stressed rats, injection of R-SKF38393 into the RVM potentiated swim stress-induced antinociception in phase 1 and interphase, phase 2A of formalin test. Furthermore, R-SKF38393 had pronociceptive effects in phase2B whereas injections of R-SKF38393 resulted in significant difference in nociceptive bahaviours in all phases of formalin test (P<0.05). The result of the present study demonstrated that permanent inactivation of RVM can potentiate stress-induced analgesia in formalin test.

[PMID: 6493793]
The formalin test has been used in monkeys for assessing pain. After formalin injection in the palmar surface of the hand just proximal to the base of the fingers, the monkey's responses are rated for 1 h according to objective behavioral criteria. The present 'tonic' pain model has a fair degree of objectivity, validity, reproducibility and quantifiability. The analgesic effects of morphine and pethidine have been evaluated.

[PMID: 27987222]
Preclinical Research The aim of the present study was to evaluate the antinoceptive interaction between the opioid analgesic, tapentadol, and the NSAID, ketorolac, in the mouse orofacial formalin test. Tapentadol or ketorolac were administered ip 15 min before orofacial formalin injection. The effect of the individual drugs was used to calculate their ED<sub>50</sub> values and different proportions (tapentadol-ketorolac in 1:1, 3:1, and 1:3) were assayed in the orofacial test using isobolographic analysis and interaction index to evaluate the interaction between the drugs. The combination showed antinociceptive synergistic and additive effects in the first and second phase of the orofacial formalin test. Naloxone and glibenclamide were used to evaluate the possible mechanisms of action and both partially reversed the antinociception produced by the tapentadol-ketorolac combination. These data suggest that the mixture of tapentadol and ketorolac produces additive or synergistic interactions via opioid receptors and ATP-sensitive K<sup>+</sup> channels in the orofacial formalin-induced nociception model in mice. Drug Dev Res 78 : 63-70, 2017. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 19168051]
The formalin test is used as a primary behavioural screen for assaying the antinociceptive activity of compounds in laboratory rodents. After hindpaw formalin injection, nociceptive behaviours are expressed in a biphasic pattern and correlate closely with the concentration of formalin injected. Here, the antinociceptive efficacy of six compounds used in the clinical treatment of chronic pain was compared in rats injected with either 1% or 5% formalin. Predictably, the anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen (30-300 mg/kg) attenuated second phase (16-40 min) nociceptive behaviours in 5% formalin-injected rats; 1% formalin-injected rats were unaffected. The anti-epileptic drugs gabapentin (50-200 mg/kg) and lamotrigine (10-60 mg/kg) were antinociceptive only during second phase in both 1% and 5% tests. Notably, they were 2-4 times more potent in 1% vs 5% formalin-injected rats. The dual monoamine reuptake inhibitor duloxetine (3-60 mg/kg) consistently attenuated nociceptive behaviours during first phase and interphase in both tests. However second phase nociception was only attenuated in 5% formalin-injected rats giving rise to a 6 fold increase in potency compared with 1% formalin-injected rats. The micro-opioid receptor agonist morphine (1-6 mg/kg) and the combined micro-opioid receptor agonist/monoamine reuptake inhibitor tramadol (5-50 mg/kg) both attenuated nociceptive behaviours throughout the duration of both the 1% and 5% tests; no difference in antinociceptive potency occurred for either compound during second phase. Thus, for mechanistically-distinct compounds the predictive antinociceptive capacity of the formalin test can vary with the concentration of formalin injected, likely as a result of peripheral and central nociceptive signalling mechanisms being differentially engaged.

[PMID: 27284395]
The formalin test is the most accepted chemical test for evaluation of nociception. It requires the injection of an adequate amount of formalin into the surface of the hindpaw. Formalin test consists of phase 1 (0-7 min) and phase 2 (15-60) in which the animal shows painful behaviors. These phases are separated with a quiet phase named interphase, in which the nociceptive responses are decreased or completely disappeared. The goal of the current study was to evaluate the effects of swim stress at different heights of water on different phases of the formalin test in male rats. Swim stress decreased nociceptive behaviors in first phase and prolonged interphase or delayed the start of second phase in a water height dependent manner. Swim stress in 25 and 50cm completely abolished the nociceptive behaviors in phase 1. The present results showed different pain modulation during different phases of the formalin test and elucidated the impact of swim stress on duration of interphase. Interphase considered as an inactive period, but a recent research has shown that active inhibitory mechanisms are involved in the modulation of pain during this period. Therefore, swim stress may be considered as a useful tool for study of the basic inhibitory mechanisms underlying attenuation of nociceptive behaviors between phase 1 and 2 of the formalin test.

[PMID: 27716994]
Pain is a complex and subjective experience. Previous studies have shown that mice lacking the dopamine D3 receptor (D3RKO) exhibit hypoalgesia, indicating a role of the D3 receptor in modulation of nociception. Given that there are sex differences in pain perception, there may be differences in responses to nociceptive stimuli between male and female D3RKO mice. In the current study, we examined the role of the D3 receptor in modulating nociception in male and female D3RKO mice. Acute thermal pain was modeled by hot-plate test. This test was performed at different temperatures including 52°C, 55°C, and 58°C. The von Frey hair test was applied to evaluate mechanical pain. And persistent pain produced by peripheral tissue injury and inflammation was modeled by formalin test. In the hot-plate test, compared with wild-type (WT) mice, D3RKO mice generally exhibited longer latencies at each of the three temperatures. Specially, male D3RKO mice showed hypoalgesia compared with male WT mice when the temperature was 55°C, while for the female mice, there was a statistical difference between genotypes when the test condition was 52°C. In the von Frey hair test, both male and female D3RKO mice exhibited hypoalgesia. In the formalin test, the male D3RKO mice displayed a similar nociceptive behavior as their sex-matched WT littermates, whereas significantly depressed late-phase formalin-induced nociceptive behaviors were observed in the female mutants. These findings indicated that the D3 receptor affects nociceptive behaviors in a sex-specific manner and that its absence induces more analgesic behavior in the female knockout mice. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 22891086]
Pethidine, an opioid analgesic is used for pain management. Clomipramine a tricyclic antidepressant primarily used for mood management is also used to treat pain. The objective of this study was to investigate the potentiation of the analgesic effects of sub-threshold dose of pethidine by a tricyclic antidepressant, clomipramine. The antinociceptive activities of clomipramine and pethidine alone and in combination were investigated in Swiss albino mice using the formalin test. Normal saline was employed as the control. Ten animals were used in each experiment. Pethidine 5mg / kg failed to cause any significant effect while the 6.25, 7.5, 8.75 and 10.0mg /kg showed highly significant antinociceptive effect (p< 0.01) compared to the controls in the late phase of formalin test. Clomipramine 0.5 mg / kg did not show any significant effect while 0.75 mg / kg caused a significant effect (p< 0.05) while 1.00 and 1.25mg /kg caused a very highly significant antinociceptive effect (p< 0.001) in the late phase of formalin test compared to the vehicle treated animals. The combination of pethidine 5mg / kg and clomipramine 0.75 mg / kg caused a highly significant antinociceptive effect (P<0.01) in the late phase of formalin test. This study demonstrates a marked reduction in the time spent in pain behaviour produced by the combination of low dose pethidine and clomipramine in the late phase of formalin test. The findings demonstrate the potentiation of a narcotic analgesic by a tricyclic antidepressant.

[PMID: 25436084]
Formalin injection induces nociceptive bahaviour in phase I and II, with a quiescent phase between them. While active inhibitory mechanisms are proposed to be responsible for initiation of interphase, the exact mechanisms which lead to termination of nociceptive response in phase II are not clear yet. Phase II is a consequence of peripheral and central sensitization processes, which can lead to termination of the noxious stimuli responses; 45-60 minutes after formalin injection via possible recruitment of active inhibitory mechanisms which we have investigated in this study. To test our hypothesis, in the first set of experiments, we evaluated nociceptive response after two consecutive injection of formalin (50µL, 2%), with intervals of 5 or 60 minutes. In the next set, formalin tests were carried out in companion with injection of Naloxone Hydrochloride, a non-selective antagonist of opioid receptors, pre-formalin injection and 30 and 45 minutes post formalin injection. While normal nociceptive behaviour was observed in the group receiving one injection of formalin, a diminished response was observed in phases I and II of those receiving consequent injection of formalin, 60 minute after first injection. While second injection of formalin, 5 minute after first injection, had no effect. Administration of naloxone (1mg/kg) decreased nociception in phase 2A; but had no effect on delayed termination of formalin test. The results of this study suggest the existence of an active inhibitory mechanism, other than the endogenous opioids, that is responsible for termination of nociceptive behaviour at the end of formalin test.

[PMID: 9431444]
The formalin test for nociception, predominantly used with rodents, is characterized by continuous pain due to tissue injury induced by formalin. In addition to the pain generated by formalin itself, the classical formalin test for nociception comprises a number of additional strong stressful events such as restraint and injury caused by needle insertion. These events have hampered its use as a model of stress employing continuous pain as a stress stimulus. We describe here a new, simple method of a subcutaneous application of formalin in conscious rats without restraint and needle insertion. Formalin or physiological saline (controls) was injected subcutaneously through a chronically implanted catheter in the region of the lower leg. In most animals, the cardiovascular and behavioural responses to subcutaneously injected formalin were biphasic. The early phase was quantitatively characterized. Formalin (2.5%, 50 microL) induced a marked increase in mean arterial pressure and heart rate. Maximal increases occurred during the first 3 min after formalin injection and were followed by a gradual decline of both cardiovascular parameters to levels higher than the preinjection baseline. Subcutaneous saline injection did not induce any changes in mean arterial pressure and heart rate. The behavioural response to formalin featured intensive licking and biting of the injection site. The behavioural response to subcutaneous saline did not differ from the spontaneous behavioural activity recorded in noninjected rats. Subcutaneously injected formalin induced an immediate increase in plasma corticotrophin (ACTH), corticosterone, noradrenaline, and adrenaline levels, and all hormones remained increased during the whole observation period (60 min). Adrenaline and noradrenaline levels in plasma were slightly, but significantly, elevated during the initial 5 min after subcutaneous saline application but returned to basal values after 15 min. The magnitude of the hormonal responses characterizes the described formalin test as a moderate stress stimulus. The complex response pattern to formalin injected through the subcutaneous catheter is brought about exclusively by pain generated by formalin-induced tissue injury. The described technique of subcutaneous formalin injection represents a new tool to study mechanisms activating brain neuronal circuits that generate the cardiovascular, endocrine, and behavioural responses of the reaction to pain.

[PMID: 28073097]
Moringa oleifera has long been used in large demand in folk medicine to treat pain. The present study was undertaken to examine the antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory spectrum of M. oleifera leaf extracts discriminating the constituents' nature by using different kind of experimental models in rats. Pharmacological evaluation of a non-polar and/or polar extracts at several doses (30-300mg/kg, p.o.) was explored through experimental nociception using formalin test, carrageenan-induced paw edema and arthritis with subcutaneous injection of collagen in rats. Basic morphology characterization was done by scanning electronic microscopy and laser scanning confocal microscopy. Not only polar (from 30 or 100mg/kg, p.o.) but also non-polar extract produced significant inhibition of the nociceptive behavior with major efficacy in the inflammatory response in different assessed experimental models. This antinociceptive activity involved constituents of different nature and depended on the intensity of the induced painful stimulus. Phytochemical analysis showed the presence of kaempferol-3-glucoside in the polar extract and fatty acids like chlorogenic acid, among others, in the non-polar extract. Data obtained with M. oleifera leaf extracts give evidence of its potential for pain treatment.

[PMID: 15172765]
The subcutaneous injection of formalin into the rat upper lip generates behavioral responses that last several minutes. The time course of the response is similar to what is observed following formalin injection into the paw, i.e. biphasic, with an early and short-lasting first phase followed, after a quiescent period by a second, prolonged (tonic) phase. The applied chemical stimulus (formalin) can be qualified as noxious since it produces tissue injury, activates Adelta and C nociceptors as well as trigeminal and spinal nociceptive neurons and is felt as painful in man. In addition, increasing the concentration of formalin causes a parallel aggravation of histological signs of tissue inflammation and injury. The measured behavioral response (face rubbing) is a relevant end-point: prolonged face rubbing is evoked by formalin but not saline injection and a positive relationship between the amplitude of the response and the formalin concentration is observed, at least up to 2.5%. At higher formalin concentrations, the use of other or additional end-points should be considered. Finally, the behavioral response in the orofacial formalin test is sensitive to various opioid and non-opioid analgesics. The orofacial formalin test can then be considered as a reliable way of producing and quantifying nociception in the trigeminal region of the rat.