[PMID: 14642738]
Zolmitriptan is a novel and highly selective 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist used as an acute oral treatment for migraine. There are few reports regarding the in vitro metabolism of zolmitriptan. Previous studies indicated zolmitriptan was metabolized via CYP1A2 in human hepatic microsomes. In order to study the enzyme kinetics and drug interaction, the metabolism of zolmitriptan and possible drug-drug interactions were investigated in rat hepatic microsomes induced with different inducers. An active metabolite, N-demethylzolmitriptan, was detected and another minor, inactive metabolite that was reported in human hepatic microsomes was not detected in this study. The enzyme kinetics for the formation of N-demethylzolmitriptan from zolmitriptan in rat liver microsomes pretreated with BNF were 96+/-22 microM (K(m)), 11+/-3 pmol min(-1)mg protein(-1) (V(max)), and 0.12+/-0.02 microl min(-1)mg protein(-1) (CL(int)). Fluvoxamine and diphenytriazol inhibited zolmitriptan N-demethylase activity catalyzed by CYP1A2 (K(i)=3.8+/-0.3 and 3.2+/-0.1 microM, respectively). Diazepam and propranolol elicited a slight inhibitory effect on the metabolism of zolmitriptan (K(i)=70+/-11 and 90+/-18 microM, respectively). Cimetidine and moclobemide produced no significant effect on the metabolism of zolmitriptan. Fluvoxamine yielded a k(inactivation) value of 0.16 min(-1), and K(i) of 57 microM. The results suggest that rat hepatic microsomes are a reasonable model to study the metabolism of zolmitriptan, although there is a difference in the amount of minor, inactive metabolites between human hepatic microsomes and rat liver microsomes. The results of the inhibition experiments provided information for the interactions between zolmitriptan and drugs co-administrated in clinic, and it is helpful to explain the drug-drug interactions of clinical relevance on enzyme level. This study aso demonstrated that fluvoxamine may be a mechanism-based inactivator of CYP1A2.

[PMID: 9399013]
Zolmitriptan (Zomig, formerly 311C90) is a novel, oral, acute treatment for migraine. In healthy volunteers it is rapidly and extensively absorbed and has favorable oral bioavailability (approximately 40%) which is not affected by concomitant food intake. On average, 75% of its eventual Cmax is achieved within 1 h of dosing. Plasma concentrations are sustained for 4 to 6 h after dosing with single or multiple peaks in the plasma concentration-time profile, reflecting continued absorption down the gastrointestinal tract. The pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan indicate dose proportionality over the dose range of 2.5 to 50 mg and there are no significant changes on multiple dosing. Zolmitriptan is cleared by metabolism followed by urinary excretion of the metabolites. There are three major metabolites, one of which, the N-desmethyl metabolite, is active as a 5HT1D agonist and has mean plasma concentrations approximately two thirds those of the parent compound. The other two metabolites, the N-oxide and indoleacetic acid, are inactive. The elimination half lives of zolmitriptan and its metabolites are similar, approximately 3 h. Zolmitriptan and its active metabolite are minimally protein bound in the plasma (approximately 25%). In migraine patients, plasma concentrations of zolmitriptan and its metabolites are lower during a migraine attack than outside an attack. In summary, the pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan are simple, predictable and appropriate to an acute oral treatment for migraine.

[PMID: 9399012]
Zolmitriptan (Zomig; formerly 311C90) is a novel 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT)1B/1D receptor agonist with proven efficacy in the acute treatment of migraine with or without preceding aura. The drug differs from presently available members of this drug class in that it combines 5HT1B/1D receptor partial agonist activity with robust oral pharmacokinetics and an ability to inhibit trigeminovascular activation centrally as well as peripherally in preclinical studies. Consistent with its selectivity for 5HT1B/1D receptors, zolmitriptan produces constriction of various isolated blood vessels, most notably cranial arteries. In anaesthetized animals, these vascular effects manifest as a selective constriction of cranial arterio-venous anastomoses resulting in a redistribution of carotid arterial blood flow. This effect is produced without significant effects on heart rate, blood pressure or blood flow to the brain, heart or lungs. Zolmitriptan also inhibits trigeminal-evoked increases in cerebral blood flow in anaesthetized cats and blocks trigeminal-evoked plasma protein extravasation in the dura of guinea-pigs. These actions are consistent with a pre-junctional inhibition of neuropeptide release from perivascular afferents of the trigeminal nerve, as confirmed by independent studies showing that zolmitriptan blocks elevations of calcitonin-gene-related peptide in jugular venous blood during electrical stimulation of the trigeminal ganglion. In all of these effects, zolmitriptan is three to four times more potent than sumatriptan, but produces the same maximum response. Zolmitriptan crosses the intact blood-brain barrier to inhibit trigeminovascular activation in the brainstem. This was shown initially by the ability of the drug to block a brainstem reflex provoking vasoactive intestinal peptide release from the VIIth cranial (facial) nerve during trigeminal stimulation. Subsequent ex vivo autoradiography confirmed that intravenously injected [3H]zolmitriptan labels a discrete population of cells in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC) and nucleus tractus solitarius. Direct evidence for a central neuromodulatory effect of zolmitriptan was provided by electrophysiological experiments which clearly demonstrated that the drug inhibits the excitability of cells in the TNC after systemic administration. This novel pre-clinical profile not only distinguishes zolmitriptan from sumatriptan, but raises intriguing questions about the clinical relevance of a dual action. Studies to date show that zolmitriptan indeed modulates cranial sensory processing in humans, yet central side-effects are no different from sumatriptan. This property may account for the remarkable consistency in clinical efficacy observed in clinical trials.

[PMID: 9170337]
The trigeminovascular system consists of bipolar neurons which innervate pain-sensitive intracranial structures and projecting to neurons in the superficial laminae of the caudal trigeminal nucleus and of the dorsal horns of C1 and C2. The serotonin (5HT1B/D) agonist zolmitriptan (311C90) has been shown to be effective in the treatment of acute attacks of migraine and experimental data suggest that it may have both peripheral and central sites of action. This study sought to further investigate possible central effects of zolmitriptan (311C90) by examining its distribution in the central nervous system. Specific binding of [3H]-zolmitriptan was determined both ex vivo and in vitro in the cat brain. For the ex vivo studies, cats were anaesthetized with halothane and alpha-chloralose (60 mg/kg intraperitoneal). A femoral vein catheter was inserted for injection of the [3H]-zolmitriptan and then 1 h after injection the brain removed. For the in vitro studies fresh frozen brain slices were incubated with labelled and masking concentrations of zolmitriptan. The distribution of [3H]-zolmitriptan was determined using quantitative autoradiographic methods. The in vitro work demonstrated specific binding of [3H]-zolmitriptan in the superficial laminae of the trigeminal nucleus caudalis and dorsal horns of the C1 and C2 cervical spinal cord. The density of binding was 53 +/- 9 fmol/mg for the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, 47 +/- 7 fmol/mg for C1 and 50 +/- 6 fmol/mg for C2. The ex vivo work demonstrated binding in anatomically identical areas which was less dense than that seen with the in vitro method. These data confirm the existence of a population of receptors that specifically bind zolmitriptan following systemic administration. These receptors may, in part, be responsible for its clinical efficacy and reinforce the importance of central trigeminal neurons as a possible site of action of anti-migraine drugs.

[PMID: 9399017]
Zolmitriptan (Zomig, formerly 311C90) is a novel, oral antimigraine drug that is consistently effective and well tolerated in the acute treatment of migraine headache and its associated symptoms. The purpose of this article is to review data available from pharmacological and clinical trials with zolmitriptan and to summarize the clinically relevant features that distinguish this agent. We will review the attributes desirable in a migraine drug and use this as a template for assessing zolmitriptan. Zolmitriptan provides a new oral treatment option for physicians which should help improve patient outcomes.

[PMID: 14743270]
Zolmitriptan, a selective 5-HT(1B/D) agonist was developed for the acute treatment of migraine. Dose-finding studies show a clearly defined dose response curve for the oral formulation with onset of efficacy demonstrated within 45 min of dosing. Clinical trials support its efficacy in all types of migraine, with excellent safety and tolerability in those patients for whom zolmitriptan is not contraindicated. Future developments, including new formulations, will provide patients with a greater choice of treatment.

[PMID: 32752932]
M207 is an investigational intracutaneous microneedle therapeutic system for nonoral zolmitriptan delivery. In a Phase I trial, M207 provided faster absorption with a higher 2 h exposure than oral zolmitriptan. In the pivotal trial evaluating efficacy, tolerability and safety in moderate-to-severe migraine attacks, M207 3.8 mg was superior to placebo in providing freedom from headache pain (42 vs 14%) and freedom from most bothersome symptom (68 vs 43%) 2 h post-dose. Treatment-emergent adverse events were mild and transient and most commonly concerned the application site. In <i>post hoc</i> analyses: pain freedom was sustained in approximately 1/3 of patients; efficacy was observed in migraine headaches that are typically more difficult to treat.

[PMID: 11200789]
In the last two years, a number of 5-HT1B/1D agonist triptans with enhanced lipophilicity (TELs) relative to the first drug of this class, sumatriptan, have been approved for marketing in most countries of the world (naratriptan, rizatriptan and zolmitriptan). In addition, at least three others are in advanced stage of clinical development (almotriptan, eletriptan, and frovatriptan). This paper sets out to review the recent data with the aim of identifying: 1) What are the critical differences between the TELs and sumatriptan? 2) How do the currently licensed TELs compare? 3) Is it possible to provide a rational approach to migraine therapy based on objective differences in the clinical profile of these new drugs? Recent randomised controlled and comparator data were reviewed, including the independent FDA assessment of rizatriptan. Critical differences for the new TELs (naratriptan, rizatriptan and zolmitriptan) which may lead to more rational migraine management: Both rizatriptan (10 mg) and zolmitriptan (2.5 mg and 5.0 mg) have demonstrated superior efficacy to sumatriptan 100 mg, and 25 and 50 mg respectively. Therefore, for first line use either rizatriptan or zolmitriptan would be appropriate for moderate and severe headache. Rizatriptan has a more rapid onset of action than sumatriptan 100 mg. Both rizatriptan and zolmitriptan have a more rapid onset of action than naratriptan. Therefore, for a rapid onset of action either rizatriptan or zolmitriptan would be appropriate. Naratriptan would appear to have a lower recurrent headache rate than sumatriptan, rizatriptan or zolmitriptan. However, 24-hour efficacy rates for zolmitriptan 2.5 mg were significantly greater than for sumatriptan 25 mg and 50 mg and were not significantly different from naratriptan. Therefore, for headaches of long duration and with a tendency to recur (e.g. menstrual headaches) either naratriptan or zolmitriptan would be appropriate. Naratriptan has lower reported adverse event rates comparable with placebo. This would support the use of naratriptan 2.5 mg in patients who have demonstrated poor tolerance to the "triptan type" adverse events.

[PMID: 31889312]
There are many new treatment options available for migraine and more are coming. Three calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonist monoclonal antibodies have been approved and a 4th is due in early 2020. Small molecule CGRP receptor-blocking oral compounds, both for acute care and prevention, are also coming. Four neurostimulators are available, with others on the way. New acute treatments coming soon include the 5HT<sub>1F</sub> agonist lasmiditan, a zolmitriptan intradermal micro-needle patch, and a nasal mist sumatriptan with a permeability enhancer. Farther out, three novel dihydroergotamine delivery systems, and a liquid-filled capsule of celecoxib show early promise. A new, safer form of methysergide is in the works, as is a longer-duration onabotulinumtoxinA. As always with new products, questions regarding safety, tolerability, cost, and insurance coverage will need to be addressed. Despite these concerns and uncertainties, a robust headache treatment pipeline is good for patients who are not satisfied with the results of their treatment and/or cannot tolerate existing treatments.

[PMID: 9660035]
Zolmitriptan (Zomig, formerly 311C90) is a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)1B/1D-receptor agonist with central and peripheral activity for the acute treatment of migraine. This randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study investigated the effects of fluoxetine administration on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of zolmitriptan. Twenty volunteers were given single doses of fluoxetine 20 mg or an identical placebo daily for 28 days prior to receiving a single 10 mg oral dose of zolmitriptan. Sixteen volunteers completed the two treatment phases. The pharmacokinetic parameters of zolmitriptan and its metabolites were not significantly affected by fluoxetine pretreatment. The pharmacodynamic effects of zolmitriptan were also unaffected by fluoxetine pretreatment. There were small, clinically insignificant increases in blood pressure following zolmitriptan which were unaltered by fluoxetine. Zolmitriptan was well tolerated when given alone or concomitantly with fluoxetine. These results indicate that there is no contraindication to the use of zolmitriptan in patients treated concurrently with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and that no adjustment of the zolmitriptan dose is required in these circumstances.

[PMID: 15992000]
Zolmitriptan is a new oral acute treatment for migraine. It is a selective and potent agonist at the serotonin (5-HT)(1B/1D) receptor and was developed to improve on the oral bioavailability, tissue selectivity and CNS penetration of earlier compounds. Animal studies confirmed that these objectives had been attained. In man, zolmitriptan is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, with at least 75% of the eventual C(max) reached within 1 h. Oral bioavailability is approximately 40%. The elimination half-life of zolmitriptan is approximately 2.5 h and the primary route of elimination is metabolism, with one of the metabolites being pharmacologically active. A consistent 2-h headache response rate of 60-70% was observed at doses of 2.5 mg and above. Long-term treatment response is high (> 80%) and consistent. In addition, there is evidence from electrophysiology in migraineurs that zolmitriptan has a central action not shared by sumatriptan. Zolmitriptan is well-tolerated. The nature and incidence of the most frequently reported adverse events are similar to those of other 5-HT(1B/1D) agonists. Long-term zolmitriptan usage was associated with an improvement in quality of life. Zolmitriptan is a suitable first-line drug for acute treatment for migraine.

[PMID: 9725543]
Zolmitriptan is a potent selective 5HT1B/1D receptor agonist for acute migraine therapy. Zolmitriptan has vasoconstrictor activity in cerebral vessels and may cause slight elevations of blood pressure in subjects without hypertension. Therefore, the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of zolmitriptan (5, 10, and 20 mg) were evaluated in 16 patients with mild to moderate hypertension (controlled by hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg once daily) and 17 healthy age- and sex-matched control subjects in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, four-period crossover study. The pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan and its metabolites were dose proportional. Although area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-infinity) and maximum concentration (Cmax) were slightly higher in patients with hypertension at all doses, this was only statistically significant for AUC at the 20-mg dose. Differences between subjects with and without hypertension were not clinically significant. Zolmitriptan produced a small increase in blood pressure, but this was similar in subjects with and without hypertension and was of no clinical significance. Zolmitriptan was well tolerated in both groups. Zolmitriptan plasma concentrations were higher in women than in men, with higher values of AUC and Cmax and lower total clearance in women. These results indicate that zolmitriptan can be administered for treatment of migraine in patients with controlled hypertension without dose adjustment.

[PMID: 12083998]
Preclinical studies have shown that zolmitriptan is a selective serotonin 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist (triptan). Randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials in patients with migraine have shown that zolmitriptan has good efficacy measured using 2 h response and pain-free rates. Migraine-associated symptoms, including nausea, photophobia and phonophobia, are also improved with zolmitriptan. Oral zolmitriptan (2.5 and 5 mg) has an onset of action within 45 min and efficacy is sustained in most patients who respond at 2 h. The orally-disintegrating zolmitriptan tablet has the advantage that it may be taken immediately, without the need for additional fluids, any time a migraine headache occurs. Patients may benefit in terms of improved efficacy from the convenience of the disintegrating tablet, since there is evidence that taking triptan therapy as early as possible in an attack is advantageous. For similar reasons, as well as improved efficacy, a nasal spray formulation is in development. Zolmitriptan is effective in the treatment of migraine associated with menses and migraine with aura. There is no tachyphylaxis following repeated doses for multiple attacks of migraine over a prolonged period of time. Compared to placebo, the incidence of persistent migraine headache is reduced by zolmitriptan and recurrent migraine headache occurs less frequently. Zolmitriptan has also shown efficacy in the treatment of persistent and/or recurrent migraine headache. Comparative clinical studies have shown overall that zolmitriptan has similar or superior efficacy to sumatriptan in the treatment of migraine. Specifically, zolmitriptan 2.5 mg was significantly more effective than sumatriptan 25 or 50 mg according to a number of end points, including headache response at 2 h. Oral zolmitriptan is also effective in the acute treatment of cluster headache. Zolmitriptan is generally well tolerated, with most adverse events being mild-to-moderate, transient and resolving without intervention or the need for treatment withdrawal. The consistent efficacy in treating all types of migraine and the choice of available formulations make zolmitriptan acceptable to patients and a suitable first-line therapy for the treatment of migraine.

[PMID: 31593739]
Migraine has recently become a major interest to the neuroscientists. Zolmitriptan is an effective medicine used in the treatment of migraine. The nasal spray was prepared from Zolmitriptan loaded chitosan nanoparticles and evaluated for pharmacokinetic properties. In this study male Wistar albino rats weighing between 200 and 250 g were taken and divided into 4 groups with 6 rats in each group. Nasal spray containing Zolmitriptan loaded Chitosan nanoparticles were administered nasally (using specific inhalation mask) at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg as a test formulation and compared with the control groups which received either water for injection or marketed standard drug (Zolmist) or standard drug solution at a same dose. The pharmacokinetic parameters such as C<sub>max</sub>, T<sub>max</sub>, and brain tissue analyses for accumulation of drug were performed for Zolmitriptan by LC-MS method. Amount of drug in the plasma from the test formulation, standard marketed drug (Zolmist) and standard drug solution was found to be 41.37 ± 2.31, 34.76 ± 4.22 and 23.74 ± 2.42 ng/ml at 10 min respectively, which indicated significantly (p < 0.05) greater amount of drug being delivered from the test formulation compared to the both standard groups. The amount of the drug (Zolmitriptan) present in brain tissue (Olfactory lobe) was found to be 15 ± 0.08, 13 ± 0.14 and 8 ± 0.13 ng/g at 60 min for test formulation, marketed standard and standard drug solution respectively which indicates significantly (p < 0.05) higher amount of drug absorption in brain tissue from the test formulation compared to both the standard groups. Pharmacokinetics studies of nasal spray containing Zolmitriptan loaded chitosan nanoparticles proved rapid onset of action in animals and is promising in treatment of migraine.

[PMID: 10473025]
Zolmitriptan is a selective serotonin 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonist ('triptan'). Its efficacy and tolerability have been assessed in a number of randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials in large numbers of adults with moderate to severe migraine attacks. Oral zolmitriptan 2.5 and 5mg has a rapid onset of action (significant headache relief is observed at 45 minutes) and efficacy is sustained in most patients who respond at 2 hours. The drug is significantly more effective than placebo as measured by a number of parameters including 2-hour headache response rates and pain-free response rates. Other symptoms of migraine, including nausea, photophobia and phonophobia are also alleviated with zolmitriptan. Zolmitriptan is effective in the treatment of migraine associated with menses and migraine with aura. There is some evidence to support the use of zolmitriptan in patients with migraine who have had a poor response to previous therapy. The efficacy of zolmitriptan appears to be maintained, with no tachyphylaxis, following repeated administration for multiple attacks of migraine over a prolonged period of time, with high headache response rates reported over all attacks. In comparison with placebo, the incidence of persistent migraine headache is reduced by zolmitriptan and recurrent migraine headache occurs less frequently with the active treatment. Zolmitriptan has also demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of persistent and/or recurrent migraine headache. For relief of migraine headache, zolmitriptan 5mg had similar efficacy to sumatriptan 100mg for a single attack, but generally was more effective than sumatriptan 25 and 50mg for multiple attacks, in single trials. The incidence of recurrent headache with zolmitriptan was similar to that with sumatriptan. Zolmitriptan is generally well tolerated with most adverse events being mild to moderate, transient and resolving without intervention or the need for treatment withdrawal. The most common adverse events with zolmitriptan therapy are asthenia, heaviness other than that of the chest or neck, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness, somnolence, paraesthesia, warm sensation, tightness, vasodilation and chest pain. Zolmitriptan is effective across a wide range of migraine subtypes, maintains efficacy when used in the long term and is generally well tolerated. Further clinical experience is necessary to define the position of zolmitriptan among other currently or soon to be available selective 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists. However, on the basis of available data, zolmitriptan should emerge as a useful treatment option in the management of patients with moderate to severe migraine.

[PMID: 10640260]
Zolmitriptan is a 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonist for the acute treatment of migraine. This study examined the efficacy of a second dose of zolmitriptan for the treatment of persistent or recurrent headache. Part 1 was a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind evaluation of 2.5 mg and 5 mg zolmitriptan for the treatment of persistent migraine headache, two hours after an initial dose of 2.5 mg zolmitriptan. In part 2 (open-label), patients treated the first two attacks with 2.5 mg zolmitriptan, thereafter patients could treat any initial, persistent or recurrent migraine headache with 2.5 mg or 5 mg zolmitriptan. The unique design of this trial allowed patients to adjust their treatment to attain maximum headache relief and control of their disease. Of 2800 patients treating an initial migraine headache in Part 1, 989 patients took a second dose to treat persistent headache of moderate or severe intensity. Headache response rates were similar across the three treatment groups, but the pain-free response rate was significantly higher with 5 mg zolmitriptan than with placebo (p < 0.001). In Part 2, 2499 patients treated 49,784 migraine attacks (excluding the first two attacks, which had to be treated with 2.5 mg zolmitriptan), of which 66% required only a single dose of zolmitriptan. Patients treated 22% of attacks with a second dose of zolmitriptan for persistent headache. A headache response was achieved in 80% and 73% of persistent headaches treated with 2.5 mg or 5 mg zolmitriptan, respectively. Corresponding pain-free responses following treatment of persistent headaches of any intensity were 64% and 52%. Eight per cent of attacks were treated with a second dose of zolmitriptan for moderate or severe recurrent headache. A headache response was achieved in 90% and 86% of moderate/severe attacks, with a pain-free response in 78% and 70% of attacks of any intensity treated with 2.5 mg and 5 mg, respectively. Zolmitriptan was well tolerated. In conclusion, 2.5 mg and 5 mg zolmitriptan are highly effective in treating both persistent and recurrent migraine headache.

[PMID: 16575626]
The objective is to analyse our experience with the new intranasal formulation of zolmitriptan 5 mg in the symptomatic treatment of cluster headache in daily clinical practice. We collected a total of 18 patients with cluster headache and experience with intranasal zolmitriptan; 17 had used subcutaneous sumatriptan and 8 oral triptans. The main reasons for trying intranasal zolmitriptan were: poor tolerability in 12 patients and insufficient efficacy in 6. Among the 17 patients experienced in subcutaneous sumatriptan, 12 (71 %) preferred nasal zolmitriptan, 2 (18 %) subcutaneous sumatriptan and 2 (12 %) did not express any preference. The reasons for preferring intranasal zolmitriptan were: higher convenience (n = 6), better tolerability (n = 5), lower price (n = 2) and higher efficacy (n = 1). Seven out of the 8 patients who had taken oral triptans preferred nasal zolmitriptan, in all cases due to higher subjective efficacy. A total of 11 patients showed efficacy within 30 minutes. Only 3 patients referred to adverse events, always mild. The 5 mg nasal formulation of zolmitriptan is a potential new option for the symptomatic treatment of cluster headache. This formulation should be considered in patients with poor tolerability to subcutaneous sumatriptan and in those attacks where quick access to inhaled oxygen is not possible. These results suggest that a controlled trial with nasal zolmitriptan in this indication would be worthwhile.

[PMID: 9071267]
311C90 (Zomig; zolmitriptan) is a novel, selective serotonin (5HT)1B/1D receptor agonist with both central and peripheral activity, now in late-stage clinical development for acute oral treatment of migraine. Several studies have demonstrated the tolerability and efficacy of 311C90 in the treatment of a single migraine headache. The objectives of this open-label study were to assess the tolerability and efficacy of repeated doses of 5 mg of 311C90 for acute treatment of multiple attacks for up to 1 year. Patients were allowed to treat as many migraine headaches (mild, moderate, or severe) as desired with an initial dose. A second 5-mg dose could be used to treat recurrence should it develop. Safety assessments included ECG, the frequency, intensity, and duration of adverse experiences, and routine hematology, urinalysis, and clinical chemistry parameters. Efficacy assessments included headache severity at 2 hours (i.e., severe, moderate, mild, or none), the proportion of patients pain-free at 2 hours, the use of a second tablet to treat headache recurrence if it developed, and the consistency of these findings over time. The efficacy profile and the nature/incidence of adverse events reported appear to be consistent with previous 311C90 studies. The dosing regimen was well tolerated during multiple exposures. Notably, headache response rates were consistently good after both initial and repeated exposure (> 80% across 1 to 30 attacks). For 67% of patients who treated at least five attacks, 311C90 was effective 80 to 100% of the time.

[PMID: 11594437]
Zolmitriptan is an anti-migraine agent with action at 5-HT1B/D receptors. It penetrates into the central nervous system and, like other 5-HT1B/D agonists, its pharmacotherapeutic profile may include significant anti-aggressive effects. To examine whether zolmitriptan has potential anti-aggressive effects by studying two kinds of aggressive behavior in mice--species-typical and aggression under the influence of alcohol. A second objective was to study whether pre- or post-synaptic receptors mediate these anti-aggressive effects. Initially, the anti-aggressive effects of zolmitriptan were studied in male CFW mice during 5-min resident-intruder confrontations. To confirm the 5-HT1B receptor as a critical site of action for the anti-aggressive effects, the zolmitriptan dose-effect determinations were repeated after pretreatment with GR 127935 (10 mg/kg, i.p.). In further experiments, mice were treated concurrently with alcohol (1.0 g/kg, p.o.) and zolmitriptan (1-30 mg/kg, i.p.) in order to compare the effects of this agonist on species-typical and alcohol-heightened aggression. Finally, mice were infused with the neurotoxin 5,7-DHT (10 microg) into the raphé area to eliminate somatodendritic and presynaptic autoreceptors. The anti-aggressive effects of zolmitriptan (17 mg/kg, i.p.) or CP-94,253 (10 mg/kg, i.p.) were assessed 10 days after the lesion, and levels of 5-HT and 5-HIAA were measured in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Zolmitriptan exerted behaviorally specific anti-aggressive effects. The reduction in aggression was antagonized by GR 127935, indicated by a rightward shift in the dose-effect curves of zolmitriptan, showing the specificity for the 5-HT1B receptors. Zolmitriptan also decreased alcohol-heightened aggression with equal efficacy. The anti-aggressive effects of CP-94,253 and zolmitriptan remained unaltered by 5,7-DHT lesions that depleted cortical and hippocampal 5-HT by 60-80%. Zolmitriptan proved to be an effective and behaviorally specific anti-aggressive agent in situations that engender moderate and alcohol-heightened levels of aggression. These effects are potentially due to activation of post-synaptic 5-HT1BD receptors.

[PMID: 10210888]
Zolmitriptan is a selective 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonist for acute oral migraine therapy. This randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study investigated the efficacy and tolerability of oral zolmitriptan (5, 10, 15 and 20 mg) in the treatment of single acute migraine attacks. Of 1181 patients randomized, 840 were evaluable for the primary efficacy analysis. Headache response rates (a reduction in headache intensity from severe or moderate at baseline to mild or no pain at 2 hours post-treatment) were similar across the zolmitriptan dose groups (66%, 71%, 69% and 77% for 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg and 20 mg, respectively) and were significantly higher than that for placebo (19%; all groups P < 0.001). A headache response was reported at 1 hour by 40-50% of zolmitriptan recipients (16% placebo). At 2 hours post dose, 39-47% of zolmitriptan-treated patients were pain-free, compared with 1% of placebo recipients. Headache recurrence occurred in 21-29% (upper 95% CI 37.1) of zolmitriptan-treated patients and in 65% (95% CI 38.3, 85.8) of placebo recipients. Zolmitriptan was well tolerated at each dose. The most commonly reported adverse events were asthenia, dizziness, paraesthesia and feelings of heaviness. Most adverse events were of mild or moderate intensity and were transient. The frequency of adverse events was dose-related. Although, zolmitriptan 5 mg exhibited the most favourable efficacy and tolerability profile, the dose response data suggest that lower doses would also offer significant efficacy. Copyright 1998 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

[PMID: 18028032]
Migraine is a common, often disabling, neurovascular disease that has been shown to be associated with abnormal serotonergic activity. Drugs that modulate serotonin receptors are commonly used in the acute treatment of a migraine attack. Zolmitriptan, a 5-hydroxytryptophan(1B/1D) receptor agonist, is once such drug that is used in acute migraine therapy. Zolmitriptan is FDA approved for the treatment of acute migraine attacks and there is recent literature demonstrating its efficacy in the acute treatment of cluster attacks. It is rapidly absorbed and is detectable in the plasma within 2 - 5 min for the nasal spray formulation and within 15 min for the oral formulations. Zolmitriptan reaches peak plasma levels in 2 - 4 h and significant plasma levels are maintained for up to 6 h and lower levels for over 15 h. As zolmitriptan's metabolism is predominantly hepatic, patients with severe hepatic impairment should not receive zolmitriptan. However, only 25% of zolmitriptan is bound to plasma proteins and thus it is unlikely for drug interactions involving the displacement of highly protein-bound drugs. Zolmitriptan is generally very well tolerated and less than half of patients in clinical trials have reported adverse events, most of which are mild and transient, although rare serious cardiovascular events have been reported with all triptans. When patients are appropriately selected, zolmitriptan is both a safe and effective acute care migraine treatment. In this review the biological role of serotonin and its receptors is covered, followed by an in-depth review of the pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and efficacy of zolmitriptan. Finally, the clinical application of zolmitriptan's use in patients is dicussed.