[PMID: 11948988]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal genetic disease among Caucasian populations. The generally accepted incidence of CF in the United States is 1 in 3,200 in the Caucasian population. Intestinal obstructions and atresias have been described among patients with CF. An association of CF with infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS) has not been previously documented. A review in our clinic of 72 patients with CF revealed IHPS in two. The incidence of 2.7% is greater than the 0.3% incidence expected in the general population. This ninefold increase in IHPS in patients with CF suggests an association between the two and warrants further investigation.

[PMID: 15211979]
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common and severe autosomal recessive disease in Caucasian populations, with an incidence of 1 in 2500 live births. It is characterized by a generalized disturbance in exocrine glands and it is caused by over one thousand mutations at the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator gene (CFTR) mapped at 7q31. AF508 is the most frequent mutation worldwide and it consists in a deletion of the codon that encodes fenilalanine at the 508 protein's position. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of the delta F508 mutation in Venezuelan patients with CF using the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). We studied thirty patients of twenty eight families who were diagnosed with CF based on their clinical features and sweat chloride level > 60 mEq/l in two determinations. Detection of the mutation was performed from the amplification of a 98 pair of bases (pb) CF gene segment which contains the codon that encodes fenilalanine in the 508 position by PCR. This PCR product is absent in those who have the mutation. The delta F508 allelic frequency was 26.79%, distributed in six homozygous and seven compound heterozygote delta F508/X. The reminder mutations (no delta F508) represent 73.21%. The delta F508 frequency in our sample is less than the reported in European countries. On the other hand, a delta F508 frequency highly heterogeneous has been observed in Latin-American countries. This variation results from mixed populations with a different genetic background influenced by external migration and CF molecular alterations, which exists in the analyzed populations. In this study, the delta F508 mutation comes mainly from grandparents (79.41%) who were born in Mediterranean countries and Colombia, while the no delta F508 mutations come from grandparents who were born in Venezuela (79.27%) and Colombia (17.07%).

[PMID: 7513296]
Cyprus is an island in the eastern Mediterranean basin inhabited by people of Caucasian extraction, mostly Greek-Cypriots. The most common inherited disease among Caucasians is cystic fibrosis (CF). Although no careful scientific study had ever been done the impression was that CF was extremely rare among the Greek-Cypriots, with an incidence estimated at around 1:30,000. About 2 years ago, we introduced molecular diagnostic methodology in an effort to assist clinicians in safer diagnosis of patients presenting with atypical CF symptomatology, and also for testing the hypothesis that mutations that cause milder phenotypes might be responsible for misdiagnosis or for missing entirely some cases of CF. Initial screening for delta F508 revealed that it is indeed rare in the general population. Further screening of suspected CF patients revealed a novel mutation that converted leucine at position 346 to proline (L346P) in two unrelated families. The second CF mutation was delta F508 and 1677delTA in the two families respectively, both reportedly associated with severe phenotypes. Yet our patients did not present with typical CF pictures possibly because of the dominant nature of this novel mild mutation in exon 7. Symptoms included failure to thrive, chest infections and electrolyte disturbances. These findings raise the possibility that Cyprus might have been spared very severe CF phenotypes but not cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mutations.

[PMID: 1722259]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population, affecting approximately 1 in 2,000 newborns but the actual estimate varies with the geographic location. The incidence of CF in non-Caucasian populations is low. Intensive efforts using genetic linkage information ultimately led to the cloning of the CF gene prior to the identification of the gene product or its function. The gene encodes what is believed to be a transmembrane protein, which has been named the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). The CFTR contains two nucleotide-binding folds (NBF) which show homology to numerous transport proteins with the greatest homology to the P-glycoproteins that are encoded by the multiple drug-resistance loci. A three- base deletion resulting in the loss of phenylalanine residue (delta F508) in the tenth exon of the CFTR gene is the mutation occurring on the majority of CF chromosomes. The overall frequency of delta F508 in the present mutant CF gene pool is about 70%, but the study populations are not equally represented: there is marked variation in the population of delta F508 among different geographic populations. Recently, numerous additional, less common mutations have been found. Some mutations occur on 2-5% of the CF chromosomes. Many of these are rare 'private' mutations, occurring in individual families of all racial and ethnic backgrounds. By contrast over 80% of Western European CF mutations have been identified. The highly heterogeneous nature of the remaining CF mutations provides important insights into the structure and function of the protein, but further improvements are needed in DNA-based genetic screening for CF carrier status.

[PMID: 19787152]
Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common autosomal recessive hereditary diseases in the Caucasian population, with an incidence of 1:2000 to 1:3500 liveborns. More than 1000 mutations have been described with the most common being F508del. It has a prevalence of 23-55% within the Brazilian population. The lack of population-based studies evaluating the incidence of cystic fibrosis in São Paulo State, Brazil, and an analysis concerning the costs of implantation of a screening program motivated the present study. A total of 60,000 dried blood samples from Guthrie cards obtained from April 2005 to January 2006 for neonatal screening at 4 reference centers in São Paulo State were analyzed. The immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)/IRT protocol was used with the cut-off value being 70 ng/mL. A total of 532 children (0.9%) showed IRT >70 ng/mL and a 2nd sample was collected from 418 (80.3%) of these patients. Four affected children were detected at two centers, corresponding to an incidence of 1:8403. The average age at diagnosis was 69 days, and 3 of the children already showed severe symptoms of the disease. The rate of false-positive results was 95.2% and the positive predictive value for the test was 8%. The cost of detecting an affected subject was approximately US$8,000.00 when this cystic fibrosis program was added to an existing neonatal screening program. The present study clearly shows the difficulties involved in cystic fibrosis screening using the IRT/IRT protocol, particularly in a population with no long-term tradition of neonatal screening.

[PMID: 659256]
Estimates of the newborn frequency of cystic fibrosis in different Caucasian groups range from 4 times more to 40 times less common than the generally accepted figure of 1:2000. Current meconium screening trials which may be effective in populations with the incidence equal to or greater than 1:2000, may be useful for populations with an incidence as low as 1:7000 only after maximum improvement of the methods. Once the true incidence or the variable incidence is proven for Caucasian populations, screening trails in Negro, Oriental and Indian populations will be required.

[PMID: 2999612]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common genetic disease in Caucasian populations, with an incidence of 1 in 2,000 live births in the United Kingdom, and a carrier frequency of approximately 1 in 20. The biochemical basis of the disease is not known, although membrane transport phenomena associated with CF have been described recently. Consanguinity studies have shown that the inheritance of CF is consistent with it being a recessive defect caused by a mutation at a single autosomal locus. Eiberg et al. have reported a genetic linkage between the CF locus and a polymorphic locus controlling activity of the serum aryl esterase paraoxonase (PON). The chromosomal location of PON, however, is not known. Linkage to a DNA probe, DOCR1-917, was also recently found at a genetic distance of approximately 15 centimorgans (L.-C. Tsui and H. Donnis-Keller, personal communication), but no chromosomal localization was given. Here we report tight linkage between the CF locus and an anonymous DNA probe, pJ3.11, which has been assigned to chromosome 7cen-q22.

[PMID: 22989055]
Cystic fibrosis is the most frequent autosomal recessive disease in the Caucasian population, with an incidence of 1:2500 newborn and a frequency of 1:25. The associated gene is Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) and it encodes the CFTR protein that functions as a chloride (Cl(-)) channel. It is found in the apical membrane of exocrine epithelial cells, responsible for the regulation of the movement of water and solutes through biological membranes. To our knowledge, there are no studies on protein localization in the different cell types of the seminiferous epithelium with different pathologies. The aim of the present study was to analyze the expression of the CFTR protein in the human seminiferous epithelium of infertile males with different pathologies. CFTR protein expression was studied by immunohistochemistry in paraffin sections of testicular biopsies of six infertile men: Sertoli cell only syndrome, maturation arrest, secondary obstructive azoospermia, primary obstructive azoospermia due to congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), severe oligozoospermia, and retrograde ejaculation. All cell types of the seminiferous epithelium were studied: Sertoli cells, spermatogonia, primary spermatocytes at the leptotene/zygotene and at the pachytene stages, secondary spermatocytes, round, elongating and elongated spermatids, and spermatozoa. With the exception of sperm, all cells were labeled in the cytoplasm and in the cytoplasmic membrane. In the patient with CBAVD labeling was light at the cell membrane and absent in the cytoplasm of Sertoli cells and diploid germ cells. Generally, labeling was stronger after the diploid stage, which is probably related to cell volume reduction during spermiogenesis. The results obtained also suggest that the CFTR protein may impact CBAVD spermatogenesis and other pathologies.

[PMID: 20034372]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the commonest autosomal recessive condition among Caucasian populations, affecting 1 in 2500 live births. The median age of survival has dramatically improved and will reach 40 years for children born in the 1990s. Complications such as cystic fibrosis related diabetes mellitus (CFRD) develop with age, and the median age at diagnosis is 21 years. The prevalence of CFRD progressively increases from 9% below the age of 10 years to 43% above the age of 30 years, with reported annual age-dependent incidence rates ranging from 4% to 9%. The onset of CFRD is insidious and annual screening using the standard oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) from the age of 10 years has been recommended. However, OGTT thresholds for the diagnosis of impaired glucose tolerance and CFRD were derived from epidemiological studies of non-CF patients and it is uncertain whether they are appropriate for patients with CF. The ability of OGTT alone to detect early abnormalities in blood glucose regulation has been questioned. Continuous glucose monitoring systems (CGMS) may augment the screening and diagnosis of CFRD, as well as guide and monitor its management. Subcutaneous insulin therapy is currently recommended for the treatment of CFRD. Early use of insulin therapy might improve weight gain and lung function of CF patients, including those with normal OGTT results. It is still not clear when insulin therapy should be started, possibly reflecting the difficulties in detecting early but clinically relevant abnormalities in blood glucose metabolism among CF patients. We review the current evidence which highlight these diagnostic and management challenges in CFRD.

[PMID: 7509311]
The incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) in Finland, 1:25,000 newborn, is one of the lowest in Caucasian populations. The delta F508 mutation accounts for 18/40 (45%) of CF chromosomes in Finland. Other mutations were therefore sought among the remaining 55%. Twelve out of 40 chromosomes (30%) were found to carry 394delTT, whereas G542X and 3732delA were each detected in one chromosome. Eight mutations remained unidentified using a testing panel for 26 mutations. Mutation 394delTT was associated exclusively with haplotype 23-36-13. Five unknown mutations were associated with different haplotypes for microsatellite markers, whereas three shared the same haplotype. Most delta F508 mutations and all unidentified mutations originated from regions of old and dense settlement in the coastal regions, whereas 394delTT was geographically clustered and enriched in a rural location, consistent with a local founder effect. The remote location of Finland and her population history give a plausible explanation for the rarity of CF in Finland.

[PMID: 17968991]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) was considered to be non-existent in Indian subcontinent. Reports in last one decade have suggested that cystic fibrosis occurs in India but its precise magnitude is not known. Studies on migrant Indian population in United States and United Kingdom estimate frequency of CF as 1:10,000 to 1:40,000. The clinical features are similar to that reported in Caucasian population. CF in Indian children is usually diagnosed late and in advanced stage. Children are more malnourished and may have clinically evident deficiency of fat soluble vitamins. The frequency of clubbing, colonization with Pseudomonas, and laboratory evidence of pseudo-Bartter syndrome is relatively more at the time of diagnosis. Diagnostic facilities in form of sweat chloride estimation and genetic studies are not available readily. Mutation profile is different. The frequency of common mutation F508del in Indian children is between 19% and 34%. Other mutations are heterogeneous. Management of CF in India is difficult due to less number of trained manpower, limited availability, and high cost of pharmacologic agents. The determinants of early death include: severe malnutrition and colonization with Pseudomonas at the time of diagnosis, more than four episodes of lower respiratory infection per year and age of onset of symptoms before 2 months of age. To conclude, CF does occur in India; however, precise magnitude of problem is not known. There is need to create awareness amongst pediatricians, developing diagnostic facilities, and management protocols based on locally available resources.

[PMID: 15698945]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common inherited disorder in Caucasian populations, with more than 1000 cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mutations presently described. The distribution of the mutations ranges widely between countries and/or ethnic groups. Multicentric studies are usually needed to study the genotype-phenotype correlations. Since 1992, the French CF Registry (FCFR) has collected and analyzed data from most of the CF patients regularly seen in CF care centres in France. We compared the mutation distribution of the patients born in western France to that of those born elsewhere in France. Then we extracted the available data for all the compound heterozygotes carrying the DeltaF508 allele and one of the following mutations: DeltaI507, 1078delT, 4005+1G->A, E60X and W846X, and matched a patient homozygous for the DeltaF508 mutation for each of them. Western France appeared to have a specific distribution of some CF mutations. Furthermore, disparities were found regarding the mutation repartition (DeltaI507 in Normandy, 1078delT, 4005+1G->A and W846X in western Brittany). Genotype-phenotype correlations showed a wide heterogeneity. Although variations were found, DeltaI507/DeltaF508, 4005+1G->A/DeltaF508 and 1078delT/DeltaF508 patients appeared to have a similar disease as the DeltaF508/DeltaF508 patients. Although the W846X and E60X mutations should be considered as severe alleles as regards to pancreatic function, they were associated with less severe pulmonary manifestations and, probably, better prognosis. The knowledge of the distribution of uncommon CF mutations specific to particular areas and of their associated phenotype makes up an essential tool in the management of local CF patients.

[PMID: 7635469]
The incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) and the frequency of disease-causing mutations varies among different ethnic and geographic populations. The Jewish population around the world is comprised of two major ethnic groups; Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi. The latter is further classified according to country of origin. In this study, we analyzed the incidence of CF and the distribution of CF mutations in the general Jewish population in Israel and in most of the Jewish ethnic subgroups. The disease frequency varies considerably among the latter. Among Ashkenazi Jews, the frequency of CF is 1:3300, which is similar to the frequency in most Caucasian populations. Among non-Ashkenazi Jews, the disease occurs at a similar frequency among Jews from Libya (1:2700), Georgia (1:2700), Greece and Bulgaria (1:2400), but is rare in Jews from Yemen (1:8800), Morocco (1:15000), Iraq (1:32000), and Iran (1:39000). So far, only 12 mutations have been identified in Israeli Jews, and this enables the identification of 91% of the CF chromosomes in the entire Jewish CF population. However, in each Jewish ethnic group, the disease is caused by a different repertoire of mutations. The frequency of identified mutations is high in Ashkenazi Jews (95%), and in Jews originating from Tunisia (100%), Libya (91%), Turkey (90%), and Georgia (88%). However, a lower frequency of mutations can be identified in Moroccan (85%), Egyptian (50%), and Yemenite (0%) Jews. For genetic counseling of a Jewish individual, it is necessary to calculate the residual risk according to ethnic origin. Carrier screening of healthy Jewish individuals is currently feasible for Ashkenazi Tunisian, Libyan, Turkish, and Georgian Jews. These results provide the required information for genetic counseling of Jewish CF families and screening programs of Jewish populations worldwide.

[PMID: 1756602]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder with a prevalence at birth estimated at 1/2000-1/2500 livebirths in Caucasian populations. Some 127 CF individuals are known in Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean (SLSJ), a geographically isolated region of Quebec. The prevalence at birth was estimated at 1/902 live borns, and the carrier rate was estimated at 1/15 inhabitants in the SLSJ region. The mean inbreeding coefficient was only slightly elevated in the CF group compared with three control groups, and was due to remote consanguinity. The mean kinship coefficient was 2.4 times higher in the CF group than in the control groups. In SLSJ region, the places of origin of the CF individuals and their parents did not show a clustered nonuniform distribution. Endogamy was not higher in the CF group than in control groups.

[PMID: 18078202]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disease in the European (Caucasian) population, with an incidence of 1:2000 to 1:8000. The deltaF508 mutation (66%) is predominant among more than 1300 different mutations of the CFTR gene. The population of the state of Bahia, in northeastern Brazil, is highly admixed (mainly African and Portuguese descendants), and so far, no study has been carried out to assess the molecular basis of CF in this population. We determined the deltaF508 mutation frequency in 503 individuals from the general population of Salvador, the capital of the state of Bahia, and in 144 CF patients from several cities in Bahia. In the general population samples we found 4 individuals heterozygous for the deltaF508 mutation (allele frequency of 0.4%). This frequency was lower than that found in the state of Rio de Janeiro, in southeastern Brazil, and similar to that reported for the state of Paraná, in the far south. In the CF patients we found 9 heterozygous individuals and 8 homozygous individuals (allele frequency of 8.68%) for the deltaF508 mutation. This frequency is considerably lower than the average frequency of CF in the world population and in the Brazilian CF population of European ancestry (47%). These data could be explained by the intense admixture among the population in Bahia, and they suggest a heterogeneous molecular basis for CF in this area of Brazil.

[PMID: 2570015]
The incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) in Finland is one tenth that in other Caucasian populations. To study the genetics of CF in Finland, we used a combined molecular and genealogical approach. Out of the 20 Finnish families with a living CF patient, 19 were typed for eight closely linked restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP) at the MET, D7S8, and D7S23 loci. The birthplaces of the parents and grandparents were traced using population registries. Allele and haplotype frequencies in Finland are similar to those of other European and North American populations, but are modified by sampling: two regional CF gene clusters, evidently the results of a founder effect, were identified. Generally, the gene was evenly distributed over the population, carrier frequency being estimated at approximately 1.3%. We conclude that CF in Finland is caused by the common Caucasian mutation(s), and that the low frequency of the gene can be explained by a negative sampling effect and genetic drift.

[PMID: 10992696]
Evaluation of the incidence of common delta F508 mutation in a cohort of Pakistani children with Cystic Fibrosis (CF). The presence of the CFTR gene mutation at position 508 (delta F508) was evaluated in 15 consecutively presenting children with CF, proven by clinical features and an unequivocally positive sweat chloride test. The DNA from mononuclear cells was extracted and the delta F508 mutation assessed by the amplification refractory mutation system using the polymerase chain reaction. The delta F508 mutation was found in 9 cases (60%), of which 5 were homozygous for the disorder. In this preliminary study, the reported frequency of the delta F508 mutation in Pakistani children with CF is lower than the reported frequency among the Western Caucasian population. Further studies are needed to characterize the common genetic mutations in Pakistani children with CF.

[PMID: 18344710]
Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean is a region located in the northeastern part of the Province of Quebec, Canada, and is characterized by a founder effect. In this region, it has been documented that the incidence of cystic fibrosis reached 1/902 live births between 1975 and 1988, three times higher than the average incidence of 1/2500 live births reported in other Caucasian populations. This corresponds to a carrier rate of 1/15. Using genotyping data from the Canadian Consortium for Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Studies, this article describes the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator profile of the cystic fibrosis population living in the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region and compares it with cystic fibrosis populations living in three other regions of the Province of Quebec. Significant differences in allelic frequencies of common mutations (as DeltaF508, 621 + 1G>T and A455E), and in percentage of covered allele with three or six mutations, were found in Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean compared to other regions. Based on this result, two mutation panels exceeding 90% sensitivity threshold are now proposed for cystic fibrosis carrier screening in this region. The implementation of the proposed carrier screening program could diminish the incidence of this disease in this region and allow future parents to make informed decisions about family planning.

[PMID: 1392366]
Cystic fibrosis is the most common, severe, inherited disease in the Caucasian population. As a consequence, the demand for genetic counselling of patients with cystic fibrosis and their families is large. In Denmark the incidence of cystic fibrosis is 1:4700, which is quite low compared to other European countries. We have investigated 268 Danish cystic fibrosis patients with respect to DNA markers (haplotypes) and the most common mutation delta F508. The delta F508 mutation is found on 88% of all cystic fibrosis chromosomes, the highest frequency reported so far. This had had an important impact on genetic counselling, prenatal diagnosis and eventually population screening. In the Danish population 78% of all couples at risk will be informative for delta F508 and will be identifiable by simple screening methods.

[PMID: 1281842]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal inherited disease in the Caucasian population with an incidence of approximately 1 in 2,500 live births. Pulmonary complications of CF, which are the most morbid aspects of the disease, are caused by primary abnormalities in epithelial cells that lead to impaired mucociliary clearance. One potential therapeutic strategy is to reconstitute expression of the CF gene in airway epithelia by somatic gene transfer. To this end, we have developed an animal model of the human airway using bronchial xenografts and have tested the efficiency of in vivo retroviral gene transfer. Using the LacZ reporter gene, we find the efficiency of in vivo retroviral gene transfer to be dramatically dependent on the regenerative and mitotic state of the epithelium. Within an undifferentiated regenerating epithelium in which 40% of nuclei labeled with BrdU, 5-10% retroviral gene transfer was obtained. In contrast, no gene transfer was noted in a fully differentiated epithelium in which 1% of nuclei labeled with BrdU. These findings suggest that retroviral mediated gene transfer to the airway in vivo may be feasible if the proper regenerative state can be induced.

[PMID: 1683481]
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common severe autosomal recessive genetic disorder in Caucasian populations, with an incidence of about 1 in 2000 live births, implying a carrier frequency of about 1 in 22. In 1989, the CF gene was isolated and characterized and the major mutation (delta F508), a 3-bp deletion that results in the loss of a phenylalanine residue at position 508, was detected. To determine the frequency of the delta F508 mutation and the predicted number of additional mutations in our population, we have undertaken a collaborative study of 215 CF patients and 175 CF parents in Switzerland. The delta F508 mutation in exon 10 has been found in 70% of the CF chromosomes, and the exon-11 mutation R553X seems to be the second most common CF mutation in our population, with a frequency of 5.3%, whereas the G551D mutation (also in exon 11) has not been detected at all. Haplotype determination of 430 CF and 175 normal chromosomes using XV-2c, KM19, MP6d-9, and J3.11 has been proven to be very helpful in providing additional carrier risk calculations: Haplotypes 1 (1221), 2 (1222), 6 (2111), and 7 (2221) increase the risk of being a carrier from 1 in 55 (haplotype 6) to 1 in 17 (haplotype 1), whereas haplotypes 3 (1122), 4 (1112), 8 (2222) and 10 (1111) lower the risk from 1 in 144 (haplotype 3) to 1 in 1678 (haplotype 10). Moreover, the mutation R553X shows strong correlation with haplotype 3, leading to the suggestion that haplotypes 1, 2, 5, and 6 may account for four additional mutations in Switzerland.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)