[PMID: 23300799]
α-Synuclein is the main component of Lewy bodies, the intraneuronal inclusion bodies characteristic of Parkinson's disease. Although α-synuclein accumulation is caused by inhibition of proteasome and autophagy-lysosome, the degradation of α-synuclein inclusions is still unknown. Formation of Lewy body-like inclusions can be replicated in cultured cells by introducing α-synuclein fibrils generated in vitro. We used this cell culture model to investigate the autophagy of α-synuclein inclusions and impaired mitochondria. The intracellular α-synuclein inclusions immediately underwent phosphorylation and ubiquitination. Simultaneously they were encircled by an adaptor protein p62/SQSTM1 and directed to the autophagy-lysosome pathway in HEK293 cell line. Most phospho-α-synuclein-positive inclusions were degraded in 24 h, however, lysosomal dysfunction with bafilomycin A1 significantly affected their clearance. Moreover, inhibition of autophagy by Atg-5 siRNA treatment reduced the incorporation of α-synuclein inclusions into LC3-positive autophagosomes. Knockdown experiments demonstrated the requirement of p62 for α-synuclein autophagy. These results demonstrate that α-synuclein inclusions are preferred targets for p62-dependent autophagy. Next, we investigated the autophagic clearance of impaired mitochondria in α-synuclein inclusion-containing cells. Impaired mitochondria were almost completely eliminated after mitochondrial uncoupling even in the presence of α-synuclein inclusions, suggesting that mitochondrial clearance is not prevented by α-synuclein inclusions in HEK293 cells.

[PMID: 22843682]
Fibrillar α-synuclein (α-Syn) is the principal component of Lewy bodies, which are evident in individuals affected by Parkinson disease (PD). This neuropathologic form of α-Syn plays a central role in PD progression as it has been shown to propagate between neurons. Tools that interfere with α-Syn assembly or change the physicochemical properties of the fibrils have potential therapeutic properties as they may be sufficient to interfere with and/or halt cell-to-cell transmission and the systematic spread of α-Syn assemblies within the central nervous system. Vertebrate molecular chaperones from the constitutive/heat-inducible heat shock protein 70 (Hsc/p70) family have been shown to hinder the assembly of soluble α-Syn into fibrils and to bind to the fibrils and very significantly reduce their toxicity. To understand how Hsc70 family members sequester soluble α-Syn, we set up experiments to identify the molecular chaperone-α-Syn surface interfaces. We cross-linked human Hsc70 and its yeast homologue Ssa1p and α-Syn using a chemical cross-linker and mapped the Hsc70- and Ssa1p-α-Syn interface. We show that the client binding domain of Hsc70 and Ssa1p binds two regions within α-Syn similar to a tweezer, with the first spanning residues 10-45 and the second spanning residues 97-102. Our findings define what is necessary and sufficient for engineering Hsc70- and Ssa1p-derived polypeptide with minichaperone properties with a potential as therapeutic agents in Parkinson disease through their ability to affect α-Syn assembly and/or toxicity.

[PMID: 15541000]
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is characterized by the widespread presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) in the brain. alpha-Synuclein, the main component of LBs, is expressed as two main isoforms (112 and 140), but little is known about their differential expression in the brain. We compared alpha-synuclein 112 and alpha-synuclein 140 expression levels in the prefrontal cortices of six DLB patients, eight Alzheimer disease (AD) patients, and six control subjects. Relative alpha-synuclein 112 and alpha-synuclein 140 expression levels were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction with competimer technology using a LightCycler System. Whereas total alpha-synuclein levels were just marginally elevated in DLB in comparison with the other groups, alpha-synuclein 112 was seen to be markedly increased in DLB compared with AD cases and controls. In contrast, alpha-synuclein 140 levels were significantly diminished in both neurodegenerative disorders in comparison with controls. These results show differential overexpression of alpha-synuclein 112 in DLB, a finding that could be of importance in DLB pathogenesis.

[PMID: 20534649]
The pre-synaptic protein alpha-synuclein is the main component of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, the defining neuropathological characteristics of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Mutations in the alpha-synuclein gene cause familial forms of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. We previously described a transgenic mouse line expressing truncated human alpha-synuclein(1-120) that develops alpha-synuclein aggregates, striatal dopamine deficiency and reduced locomotion, similar to Parkinson's disease. We now show that in the striatum of these mice, as in Parkinson's disease, synaptic accumulation of alpha-synuclein is accompanied by an age-dependent redistribution of the synaptic SNARE proteins SNAP-25, syntaxin-1 and synaptobrevin-2, as well as by an age-dependent reduction in dopamine release. Furthermore, the release of FM1-43 dye from PC12 cells expressing either human full-length alpha-synuclein(1-140) or truncated alpha-synuclein(1-120) was reduced. These findings reveal a novel gain of toxic function of alpha-synuclein at the synapse, which may be an early event in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.

[PMID: 22923347]
Lewy body diseases include Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies and are characterized by the widespread distribution of Lewy bodies in virtually every brain area. The main component of Lewy bodies is alpha-synuclein (AS). Accumulating evidence suggests that AS oligomerization and aggregation are strongly associated with the pathogenesis of Lewy body diseases. AS is a small soluble protein with aggregation-prone properties under certain conditions. These properties are enhanced by posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, nitration, and truncation. Accordingly, Lewy bodies contain abundant phosphorylated, nitrated, and monoubiquitinated AS. However, alternative splicing of the AS gene is also known to modify AS aggregation propensities. Splicing gives rise to four related forms of the protein, the main transcript and those that lack exon 4, exon 6, or both. Since AS structure and properties have been extensively studied, it is possible to predict the consequences of the splicing out of the two aforesaid exons. The present review discusses the latest insights on the mechanisms of AS posttranslational modifications and intends to depict their role in the pathogenesis of Lewy body diseases. The implications of deregulated alternative splicing are examined as well, and a hypothesis for the development of the pure form of dementia with Lewy bodies is proposed.

[PMID: 11412709]
The term alpha-synucleinopathy is used to name a group of disorders having in common the abnormal deposition of alpha-synuclein in the cytoplasm of neurons or glial cells, as well as in extracellular deposits of amyloid. In Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia, alpha-synuclein is the main component of Lewy bodies and dystrophic neurites; alpha-synuclein also accumulates in the cytoplasm of glial cells. In multiple system atrophy, alpha-synuclein conforms the cytoplasmic oligodendroglial inclusions and the neuronal inclusions which are the hallmark of this disease. Finally, the amyloidogenic fragment 61-95 amino acids of alpha-synuclein is the non-Abeta component of senile plaque amyloid in Alzheimer disease. Accumulations of alpha-synuclein in all these disorders have in common a fibrilar configuration, but they differ in the binding of alpha-synuclein to distinct proteins with the exception of ubiquitin whose binding to alpha-synuclein is common to all alpha-synuclein inclusions. The mechanisms leading to alpha-synuclein fragmentation and aggegation into extracellular amyloid are not known, although alpha-synuclein fragment and betaA4 aggregates are the result of abnormal cleavage of large precursors. On the other hand, several studies have shown that alpha-synuclein may adopt a fibrilar conformation and give rise to insoluble forms and high molecular weight aggregates in vitro. Similar complexes have also been observed in alpha-synucleinopathies. Although studies in vitro and in vivo have shown toxic effects of alpha-synuclein, the consequence of alpha-synuclein deposition on cell survival in alpha-synucleinopathies is not known.

[PMID: 20846907]
A shared neuropathological feature of idiopathic Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy is the development of intracellular aggregates of α-synuclein that gradually engage increasing parts of the nervous system. The pathogenetic mechanisms underlying these neurodegenerative disorders, however, are unknown. Several studies have highlighted similarities between classic prion diseases and these neurological proteinopathies. Specifically, identification of Lewy bodies in fetal mesencephalic neurons transplanted in patients with Parkinson's disease raised the hypothesis that α-synuclein, the main component of Lewy bodies, could be transmitted from the host brain to a graft of healthy neurons. These results and others have led to the hypothesis that a prion-like mechanism might underlie progression of synucleinopathy within the nervous system. We review experimental findings showing that misfolded α-synuclein can transfer between cells and, once transferred into a new cell, can act as a seed that recruits endogenous α-synuclein, leading to formation of larger aggregates. This model suggests that strategies aimed at prevention of cell-to-cell transfer of α-synuclein could retard progression of symptoms in Parkinson's disease and other synucleinopathies.

[PMID: 16969096]
A common finding in many neurodegenerative diseases is the presence of inclusion bodies made of aggregated proteins in neurons of affected brain regions. In Parkinson's disease, the inclusion bodies are referred to as Lewy bodies and their main component is alpha-synuclein. Although many studies have suggested that inclusion bodies may be cell protective, it is still not clear whether Lewy bodies promote or inhibit dopaminergic cell death in Parkinson's disease. Synphilin-1 interacts with alpha-synuclein and is present in Lewy bodies. Accumulation of ubiquitylated synphilin-1 leads to massive formation of inclusion bodies, which resemble Lewy bodies by their ability to recruit alpha-synuclein. We have recently isolated an isoform of synphilin-1, synphilin-1A, that spontaneously aggregates in cells, and is present in detergent-insoluble fractions of brain protein samples from alpha-synucleinopathy patients. Synphilin-1A displays marked neuronal toxicity and, upon proteasome inhibition, accumulates into ubiquitylated inclusions with concomitant reduction of its intrinsic toxicity. The fact that alpha-synuclein interacts with synphilin-1A, and is recruited to synphilin-1A inclusion bodies in neurons together with synphilin-1, further indicates that synphilin-1A cell model is relevant for research on Parkinson's disease. Synphilin-1A cell model may help provide important insights regarding the role of inclusion bodies in Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders.

[PMID: 18991634]
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), the second most frequent cause of dementia after Alzheimer disease (AD), is characterized by the widespread distribution of Lewy bodies in virtually every brain area. Clinically, DLB is distinguished from AD by fluctuating cognition, prominent visual hallucinations and parkinsonism, and from Parkinson disease, by the appearance of parkinsonism within one year of cognitive or behavioral decline. The main component of Lewy bodies is alpha-synuclein. Accumulating evidence suggests that its aggregation constitutes one of the first steps preceding Lewy body formation, so that antiaggregation strategies would be very useful to prevent alpha-synuclein fibril formation. Main therapies nevertheless applied up to the present remain symptomatological. In this context, cholinesterase inhibitors such as rivastigmine, galantamine and donepezil, are used for the treatment of delusions and other psychotic symptoms. This review focuses on the recent discovery of possible alpha-synuclein anti-aggregation factors, where four main classes can be defined. First, beta-synuclein as well as alpha-synuclein derived peptides in addition to antibodies present a group of proteins and peptides that directly interact with alpha-synuclein and so inhibit its aggregation. Second, small molecules interfere with alpha-synuclein aggregation by their covalent binding, although not all of them are suitable for an appropriate inhibition of alpha-synuclein aggregation. Third, to inhibit the expression of alpha-synuclein and its isoforms at the RNA level, the use of interference RNA represents a future challenge. The fourth strategy is based on the enhancement of inclusion body formation to accelerate the elimination of soluble alpha-synuclein oligomers. Each chapter section includes the discussion of possible strategies for the development of drugs and therapies.

[PMID: 23183883]
In 1817, James Parkinson described the symptoms of the shaking palsy, a disease that was subsequently defined in greater detail, and named after Parkinson, by Jean-Martin Charcot. Parkinson expected that the publication of his monograph would lead to a rapid elucidation of the anatomical substrate of the shaking palsy; in the event, this process took almost a century. In 1912, Fritz Heinrich Lewy identified the protein aggregates that define Parkinson disease (PD) in some brain regions outside the substantia nigra. In 1919, Konstantin Nikolaevich Tretiakoff found similar aggregates in the substantia nigra and named them after Lewy. In the 1990s, α-synuclein was identified as the main constituent of the Lewy pathology, and its aggregation was shown to be central to PD, dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy. In 2003, a staging scheme for idiopathic PD was introduced, according to which α-synuclein pathology originates in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagal nerve and progresses from there to other brain regions, including the substantia nigra. In this article, we review the relevance of Lewy's discovery 100 years ago for the current understanding of PD and related disorders.

[PMID: 10327208]
Lewy bodies and coarse Lewy neurites are the pathological hallmarks of degenerating neurons in the brains of patients suffering from Parkinson's disease (PD). Recently, the presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein was shown to be a major component of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. This study demonstrates for the first time that extensive and thin alpha-synuclein-immunoreactive inclusions are present in the axonal processes of neurons.

[PMID: 21683963]
Parkinson disease (PD) is the most important movement disorder and about 50% of patients develop dementia over the time. PD belongs to the group of Lewy body disorders. Alpha-synuclein (AS) is the main component of Lewy bodies and its aggregation is a key event in the pathogenesis of PD. Beta-synuclein (BS) inhibits AS aggregation in vitro and in vivo and has been shown to interact directly with AS regulating its functionality and preventing its oligomerization. Recently, we have described a molecular subgroup of DLB characterized by the drastic BS reduction in cortical areas. In this study we have analyzed the expression of two BS transcripts and the main AS transcript SNCA140, in frozen samples of three brain areas, temporal cortex, caudate nucleus and pons, from patients with PD and PDD in comparison with controls. Relative mRNA expression was determined by real-time PCR with SybrGreen, neuron-specific-enolase as housekeeping gene and the deltadeltaCt method. The most important difference in BS and AS mRNA expression between PD and PDD was found in the caudate nucleus, where BS mRNA was overexpressed in PD and AS mRNA diminished in PDD. Our findings provide new insights into the pathogenesis of dementia in PD, indicating that differential BS and AS expression in the caudate nucleus may represent one of the molecular mechanisms involved in these complex diseases.

[PMID: 21937912]
α-Synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). We recently showed that abnormal α-synuclein with resistance to proteinase K (PK) is deposited at presynapses of distinct brain anatomic regions from the early stages of PD and DLB. NUB1, a synphilin-1-binding protein, also accumulates in Lewy bodies, but it is not known whether abnormal α-synuclein is associated with NUB1. Here, we demonstrate that, in the brain of patients with PD and DLB, NUB1 accumulates in the presynapses in the hippocampus, cerebral neocortex, and substantia nigra in which PK-resistant α-synuclein is deposited. Endogenous NUB1 also accumulated with PK-resistant α-synuclein in the presynapses of transgenic mice that express human α-synuclein with an A53T mutation. Immunoelectron microscopy showed that NUB1 is localized to presynaptic nerve terminals where no abnormal filaments are seen. Biochemical analyses showed that NUB1 coexists with abnormal α-synuclein in the brain of DLB patients. These findings suggest that NUB1 along with abnormal α-synuclein is involved in the pathogenesis of Lewy body disease.

[PMID: 23382946]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive degeneration of substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) dopaminergic neurones and the formation of Lewy bodies (LB) in a proportion of the remaining neurones. α-synuclein is the main component of LB, but the pathological mechanisms that lead to neurodegeneration associated with LB formation remain unclear. Three pivotal elements have emerged in the development of PD: α-synuclein, mitochondria and protein degradation systems. We previously reported a unique model, created by conditional genetic depletion of 26S proteasomes in the SNpc of mice, which mechanistically links these three elements with the neuropathology of PD: progressive neurodegeneration and intraneuronal inclusion formation. Using this model, we tested the hypothesis that α-synuclein was essential for the formation of inclusions and neurodegeneration caused by 26S proteasomal depletion. We found that both of these processes were independent of α-synuclein. This provides an important insight into the relationship between the proteasome, α-synuclein, inclusion formation and neurodegeneration. We also show that the autophagy-lysosomal pathway is not activated in 26S proteasome-depleted neurones. This leads us to suggest that the paranuclear accumulation of mitochondria in inclusions in our model may reflect a role for the ubiquitin proteasome system in mitochondrial homeostasis and that neurodegeneration may be mediated through mitochondrial factors linked to inclusion biogenesis.

[PMID: 23295909]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease. The majority of PD cases are sporadic, for which genetic causes and underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unclear. Autophagy, a highly conserved cellular process that governs the breakdown of long-lived proteins and organelles, has been involved in the degradation of α-synuclein (α-Syn), the main component of Lewy bodies. Accumulating evidence implicates deregulation of autophagy in the development and progression of sporadic PD. Altered autophagic gene expression has been observed in the brain tissues from PD patients and animal models. We hypothesized that changes in expression levels of autophagy-related genes (ATGs), rather than mutations associated with amino acid changes, may contribute to PD onset. In this study, the ATG7 gene promoter was sequenced bi-directionally in groups of sporadic PD patients and ethnic-matched healthy controls. As predicted, four novel heterozygous variants, 11313449G>A, 11313811T>C, 11313913G>A and 11314041G>A, were identified in five PD patients, but in none of the controls, which significantly decreased transcriptional activities of the ATG7 gene promoter. Two novel heterozygous variants, 11312947G>A and 11313006C>G, were only found in controls, which did not affect transcriptional activities of the ATG7 gene promoter. The other five novel variants were found in PD patients and controls with similar frequencies. Taken together, the sequence variants within the ATG7 gene promoter identified in PD patients may change ATG7 protein levels, which in turn would influence autophagic activity, contributing to PD onset as a risk factor.

[PMID: 15530662]
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is involved in the accumulation of alpha-synuclein, the main component of Lewy bodies. It is currently unknown, however, whether any of the APP isoforms is instrumental in alpha-synuclein deposition in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Using real-time RT-PCR, we have studied relative mRNA expression levels of APP isoforms in frozen postmortem frontal cortices of DLB patients, Alzheimer disease (AD) patients, and control subjects. Of the three main APP isoforms, the two with a Kunitz protease inhibitory (KPI) motif (APP770 and APP751) were found to be specifically overexpressed in the frontal cortices of DLB patients when compared with controls and AD patients. These findings suggest a specific role of APP isoforms containing Kunitz protease inhibitor in DLB pathogenesis.

[PMID: 23562579]
Prolyl oligopeptidase (EC 3.4.21.26, PREP) is a serine protease that hydrolyzes proline-containing peptides shorter than 30-mer but it has also nonhydrolytic functions. PREP has been shown to accelerate aggregation of wild-type α-synuclein (α-syn) under cell-free conditions, and PREP inhibitors can block this aggregation both in vitro and in vivo. α-syn is the main component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease (PD) and Lewy body dementia. To clarify the possible interaction of PREP with other markers of neurodegenerative diseases, we studied colocalizations of PREP and (1) α-syn, (2) β-amyloid, (3) tau protein and (4) astroglial and microglial cells in human post-mortem brain samples from PD, Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and in healthy control brain samples. In the substantia nigra of PD brains, an intense colocalization with PREP and α-syn was evident. PREP colocalized also with β-amyloid plaques in AD brains and with tau protein in AD and in healthy brains. PREP was also found in astroglial cells in PD, AD and control brains, but not in the microglia. Our findings are the first ones to demonstrate colocalization of PREP and pathological proteins in the human brain and support the view that, at least in spatial terms, PREP could be associated with pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.

[PMID: 23384565]
Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases. Majority of PD are sporadic, for which genetic causes remain largely unknown. Alpha-synuclein, the main component of Lewy bodies, plays a central role in the PD pathogenesis. Macroautophagy is a highly conserved cellular process that digests dysfunctional macromolecules and damaged organelles. Accumulating evidence indicates that macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is involved in alpha-synuclein degradation. Dysregulation of autophagy has been observed in the brain tissues from PD patients and animal models. We hypothesized that change expression levels of autophagy-related genes (ATG), including ATG5, may contribute to PD. In this study, we genetically and functionally analyzed the ATG5 gene promoter in groups of sporadic PD patients and ethnic-matched healthy controls. A novel heterozygous variant, 106774459T>A, was identified in one female patient, but in none of controls, which significantly enhanced transcriptional activities of the ATG5 gene promoter. Furthermore, ATG5 gene expression level in the PD patient was significantly elevated than that in controls. Four novel heterozygous variants, 106774423C>A, 106774418C>A, 106774382C>A and 106774206G>A, were only found in controls. The variant, 106774464C>T, and SNP-106774030A>G (rs510432) were found in PD patients and controls with similar frequencies. Collectively, the variant identified in PD patient may change ATG5 protein levels and alter autophagy activities, contributing to PD onset as a risk factor.

[PMID: 11085897]
alpha-Synuclein and ubiquitin are two Lewy body protein components that may play antagonistic roles in the pathogenesis of Lewy bodies. We examined the relationship between alpha-synuclein, ubiquitin, and lipids in Lewy bodies of fixed brain sections or isolated from cortical tissues of dementia with Lewy bodies. Lewy bodies exhibited a range of labeling patterns for alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin, from a homogeneous pattern in which alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin were evenly distributed and overlapped across the inclusion body to a concentric pattern in which alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin were partially segregated, with alpha-synuclein labeling concentrated in the peripheral domain and ubiquitin in the central domain of the Lewy body. Lipids represented a significant component in both homogeneous and concentric Lewy bodies. These results suggest that Lewy bodies are heterogeneous in their subregional composition. The segregation of alpha-synuclein to Lewy body peripheral domain is consistent with the hypothesis that alpha-synuclein is continually deposited onto Lewy bodies.

[PMID: 16951579]
Alpha-synuclein, a main component of Lewy bodies in synucleinopathies and senile plaques in Alzheimer disease, is centrally involved in neurodegeneration. Three different isoforms (alpha-synuclein 112, 126, and 140) resulting from alternative splicing have been described so far. The present study explores alpha-synuclein 126 mRNA expression levels in the prefrontal cortex of six patients with dementia with Lewy bodies, eight patients with Lewy body variant of Alzheimer disease, eight patients with Alzheimer disease, and 10 controls. Relative alpha-synuclein 126 expression levels were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction with competimer technology. Alpha-synuclein 126 mRNA expression was markedly decreased in the three dementias in comparison with controls, suggesting an important role of this alpha-synuclein isoform in the normal brain.

[PMID: 24597591]
We proposed the term 'Lewy body disease' (LBD) in 1980. Subsequently, we classified LBD into three types according to the distribution pattern of Lewy bodies: a brainstem type, a transitional type and a diffuse type. Later, we added the cerebral type. As we have proposed since 1980, LBD has recently been used as a generic term, including Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's disease with dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. LBD has neuropathological characteristics whereby numerous Lewy bodies are present in the central and sympathetic nervous systems, and it is a type of alpha-synucleinopathy because the main component of Lewy body is alpha-synuclein. In this paper we explain the most recent concept of LBD from the historical viewpoint.