[PMID: 9345098]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked cardiomyopathy with neutropenia and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Recently, mutations in the G4.5 gene, located in Xq28, have been described in four probands with Barth syndrome. We have now evaluated 14 Barth syndrome pedigrees for mutations in G4.5 and have identified unique mutations in all, including four splice-site mutations, three deletions, one insertion, five missense mutations, and one nonsense mutation. Nine of the 14 mutations are predicted to significantly disrupt the protein products of G4.5. The occurrence of missense mutations in exons 3 and 8 suggests that these exons encode essential portions of the G4. 5 proteins, whose functions remain unknown. We found no correlation between the location or type of mutation and any of the clinical or laboratory abnormalities of Barth syndrome, which suggests that additional factors modify the expression of the Barth phenotype. The characterization of mutations of the G4.5 gene will be useful for carrier detection, genetic counseling, and the identification of patients with Barth syndrome who do not manifest all of the cardinal features of this disorder.

[PMID: 21932011]
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked disorder characterized by skeletal myopathy, neutropenia, growth delay, and cardiomyopathy. It is caused by mutations in the tafazzin gene (TAZ). Although early diagnosis is critical to prevent the progression of heart failure, this disease remains unrecognized when heart failure is not clinically significant. Here we report on a 13-year-old boy with no family history of BTHS who was diagnosed with the syndrome in the subclinical stage of heart failure. The clues to the diagnosis of BTHS in this patient were the findings of lipid storage myopathy in the skeletal muscle biopsy, elevated plasma brain natriuretic peptide, and the diagnosis of isolated noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium in echocardiography. Genetic studies of TAZ revealed a disease-causing mutation (p.Gly216Arg) in this patient. Physicians should be aware of the possibility of this disease and carry out genetic studies when it is considered.

[PMID: 12749056]
Isolated noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium (INVM, MIM 300183 and 604169) is a congenital unclassified cardiomyopathy with numerous prominent trabeculations and deep intertrabecular recesses in a hypertrophied and hypokinetic myocardium. Mutations in the G4.5 gene result in a wide spectrum of severe infantile X-linked cardiomyopathic phenotypes including Barth syndrome with dilated cardiomyopathy and INVM. Molecular genetic analysis of INVM has only been performed in pediatric patients. Although adult INVM patients show similar cardiac abnormalities, the influence of genetic factors, especially of mutations in G4.5, is unknown. We analyzed 25 adult INVM patients for the presence of mutations in the G4.5 gene and performed a pedigree analysis of probands. Mutations were not found in the coding sequence or splice sites of G4.5. Systematic analysis of relatives from seven of nine probands showed multiple affected members consistent with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance in the majority of cases. We conclude that INVM in the adult is an autosomal dominant disorder rarely caused by mutations in G4.5 and therefore genetically distinct from infantile X-linked cases.

[PMID: 16847078]
Barth syndrome, an X-linked disorder that is characterized by cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, and growth delay, is caused by mutations in the taffazin gene at Xq28 that result in cardiolipin deficiency and abnormal mitochondria. The clinical phenotype in Barth syndrome has not been characterized systematically, and the condition may be underrecognized. We sought to evaluate extent of cardioskeletal myopathy, potential for arrhythmia, delays in growth, and biochemical correlates of disease severity in patients with this disorder. We conducted an observational, cross-sectional study of the largest cohort of patients with Barth syndrome to date (n = 34; age range: 1.2-22.6 years). Evaluation included echocardiography, electrocardiography (standard and signal-averaged), microvolt T wave alternans analysis, biochemical and hematologic laboratory analyses, and physical therapy evaluation of skeletal myopathy. Family history was positive for confirmed or suspected Barth syndrome in 63%. Ninety percent of patients had a clinical history of cardiomyopathy (mean age at diagnosis of cardiomyopathy: 5.5 months; at genetic confirmation of Barth syndrome: 4.6 years). Echocardiography revealed a mean ejection fraction of 50% +/- 10%, mean fractional shortening of 28% +/- 5%, and mean left ventricular end-diastolic volume z score of 1.9 +/- 1.8. Left ventricular morphology demonstrated increased trabeculations or true noncompaction in 53%. Of 16 patients who were evaluated at > or = 11 years of age, 7 (43%) had documented ventricular arrhythmia. Growth deficiency was present (mean weight percentile: 15%; mean height percentile: 8%). Laboratory analysis revealed low total white blood cell count (absolute count: < 4000 cells per microL) in 25% of those who were not on granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Hypocholesterolemia was present in 24%, decreased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in 56%, low prealbumin in 79%, and mildly elevated creatine kinase in 15%. Our cohort demonstrated clinical variability, but most had cardiomyopathy and diminished growth velocity, with a propensity toward neutropenia and low cholesterol. There was increased incidence of ventricular arrhythmia, predominantly in adolescents and young adults. Barth syndrome should be considered when boys present with cardiomyopathy, especially when associated with increased left ventricular trabeculations, neutropenia, skeletal muscle weakness, or family history indicating an X-linked pattern of inheritance.

[PMID: 24751896]
Barth Syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized principally by dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy and neutropenia and caused by defects in tafazzin, an enzyme responsible for modifying the acyl chain moieties of cardiolipin. While several comprehensive clinical studies of Barth Syndrome have been published detailing cardiac and hematologic features, descriptions of its biochemical characteristics are limited. To gain a better understanding of the clinical biochemistry of this rare disease, we measured hematologic and biochemical values in a cohort of Barth Syndrome patients. We characterized multiple biochemical parameters, including plasma amino acids, plasma 3-methylglutaconic acid, cholesterol, cholesterol synthetic intermediates, and red blood cell membrane fatty acid profiles in 28 individuals with Barth Syndrome from ages 10 months to 30 years. We describe a unique biochemical profile for these patients, including decreased plasma arginine levels. We further studied the plasma amino acid profiles, cholesterol, cholesterol synthetic intermediates, and plasma 3-methylglutaconic acid levels in 8 female carriers and showed that they do not share any of the distinct, Barth Syndrome-specific biochemical laboratory abnormalities. Our studies augment and expand the biochemical profiles of individuals with Barth Syndrome, describe a unique biochemical profile for these patients, and provide insight into the possible underlying biochemical pathology in this disorder.

[PMID: 24342716]
Barth syndrome is caused by mutations in the TAZ (tafazzin) gene on human chromosome Xq28. The human tafazzin gene produces four major mRNA splice variants; two of which have been shown to be functional (TAZ lacking exon 5 and full-length) in complementation studies with yeast and Drosophila. This study characterizes the multiple alternative splice variants of TAZ mRNA and their proportions in blood samples from a cohort of individuals with Barth syndrome (BTHS). Because it has been reported that collection and processing methods can affect the expression of various genes, we tested and chose a stabilizing medium for collecting, shipping and processing of the blood samples of these individuals. In both healthy controls and in BTHS individuals, we found a greater variety of alternatively spliced forms than previously described, with a sizeable proportion of minor splice variants besides the four dominant isoforms. Individuals with certain exonic and intronic splice mutations produce additional mutant mRNAs that could be translated into two or more proteins with different amino acid substitutions in a single individual. A fraction of the minor splice variants is predicted to be non-productive.

[PMID: 24093814]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder that is caused by mutations in Taffazin gene (TAZ), leading to severe cardiolipin deficiency which results in respiratory chain dysfunction. Barth syndrome is characterized by cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, growth deficiency and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. In this paper, we present clinical, biochemical and molecular data of the first four Czech patients from four unrelated families diagnosed with this rare disease. The mean age of onset was 5.5 ± 3.8 months. One child suffered from sudden cardiac death at the age of 2 years, the age of living patients is between 3 and 13 years. Muscle hypotonia was present in all four patients; cardiomyopathy and growth retardation in three and neutropenia in two of them. Two patients manifested a dilated and one patient a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A characteristic laboratory abnormality was the intermittently increased excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid. Three novel hemizygous mutations in the TAZ gene were found (c.584G>T; c.109+6T>C; c.86G>A). We conclude that Barth syndrome should be included in differential diagnosis of cardiomyopathy in childhood, especially in the cooccurrence of dilated cardiomyopathy and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.

[PMID: 21068380]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked genetic disorder caused by mutations in the tafazzin (taz) gene and characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy, exercise intolerance, chronic fatigue, delayed growth, and neutropenia. Tafazzin is a mitochondrial transacylase required for cardiolipin remodeling. Although tafazzin function has been studied in non-mammalian model organisms, mammalian genetic loss of function approaches have not been used. We examined the consequences of tafazzin knockdown on sarcomeric mitochondria and cardiac function in mice. Tafazzin knockdown resulted in a dramatic decrease of tetralinoleoyl cardiolipin in cardiac and skeletal muscles and accumulation of monolysocardiolipins and cardiolipin molecular species with aberrant acyl groups. Electron microscopy revealed pathological changes in mitochondria, myofibrils, and mitochondrion-associated membranes in skeletal and cardiac muscles. Echocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed severe cardiac abnormalities, including left ventricular dilation, left ventricular mass reduction, and depression of fractional shortening and ejection fraction in tafazzin-deficient mice. Tafazzin knockdown mice provide the first mammalian model system for Barth syndrome in which the pathophysiological relationships between altered content of mitochondrial phospholipids, ultrastructural abnormalities, myocardial and mitochondrial dysfunction, and clinical outcome can be completely investigated.

[PMID: 8884581]
Point mutations in mitochondrial DNA, as found in MELAS, MERRF, NARP and other syndromes, are inherited via the maternal lineage. Genetic counselling can be beneficial, but prenatal diagnosis is not advantageous in these syndromes. Empirical data about the recurrence risk can be applied in Leber disease (LHON). Mitochondrial disorders not associated with a point mutation have a sporadic nature (large deletions/duplications in mitochondrial DNA) or are transmitted according to Mendelian laws. Autosomal dominant inheritance is likely to be found in disorders with depletion of mitochondrial DNA. X-linked mode of inheritance is seen in Menkes disease, Barth syndrome, and in deficiencies of the E1 alpha subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Mutation analysis or linkage studies can be applied for carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in these three types of mitochondriopathies. The majority of the disorders with a disturbed mitochondrial energy metabolism are likely inherited in an autosomal recessive mode. Prenatal diagnosis can be performed in the cases of cytochrome c oxidase and NADH dehydrogenase deficiencies in chorionic villi in selected families.

[PMID: 11975944]
Most cardiomyopathies recognizable in utero are the dilated type-with dilated, poorly contractile left ventricle. We propose a diagnostic criterion for the rare spongiform (noncompacted) cardiomyopathy. Three perinatal cases with echocardiography and autopsy are presented. The apical ventricular myocardium was thickened and markedly trabeculated. The ventricles were not dilated in two, and the atria were enlarged in all. Hydrops and bradycardia were present in all three despite normal or only mildly diminished contractility. Although the cardiomyopathy was familial in two siblings, two of three cases were female, ruling out Barth syndrome (with sex-linked recessive inheritance). Although all three of our cases with hydrops died, rare survivors have been reported in the eighth decade. Although spongiform cardiomyopathy may eventually develop into a dilated cardiomyopathy, its early characteristic is relatively diagnostic: a restrictive cardiomyopathy with no enlargement of the ventricles and prominent atria.

[PMID: 12112112]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked cardiac and skeletal mitochondrial myopathy. Barth syndrome may be due to lipid alterations because the product of the mutated gene is homologous to phospholipid acyltransferases. Here we document that a single mitochondrial phospholipid species, tetralinoleoyl-cardiolipin, was lacking in the skeletal muscle (n = 2), right ventricle (n = 2), left ventricle (n = 2), and platelets (n = 6) of 8 children with Barth syndrome. Tetralinoleoyl-cardiolipin is specifically enriched in normal skeletal muscle and the normal heart. These findings support the notion that Barth syndrome is caused by alterations of mitochondrial lipids.

[PMID: 16857210]
Mutations in the human TAZ gene are associated with Barth Syndrome, an often fatal X-linked disorder that presents with cardiomyopathy and neutropenia. The TAZ gene encodes Tafazzin, a putative phospholipid acyltranferase that is involved in the remodeling of cardiolipin, a phospholipid unique to the inner mitochondrial membrane. It has been shown that the disruption of the Tafazzin gene in yeast (Taz1) affects the assembly and stability of respiratory chain Complex IV and its supercomplex forms. However, the implications of these results for Barth Syndrome are restricted due to the additional presence of Complex I in humans that forms a supercomplex with Complexes III and IV. Here, we investigated the effects of Tafazzin, and hence cardiolipin deficiency in lymphoblasts from patients with Barth Syndrome, using blue-native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Digitonin extraction revealed a more labile Complex I/III(2)/IV supercomplex in mitochondria from Barth Syndrome cells, with Complex IV dissociating more readily from the supercomplex. The interaction between Complexes I and III was also less stable, with decreased levels of the Complex I/III(2) supercomplex. Reduction of Complex I holoenzyme levels was observed also in the Barth Syndrome patients, with a corresponding decrease in steady-state subunit levels. We propose that the loss of mature cardiolipin species in Barth Syndrome results in unstable respiratory chain supercomplexes, thereby affecting Complex I biogenesis, respiratory activities and subsequent pathology.

[PMID: 21987083]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked disorder usually diagnosed in infancy. It is characterized by hypotonia, dilated cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, growth retardation, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. The syndrome is typically caused by mutations in the TAZ (G4.5) gene, which encodes a novel protein family called the tafazzins. We report the case of two brothers with Barth syndrome and left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) caused by a splice donor mutation in TAZ. Both had impaired sucking ability at the age of 2 months. The elder brother was diagnosed with LVNC at the age of 4 months; by that time he had developed severe heart failure with metabolic decompensation. He died at 12 months of age due to intractable heart failure despite pharmacological therapy with diuretics, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and a beta-blocker. However, the younger brother, who was diagnosed as having Barth syndrome and LVNC with heart failure at the age of 2 months, received early medical treatment and demonstrated normal echocardiographic findings. The clinical courses of Barth syndrome observed in our cases show the phonotypic variability of this syndrome and suggest that early therapy may be beneficial for maintaining cardiac function.

[PMID: 23523468]
Cardiolipin is a mitochondrion-specific phospholipid that stabilizes the assembly of respiratory chain complexes, favoring full-yield operation. It also mediates key steps in apoptosis. In Barth syndrome, an X chromosome-linked cardiomyopathy caused by tafazzin mutations, cardiolipins display acyl chain modifications and are present at abnormally low concentrations, whereas monolysocardiolipin accumulates. Using immortalized lymphoblasts from Barth syndrome patients, we showed that the production of abnormal cardiolipin led to mitochondrial alterations. Indeed, the lack of normal cardiolipin led to changes in electron transport chain stability, resulting in cellular defects. We found a destabilization of the supercomplex (respirasome) I+III2+IVn but also decreased amounts of individual complexes I and IV and supercomplexes I+III and III+IV. No changes were observed in the amounts of individual complex III and complex II. We also found decreased levels of complex V. This complex is not part of the supercomplex suggesting that cardiolipin is required not only for the association/stabilization of the complexes into supercomplexes but also for the modulation of the amount of individual respiratory chain complexes. However, these alterations were compensated by an increase in mitochondrial mass, as demonstrated by electron microscopy and measurements of citrate synthase activity. We suggest that this compensatory increase in mitochondrial content prevents a decrease in mitochondrial respiration and ATP synthesis in the cells. We also show, by extensive flow cytometry analysis, that the type II apoptosis pathway was blocked at the mitochondrial level and that the mitochondria of patients with Barth syndrome cannot bind active caspase-8. Signal transduction is thus blocked before any mitochondrial event can occur. Remarkably, basal levels of superoxide anion production were slightly higher in patients' cells than in control cells as previously evidenced via an increased protein carbonylation in the taz1Δ mutant in the yeast. This may be deleterious to cells in the long term. The consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations to apoptosis signal transduction are considered in light of the potential for the development of future treatments.

[PMID: 23031367]
The tafazzin gene (TAZ) is located at Xq28 and encodes a protein involved in the transacylation of cardiolipin, an essential mitochondrial phospholipid. Mutations in TAZ are associated with Barth syndrome (BTHS), the X-linked recessive condition with dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, growth retardation, neutropenia and organic aciduria. TAZ mutations also contribute to left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC), a cardiomyopathy characterized by loose, trabeculated myocardium. We report a family with a novel TAZ mutation and the clinical spectrum from severe BTHS in an infant to skeletal myopathy with LVNC in an adult, the oldest individual with BTHS reported. The proband is a 51-year-old male with muscle weakness since early childhood. He remained stable until the age of 43. His initial evaluations found LVNC and borderline neutropenia with no elevation of urine 3-methylglutaconic acid. The proband's great nephew is a 3-year-old who presented at birth with poor feeding, hypotonia, lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. At three months he was admitted with failure to thrive, lethargy and respiratory distress due to heart failure. Cardiac studies revealed dilated cardiomyopathy with a spongiform trabeculated pattern of the left ventricle. Laboratory studies showed cyclic neutropenia and elevated urine 3-methylglutaconic and 3-methylglutaric acids. At age 11months the patient had a heart transplant. We conducted sequence analysis of the TAZ gene for two affected individuals, the proband first and then his great-nephew. A novel, hemizygous nonsense mutation in TAZ exon 7 (c.583G>T, p.Gly195X) was detected. At his current age of 51years-old, the proband is the oldest surviving individual reported with a confirmed molecular diagnosis and features of Barth syndrome. Further studies will be conducted to identify the genetic modifying factor(s) associated with the wide phenotypic range seen in this family.

[PMID: 8487269]
Familial cases of childhood congestive cardiomyopathy with X linked recessive inheritance and abnormalities of heart muscle mitochondria have been previously reported. We report here three families with possible X linked congestive cardiomyopathy and specific mitochondrial abnormalities. The heart disorder presented as endocardial fibroelastosis with neonatal death in two brothers in one family, and as heart failure and death in infancy in two brothers in the other two families. In one family a maternal uncle may also have been affected. Pyodermia and neutropenia was reported in one of the boys. Electron microscopy of heart muscle after necropsy showed increased numbers of mitochondria and abnormal mitochondrial crystal condensations and paracrystalline inclusions in all sibships. Barth's syndrome has been mapped to Xq28 and includes cardiomyopathy, skeletal muscle myopathy, neutropenia, and mitochondrial abnormalities similar to those found in the three families reported here. Since the clinical picture differed in the three families, they may represent more than one entity.

[PMID: 25185984]
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is a genetic, X-linked, rare but often fatal, pediatric skeletal- and cardiomyopathy occurring due to mutations in the tafazzin gene (TAZ). TAZ encodes a transacylase involved in phospholipid biosynthesis, also called tafazzin, which is responsible for remodeling the inner mitochondrial membrane phospholipid, cardiolipin (CL). Tafazzin mutations lead to compositional alterations in CL molecular species, causing extensive mitochondrial aberrations and ultrastructural muscle damage. There are no specific treatments or cure for BTHS. Current therapy is largely palliative and aimed at treatment of organ-specific complications during disease progression. Polypharmacy frequently occurs during treatment and may lead to severe adverse events. Adverse reactions may originate from exogenous factors such as the inadvertent co-administration of contraindicated drugs. Theoretically, endogenous factors such as polymorphic variations in genes encoding drug metabolizing enzymes may also precipitate fatal toxicity. Investigation of the consequences of pharmacogenomic variations on BTHS therapy is lacking. To our knowledge, this review presents the first examination of the possible sources of pharmacogenomic variations that may affect BTHS therapy. We also explore BTHSspecific patents for possible treatment options. The patents discussed suggest innovative strategies for treatment, including feeding linoleic acid to patients to overcome compositional CL deficiency; or the use of 2S,4R ketoconazole formulations to augment CL levels; or the delivery of mitochondrial stabilizing cargo. Future research directions are also discussed.

[PMID: 8434619]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked disorder characterised by cardioskeletal myopathy of variable severity usually fatal in childhood, and neutropenia. We ascertained a large pedigree with affected males in 3 generations. All affected males had dilated cardiomyopathy, with endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE) in some. The locus for Barth syndrome in this family was found to be closely linked to DXS52 (z = 2.78, theta = 0.0). The family was nonrecombinant for DXS52 in distal Xq28, but recombinant for DXS374 which maps proximal to DXS52. This localised Barth syndrome distal to DXS374, confirming a previous localisation to distal Xq28. As yet there is no evidence for genetic heterogeneity of Barth syndrome.

[PMID: 17353728]
Barth syndrome is a rare, X-linked recessive disorder that affects only boys. The cardinal characteristics include growth retardation, cardioskeletal myopathy, chronic or cyclic neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. A preliminary study of five young boys with Barth syndrome suggested a distinct cognitive phenotype. The present study was designed to explore whether additional evidence for a cognitive phenotype emerged from a larger sample. A psychoeducational assessment battery was administered to 15 boys with Barth syndrome. Data from these boys were compared to data from 15 typically developing boys individually matched on age and grade in school to each of the 15 boys with Barth syndrome. Although boys with Barth syndrome had age-appropriate performance on all measures of reading-related skills, their performance on mathematics and visual spatial tasks was significantly lower than that of boys in the comparison group. Moreover, specific aspects of visual short-term memory also differed from available norms. Our findings support the validity of the preliminary findings and reflect a higher incidence of cognitive difficulties in boys with Barth syndrome relative to boys in the comparison group. Coupled with the fatigue regularly experienced by boys with Barth syndrome, our findings indicate that educational support should be implemented during the early school-age years for children with Barth syndrome.

[PMID: 19037987]
This is a report of a child who died at 20 months from what was clinically thought to be cardiomyopathy of unknown etiology. Barth syndrome, an X-linked mitochondrial cardioskeletal myopathy, was diagnosed by genetic testing at autopsy. Barth syndrome presents in infancy or childhood with cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, growth delays, and cyclic neutropenia. Other associated laboratory findings can include hypocholesterolemia, relative monocytosis, low prealbumin, low plasma carnitine, and lactic acidosis. The classic echocardiogram finding is left ventricular noncompaction, although not always present. Until recently, the most reliable biochemical finding has been 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. However, quantitative analysis must be specifically requested for results to be reliable. Recently, a confirmatory tetralinoleoyl cardiolipin high-pressure liquid chromotography-tandem mass spectrometry blood test has become available. Genetic testing is also confirmatory and details the underlying mutation. Diagnosis is often missed or delayed and early diagnosis improves survival. The purpose of this case report is to encourage physicians to include Barth syndrome in the differential for cardiomyopathy of uncertain etiology in males, especially in the presence of growth delays, hypotonia, neutropenia, and/or family history of pediatric male death of unknown etiology.

[PMID: 25776009]
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked recessive disease primarily affecting males. Clinically, the disease is characterized by hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, chronic/cyclic neutropenia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, growth retardation and respiratory chain dysfunction. It is caused by mutations in the TAZ gene coding for the tafazzin protein which is responsible for cardiolipin remodeling. In this work, we present a novel pathogenic TAZ mutation c.83T>A, p.Val28Glu, found in mosaic form in almost all female members of a Polish family. Sanger sequencing of DNA from peripheral blood and from epithelial cells showed female mosaicism in three generations. This appears to be a new mechanism of inheritance and further research is required in order to understand the mechanism of this mosaicism. We conclude that BTHS genetic testing should include two or more tissues for women that appear to be noncarriers when blood DNA is initially tested. The results of our study should not only be applicable to BTHS families, but also to families with other X-linked diseases.