[PMID: 11689486]
Red hair in humans is associated with variant alleles of the alphaMSH receptor gene, MC1R. Loss of MC1R function in other mammals results in red or yellow hair pigmentation. We show that a mouse bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) which contains Mc1r will efficiently rescue loss of Mc1r in transgenic mice, and that overexpression of the receptor suppresses the effect of the endogenous antagonist, agouti protein. We engineered the BAC to replace the mouse coding region with the human MC1R sequence and used this in the transgenic assay. The human receptor also efficiently rescued Mc1r deficiency, and in addition, appeared to be completely resistant to the effects of agouti, suggesting agouti protein may not play a role in human pigmentary variation. Three human variant alleles account for 60% of all cases of red hair. We engineered each of these in turn into the BAC and find that they have reduced, but not completely absent, function in transgenic mice. Comparison of the phenotypes of alphaMSH-deficient mice and humans in conjunction with this data suggests that red hair may not be the null phenotype of MC1R.

[PMID: 7581459]
Melanin pigmentation protects the skin from the damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation (UVR). There are two types of melanin, the red phaeomelanin and the black eumelanin, both of which are present in human skin. Eumelanin is photoprotective whereas phaeomelanin, because of its potential to generate free radicals in response to UVR, may contribute to UV-induced skin damage. Individuals with red hair have a predominance of phaeomelain in hair and skin and/or a reduced ability to produce eumelanin, which may explain why they fail to tan and are at risk from UVR. In mammals the relative proportions of phaeomelanin and eumelanin are regulated by melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH), which acts via its receptor (MC1R), on melanocytes, to increase the synthesis of eumelanin and the product of the agouti locus which antagonises this action. In mice, mutations at either the MC1R gene or agouti affect the pattern of melanogenesis resulting in changes in coat colour. We now report the presence of MC1R gene sequence variants in humans. These were found in over 80% of individuals with red hair and/or fair skin that tans poorly but in fewer than 20% of individuals with brown or black hair and in less than 4% of those who showed a good tanning response. Our findings suggest that in humans, as in other mammals, the MC1R is a control point in the regulation of pigmentation phenotype and, more importantly, that variations in this protein are associated with a poor tanning response.

[PMID: 10885670]
The melanocortin 1 receptor, a seven pass transmembrane G protein coupled receptor, is a key control point in melanogenesis. Loss-of-function mutations at the MC1R are associated with a switch from eumelanin to phaeomelanin production, resulting in a red or yellow coat colour. Activating mutations, in animals at least, lead to enhanced eumelanin synthesis. In man, a number of loss-of-function mutations in the MC1R have been described. The majority of red-heads (red-haired persons) are compound heterozygotes or homozygotes for up to five frequent loss-of-function mutations. A minority of redheads are, however, only heterozygote. The MC1R is, therefore, a major determinant of sun sensitivity and a genetic risk factor for melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. Recent work suggests that the MC1R also shows a clear heterozygote effect on skin type, with up to 30% of the population harbouring loss-of-function mutations. Activating mutations of the MC1R in man have not been described. The MC1R is particularly informative and a tractable gene for studies of human evolution and migration. In particular, study of the MC1R may provide insights into the lightening of skin colour observed in most European populations. The world wide pattern of MC1R diversity is compatible with functional constraint operating in Africa, whereas the greater allelic diversity seen in non-African populations is consistent with neutral predictions rather than selection. Whether this conclusion is as a result of weakness in the statistical testing procedures applied, or whether it will be seen in other pigment genes will be of great interest for studies of human skin colour evolution.

[PMID: 11672965]
We describe a minisequencing protocol for screening DNA samples for the presence of 12 mutations in the human melanocortin 1 receptor gene (MC1R), eight of which are associated with the red hair phenotype. A minisequencing profile which shows homozygosity for one of these mutations or the presence of two different mutations would strongly indicate that the sample donor is red haired. The absence of any red hair causing mutations would indicate that the sample donor does not have red hair. We report the frequencies of MC1R variants in the British red haired population.

[PMID: 19016241]
The MC1R gene encodes a protein with key regulatory functions in the melanin synthesis. A multiplex PCR and a multiplex single base extension protocol were established for genotyping six exonic MC1R variations highly penetrant for red hair (R), four exonic MC1R variations weakly penetrant for red hair (r), two frameshift variations highly penetrant for red hair (R) and three variations in the promoter region. We genotyped 600 individuals from Denmark using either CE or MALDI-TOF MS as the detection platform. A total of 62 individuals were genotyped R/R and among the 62 individuals, 57 had red hair and five had blond hair colour. Two different R alleles may be located in cis (RR/-) position or trans (R/R) position, and the phenotype associated with RR/- and R/R may be different. Two allele-specific PCRs were established with primers targeting the -G445A variation in the MC1R promoter and the allele-specific PCR products were used in the multiplex single base extension assay. In all 62 individuals, the MC1R variants were situated in trans position. Another 18 individuals with red hair colour were either genotyped R/- or R/r, suggesting that other genes influence hair colour.

[PMID: 27755135]
The melanocortin 1 receptor is a Gs protein-coupled receptor implicated in melanogenesis regulation. The receptor gene is highly polymorphic, which accounts for the association of several of its single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with an increased risk of melanoma. The present study aimed to evaluate the distribution of melanocortin 1 receptor gene variants R151C, R160W, and D294H within the Russian population of Eastern Siberia and its association with melanoma development. Melanoma patients (n=95) admitted to Krasnoyarsk Territorial Oncological Center and healthy controls (n=334) were enrolled in the study. A clinical examination of patients was performed to evaluate the phenotypic features of melanoma patients. SNPs were analyzed by real-time PCR. Clinical examination indicated a more frequent occurrence of fair skin type, blue eyes, blonde and red hair, and more frequent localization of freckles on the neck, trunk, and extremities in the melanoma group of patients. The R151C melanocortin 1 receptor gene variant was found in 18% of melanoma patients and associated with an increased likelihood of melanoma development (odds ratio=6.4; 95% confidence interval: 2.8-14.3; P=0.0001). The two remaining variant alleles of the melanocortin 1 receptor gene occurred with low frequency both in controls and in the melanoma group. The R160W SNP was identified neither in controls nor in melanoma patients. The D294H heterozygous variant was observed in 0.3% of individuals in the control group and in 1.1% of the patients in the melanoma group. Such an asymmetric distribution of the melanocortin 1 receptor within red hair color genotypes in the population under study compared with other populations may be because of Russian genetic homogeneity. Carriers of the mutant R151C allele should exercise caution in terms of exposure to the sun to avoid the risk of melanoma development.

[PMID: 17147521]
Red hair is one of the most striking variants of human hair coloration and has historically been of profound social importance. Red hair in man is due to certain loss of function mutations of one of the peptide products of the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R, MIM 155555). Such functional mutations enable the melanocyte to produce red-yellow pheomelanin in preference to the default, black-brown eumelanin. This paper reviews the path of discovery of the MC1R in control of animal coat colour, the subsequent role of MC1R in human physiology and possibly wider role of MC1R in human skin carcinogenesis and human development through history.

[PMID: 28024137]
Only 1-2% of people is red-headed but in the Russian Udmurt Republic or United Kingdom they can be met more often. A specific variant of MC1R gene (R allele) is responsible for the red hair. The gene encodes a receptor for melanocortins. These substances stimulate melanocytes to product melanin- a dye of the skin which is transported to keratinocytes. It protects a cellular nucleus from ultraviolet radiation. Melanin has two types: eumelanin which is dark brown or even black and red/orange pheomelanin. The second one is mostly observed in red-headed which is caused by R allele. The DNA damage occurs more easily because of worse protecting ability of pheomelanin. Moreover this allele is connected with inefficient DNA repair. People with R allele have not only flaming red hairstyle but also very fair skin (often with freckles) and blue eyes. Unfortunately this phenotype is more exposed to harmful effects of UV rays. It means that too extensive exposition to solar light leads to sunburn and development of cancerous skin diseases with melanoma as the worst. R allele is a recessive variant of the gene so only in homozygous persons this characteristic phenotype is observed. Nevertheless blond- or auburn-haired carriers of this allele are also more prone to develop carcinomas. The red-headed also differ from the others in sensitivity to anaesthetics, what is shown by increased MAC. On the other hand these persons less often suffer from vitamin D deficiency. The aim of the article is to present facts and myths of red-headed.

[PMID: 22140526]
Multiple loss-of-function (LOF) alleles at the same gene may influence a phenotype not only in the homozygote state when alleles are considered individually, but also in the compound heterozygote (CH) state. Such LOF alleles typically have low frequencies and moderate to large effects. Detecting such variants is of interest to the genetics community, and relevant statistical methods for detecting and quantifying their effects are sorely needed. We present a collapsed double heterozygosity (CDH) test to detect the presence of multiple LOF alleles at a gene. When causal SNPs are available, which may be the case in next generation genome sequencing studies, this CDH test has overwhelmingly higher power than single SNP analysis. When causal SNPs are not directly available such as in current GWA settings, we show the CDH test has higher power than standard single SNP analysis if tagging SNPs are in linkage disequilibrium with the underlying causal SNPs to at least a moderate degree (r²>0.1). The test is implemented for genome-wide analysis in the publically available software package GenABEL which is based on a sliding window approach. We provide the proof of principle by conducting a genome-wide CDH analysis of red hair color, a trait known to be influenced by multiple loss-of-function alleles, in a total of 7,732 Dutch individuals with hair color ascertained. The association signals at the MC1R gene locus from CDH were uniformly more significant than traditional GWA analyses (the most significant P for CDH = 3.11×10⁻¹⁴² vs. P for rs258322 = 1.33×10⁻⁶⁶). The CDH test will contribute towards finding rare LOF variants in GWAS and sequencing studies.

[PMID: 11030758]
Variants of the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) gene are common in individuals with red hair and fair skin, but the relative contribution to these pigmentary traits in heterozygotes, homozygotes and compound heterozygotes for variants at this locus from the multiple alleles present in Caucasian populations is unclear. We have investigated 174 individuals from 11 large kindreds with a preponderance of red hair and an additional 99 unrelated redheads, for MC1R variants and have confirmed that red hair is usually inherited as a recessive characteristic with the R151C, R160W, D294H, R142H, 86insA and 537insC alleles at this locus. The V60L variant, which is common in the population may act as a partially penetrant recessive allele. These individuals plus 167 randomly ascertained Caucasians demonstrate that heterozygotes for two alleles, R151C and 537insC, have a significantly elevated risk of red hair. The shade of red hair frequently differs in heterozygotes from that in homozygotes/compound heterozygotes and there is also evidence for a heterozygote effect on beard hair colour, skin type and freckling. The data provide evidence for a dosage effect of MC1R variants on hair as well as skin colour.

[PMID: 28030792]
The MC1R gene plays a crucial role in pigmentation synthesis. Loss-of-function MC1R variants, which impair protein function, are associated with red hair color (RHC) phenotype and increased skin cancer risk. Cultured cutaneous cells bearing loss-of-function MC1R variants show a distinct gene expression profile compared to wild-type MC1R cultured cutaneous cells. We analysed the gene signature associated with RHC co-cultured melanocytes and keratinocytes by Protein-Protein interaction (PPI) network analysis to identify genes related with non-functional MC1R variants. From two detected networks, we selected 23 nodes as hub genes based on topological parameters. Differential expression of hub genes was then evaluated in healthy skin biopsies from RHC and black hair color (BHC) individuals. We also compared gene expression in melanoma tumors from individuals with RHC versus BHC. Gene expression in normal skin from RHC cutaneous cells showed dysregulation in 8 out of 23 hub genes (CLN3, ATG10, WIPI2, SNX2, GABARAPL2, YWHA, PCNA and GBAS). Hub genes did not differ between melanoma tumors in RHC versus BHC individuals. The study suggests that healthy skin cells from RHC individuals present a constitutive genomic deregulation associated with the red hair phenotype and identify novel genes involved in melanocyte biology.

[PMID: 16704453]
The melanocortin 1 receptor (Mc1r) plays a central role in cutaneous biology, but is expressed at very low levels by a small fraction of cells in the skin. In humans, loss-of-function MC1R mutations cause fair skin, freckling, red hair, and increased predisposition to melanoma; in mice, Mc1r loss-of-function is responsible for the recessive yellow mutation, associated with pheomelanic hair and a decreased number of epidermal melanocytes. To better understand how Mc1r signaling affects different cutaneous phenotypes, we examined large-scale patterns of gene expression in different skin components (whole epidermal sheets, basal epidermal cells and whole skins) of neonatal (P2.5) normal and recessive yellow mice, starting with a 26K mouse cDNA microarray. From c. 17 000 genes whose levels could be accurately measured in neonatal skin, we identified 883, 2097 and 552 genes that were uniquely expressed in the suprabasal epidermis, basal epidermis and dermis, respectively; specific biologic roles could be assigned for each class. Comparison of normal and recessive yellow mice revealed 69 differentially expressed genes, of which the majority had not been previously implicated in Mc1r signaling. Surprisingly, many of the Mc1r-dependent genes are expressed in cells other than melanocytes, even though Mc1r expression in the skin is confined almost exclusively to epidermal melanocytes. These results reveal new targets for Mc1r signaling, and point to a previously unappreciated role for a Mc1r-dependent paracrine effect of melanocytes on other components of the skin.

[PMID: 15972726]
The human melanocortin-1 receptor gene (MC1R) encodes a G-protein coupled receptor that is primarily expressed on melanocytes, where it plays a key role in pigmentation regulation. Variant alleles are associated with red hair colour and fair skin, known as the RHC phenotype, as well as skin cancer risk. The R151C, R160W and D294H alleles, designated 'R', are strongly associated with the RHC phenotype and have been proposed to result in loss of function receptors due to impaired G-protein coupling. We recently provided evidence that the R151C and R160W variants can efficiently couple to G-proteins in response to alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone. The possibility that altered cellular localization of the R151C and R160W variant receptors could underlie their association with RHC was therefore considered. Using immunofluorescence and ligand binding studies, we found that melanocytic cells exogenously or endogenously expressing MC1R show strong surface localization of the wild-type and D294H alleles but markedly reduced cell surface expression of the R151C and R160W receptors. In additional exogenous expression studies, the R variant D84E and the rare I155T variant, also demonstrated a significant reduction in plasma membrane receptor numbers. The V60L, V92M and R163Q weakly associated RHC alleles, designated 'r', were expressed with normal or intermediate cell surface receptor levels. These results indicate that reduced receptor coupling activity may not be the only contributing factor to the genetic association between the MC1R variants and the RHC phenotype, with MC1R polymorphisms now linked to a change in receptor localization.

[PMID: 19571053]
Red hair color is caused by variants of the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene. People with naturally red hair are resistant to subcutaneous local anesthetics and, therefore, may experience increased anxiety regarding dental care. The authors tested the hypothesis that having natural red hair color, a MC1R gene variant or both could predict a patient's experiencing dental care-related anxiety and dental care avoidance. The authors enrolled 144 participants (67 natural red-haired and 77 dark-haired) aged 18 to 41 years in a cross-sectional observational study. Participants completed validated survey instruments designed to measure general and dental care-specific anxiety, fear of dental pain and previous dental care avoidance. The authors genotyped participants' blood samples to detect variants associated with natural red hair color. Eighty-five participants had MC1R gene variants (65 of the 67 red-haired participants and 20 of the 77 dark-haired participants) (P < .001). Participants with MC1R gene variants reported significantly more dental care-related anxiety and fear of dental pain than did participants with no MC1R gene variants. They were more than twice as likely to avoid dental care as were the participants with no MC1R gene variants, even after the authors controlled for general trait anxiety and sex. Dental care-related anxiety, fear of dental pain and avoidance of dental care may be influenced by genetic variations. Dentists should evaluate all patients, but especially those with naturally red hair, for dental care-related anxiety and use appropriate modalities to manage the patients' anxiety.

[PMID: 9487023]
Cutaneous pigmentation is a major determinant of the cutaneous response to ultraviolet radiation, and consequently of the risk of developing skin cancer. Over the past 10 years, several genes involved in melanogenesis have been identified, including the melanocortin 1 receptor gene. Recent work on the melanocortin 1 receptor suggests that it is a key player in determining whether eumelanin or pheomelanin is predominantly produced both in vitro and in vivo. In the mouse, variants of this receptor, which differ in their ability to activate adenylyl cyclase, are associated with different coat colors. In humans, melanocortin 1 receptor variants are associated with red hair and fair skin, and work in progress from our laboratory suggests that certain melanocortin 1 receptor variants may preferentially be associated with hair color rather than skin type. In addition, melanocortin 1 receptor variants are a risk factor, possibly independent of skin type, for melanoma susceptibility.

[PMID: 18484624]
The Melanocortin-1 Receptor (MC1R) is a G-protein coupled receptor, which is responsible for production of the darker eumelanin pigment and the tanning response. The MC1R gene has many polymorphisms, some of which have been linked to variation in pigmentation phenotypes within human populations. In particular, the p.D84E, p.R151C, p.R160W and p.D294 H alleles have been strongly associated with red hair, fair skin and increased skin cancer risk. These red hair colour (RHC) variants are relatively well described and are thought to result in altered receptor function, while still retaining varying levels of signaling ability in vitro. The mouse Mc1r null phenotype is yellow fur colour, the p.R151C, p.R160W and p.D294 H alleles were able to partially rescue this phenotype, leading to the question of what the true null phenotype of MC1R would be in humans. Due to the rarity of MC1R null alleles in human populations, they have only been found in the heterozygous state until now. We report here the first case of a homozygous MC1R null individual, phenotypic analysis indicates that red hair and fair skin is found in the absence of MC1R function.

[PMID: 23146638]
The exact reasons for failure of the inferior alveolar nerve (IAN) block are not completely known, but red hair could play a role. The genetic basis for red hair involves specific mutations, red hair color (RHC) alleles, in the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene. The purpose of this prospective randomized study was to investigate a possible link between certain variant alleles of the MC1R gene or its phenotypic expression of red hair and the anesthetic efficacy of the IAN block in women. One-hundred twenty-four adult female subjects (62 red haired and 62 dark haired) participated in this study. Dental anxiety was determined in each subject using the Corah Dental Anxiety Questionnaire. The subjects were given 2 cartridges of 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine via the IAN block. Pulpal anesthesia was measured in the posterior and anterior teeth in 4-minute cycles for 60 minutes using an electric pulp tester. The MC1R alleles were genotyped for each subject from cheek cells containing DNA collected using buccal swabs. Women with red hair and women with 2 RHC alleles reported significantly higher levels of dental anxiety compared with women with dark hair or women with 0 RHC alleles. No significant differences in anesthetic success were found between any of the groups for any of the teeth. Red hair and the MC1R gene were significantly linked to higher levels of dental anxiety but were unrelated to success rates of the IAN block in women with healthy pulps.

[PMID: 12876664]
The heterogeneous group of disorders known as oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) shares cutaneous and ocular hypopigmentation associated with common developmental abnormalities of the eye. Mutations of at least 11 loci produce this phenotype. The majority of affected individuals develop some cutaneous melanin; this is predominantly seen as yellow/blond hair, whereas fewer have brown hair. The OCA phenotype is dependent on the constitutional pigmentation background of the family, with more OCA pigmentation found in families with darker constitutional pigmentation, which indicates that other genes may modify the OCA phenotype. Sequence variation in the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene is associated with red hair in the normal population, but red hair is unusual in OCA. We identified eight probands with OCA who had red hair at birth. Mutations in the P gene were responsible for classic phenotype of oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) in all eight, and mutations in the MC1R gene were responsible for the red (rather than yellow/blond) hair in the six of eight who continued to have red hair after birth. This is the first demonstration of a gene modifying the OCA phenotype in humans.

[PMID: 21108681]
Melanocortin receptor 1 (MC1R) and agouti signaling protein (ASIP) are two major genes affecting coat color phenotypes in mammals, and inactivation mutations in the MC1R gene are responsible for red coat color in European pig breeds. Conversely, the gain-of-function ASIP mutations block MC1R signaling and lead to the production of red pheomelanin. Chinese Tibetan pigs have three types of coat color phenotypes, including brownish red, solid black and black with patches of brownish red and white. Herein, we investigated variations of the MC1R and ASIP genes in Tibetan pigs. The results showed that the brownish red Tibet pig had the dominant black MC1R allele (E(D1)). No loss-of-function mutation in MC1R responsible for red coat color in European breeds was observed in this breed. No causal mutation for the red coat color phenotype was found in the coding sequence of the ASIP gene. A novel missense mutation c.157G > A was firstly identified in exon 2 of ASIP, which was further genotyped in 285 pigs from five Chinese breeds and three Western breeds having different coat color phenotypes. Nearly all pigs were GG homozygotes. In conclusion, no functional variant responsible for brownish red coloration was found in the coding region of MC1R and ASIP in Tibetan pigs.

[PMID: 11254446]
Melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene variants are associated with fair skin and red hair and, independently of these, with cutaneous malignant melanoma. The association of MC1R gene variants with nonmelanoma skin cancer is largely unknown. A total of 838 subjects were included in the present study: 453 patients with nonmelanoma skin cancer and 385 subjects with no skin cancer. The coding sequence of the human MC1R gene was tested using single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis followed by sequencing of unknown variants. Risk of skin cancer dependent on the various MC1R gene variants was estimated using the exposure odds ratio. We investigated whether subjects with MC1R variant alleles were at increased risk of developing nonmelanoma skin cancer and, if so, whether this increased risk was mediated by fair skin and red hair. A total of 27 MC1R gene variants were found. The number of carriers of one, two, or three MC1R gene variants was 379 (45.2%), 208 (24.8%), and 7 (0.9%), respectively. A strong association between MC1R gene variants and fair skin and red hair was established, especially the variants Arg151Cys and Arg160Trp (P < .0001). Carriers of two variant alleles were at increased risk for developing cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (odds ratio 3.77; 95% confidence interval [CI] 2.11-6.78), nodular basal cell carcinoma (odds ratio 2.26; 95% CI 1.45-3.52), and superficial multifocal basal cell carcinoma (odds ratio 3.43; 95% CI 1.92-6.15), compared with carriers of two wild-type alleles. Carriers of one variant allele had half the risk. The highest relative risks of nonmelanoma skin cancer were found in carriers of the Asp84Glu, His260Pro, and Asp294His variant alleles, and the risk was only slightly lower for carriers of the Val60Leu, Val92Met, Arg142His, Arg151Cys, and Arg160Trp variant alleles. When subjects were stratified by skin type and hair color, analysis showed that these factors did not materially change the relative risks. These findings indicate that MC1R gene variants are important independent risk factors for nonmelanoma skin cancer.

[PMID: 11549109]
To determine whether the Agouti Signalling Protein (ASP) gene is associated with skin and hair coloration in humans, the complete coding region of ASP was screened for polymorphisms. Analysis of ASP in Caucasian, African-American, Spanish Basque, Hispanic, Apache and Australian Aboriginal populations revealed no amino acid substitutions. A single polymorphism in the 3' untranslated region occurred at a frequency of 0.2 in African-Americans. Variants of the Melanocortin 1 Receptor (MC1R) gene have been found to be associated with red hair and fair skin in humans. Red hair individuals are usually compound heterozygotes or homozygous for one of a number of MC1R polymorphisms associated with red hair. Some individuals however are heterozygous for only one of these polymorphisms and dizygotic twins can be concordant for MC1R variants but discordant for hair colour. A recent study has also identified rare redheads carrying no MC1R variants indicating that polymorphisms of the human MC1R gene are required but not sufficient for the red hair phenotype. To address the question of whether ASP also contributes to the red hair phenotype, individuals previously identified as having unexpected MC1R genotypes were screened for polymorphisms at the ASP locus. No polymorphisms were found in any of these individuals. Results indicate that the human ASP gene is unlikely to function in normal human pigmentation in the same way as MC1R.