[PMID: 24778561]
In this study, we assessed the feasibility of fetal RhD genotyping by analysis of cell-free fetal DNA(cffDNA) extracted from plasma samples of Rhesus (Rh) D-negative pregnant women by using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Fetal genotyping was performed on 30 RhD-negative women between 9 and 39 weeks of gestation who were referred to us for invasive testing [amniocentesis/chorionic villi sampling (CVS)]. The fetal RHD genotype was determined based on real-time PCR method. Exons 7 and 10 of the RHD and SRY genes were targeted. Among the pregnant women, 12 were carrying male and 17 were carrying female fetuses. Out of 29 pregnant women, 21 had RhD-positive and nine had RhD-negative fetuses. One sample (case 12, whose blood group was found to be AB Rh [+]) was excluded due to controversial results from repeated serological analyses. All prenatal results were in concordance with postnatal RhD status and fetal sex without false- positive or -negative results. Performing real-time PCR on cffDNA showed accurate, efficient and reliable results, allowing rapid and high throughput non invasive determination of fetal sex and RhD status in clinical samples.

[PMID: 25380024]
Non-invasive fetal Rhesus (Rh) D genotyping, using cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in the maternal blood, allows targeted antenatal anti-RhD prophylaxis in unsensitized RhD-negative pregnant women. The purpose of this study was to determine the cost and benefit of this approach as compared to routine antenatal anti-RhD prophylaxis for all unsensitized RhD-negative pregnant women, as is the current policy in the province of Alberta, Canada. This study was a decision analysis based on a theoretical population representing the total number of pregnancies in Alberta over a 1-year period (n = 69 286). A decision tree was created that outlined targeted prophylaxis for unsensitized RhD-negative pregnant women screened for cffDNA (targeted group) vs routine prophylaxis for all unsensitized RhD-negative pregnant women (routine group). Probabilities at each decision point and costs associated with each resource were calculated from local clinical and administrative data. Outcomes measured were cost, number of women sensitized and doses of Rh immunoglobulin (RhIG) administered. The estimated cost per pregnancy for the routine group was 71.43 compared with 67.20 Canadian dollars in the targeted group. The sensitization rates per RhD-negative pregnancy were equal, at 0.0012, for the current and targeted programs. Implementing targeted antenatal anti-RhD prophylaxis would save 4072 doses (20.1%) of RhIG over a 1-year period in Alberta when compared to the current program. These data support the feasibility of a targeted antenatal anti-RhD prophylaxis program, at a lower cost than that of the existing routine prophylaxis program, with no increased risk of sensitization.

[PMID: 21244652]
Postnatal and antenatal anti-D prophylaxis have dramatically reduced maternal sensitisations and cases of rhesus disease in babies born to women with RhD negative blood group. Recent scientific advances mean that non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD), based on the presence of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma, could be used to target prophylaxis on "at risk" pregnancies where the fetus is RhD positive. This paper provides the first assessment of cost-effectiveness of NIPD-targeted prophylaxis compared to current policies. We conducted an economic analysis of NIPD implementation in England and Wales. Two scenarios were considered. Scenario 1 assumed that NIPD will be only used to target antenatal prophylaxis with serology tests continuing to direct post-delivery prophylaxis. In Scenario 2, NIPD would also displace postnatal serology testing if an RhD negative fetus was identified. Costs were estimated from the provider's perspective for both scenarios together with a threshold royalty fee per test. Incremental costs were compared with clinical implications. The basic cost of an NIPD in-house test is £16.25 per sample (excluding royalty fee). The two-dose antenatal prophylaxis policy recommended by NICE is estimated to cost the NHS £3.37 million each year. The estimated threshold royalty fee is £2.18 and £8.83 for Scenarios 1 and 2 respectively. At a £2.00 royalty fee, mass NIPD testing would produce no saving for Scenario 1 and £507,154 per annum for Scenario 2. Incremental cost-effectiveness analysis indicates that, at a test sensitivity of 99.7% and this royalty fee, NIPD testing in Scenario 2 will generate one additional sensitisation for every £9,190 saved. If a single-dose prophylaxis policy were implemented nationally, as recently recommended by NICE, Scenario 2 savings would fall. Currently, NIPD testing to target anti-D prophylaxis is unlikely to be sufficiently cost-effective to warrant its large scale introduction in England and Wales. Only minor savings are calculated and, balanced against this, the predicted increase in maternal sensitisations may be unacceptably high. Reliability of NIPD assays still needs to be demonstrated rigorously in different ethnic minority populations. First trimester testing is unlikely to alter this picture significantly although other emerging technologies may.

[PMID: 23024794]
Analysis of cell free fetal (cff) DNA in maternal plasma is used routinely for non invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of fetal sex determination, fetal rhesus D status and some single gene disorders. True positive results rely on detection of the fetal target being analysed. No amplification of the target may be interpreted either as a true negative result or a false negative result due to the absence or very low levels of cffDNA. The hypermethylated RASSF1A promoter has been reported as a universal fetal marker to confirm the presence of cffDNA. Using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes hypomethylated maternal sequences are digested leaving hypermethylated fetal sequences detectable. Complete digestion of maternal sequences is required to eliminate false positive results. cfDNA was extracted from maternal plasma (n = 90) and digested with methylation-sensitive and insensitive restriction enzymes. Analysis of RASSF1A, SRY and DYS14 was performed by real-time PCR. Hypermethylated RASSF1A was amplified for 79 samples (88%) indicating the presence of cffDNA. SRY real time PCR results and fetal sex at delivery were 100% accurate. Eleven samples (12%) had no detectable hypermethylated RASSF1A and 10 of these (91%) had gestational ages less than 7 weeks 2 days. Six of these samples were male at delivery, five had inconclusive results for SRY analysis and one sample had no amplifiable SRY. Use of this assay for the detection of hypermethylated RASSF1A as a universal fetal marker has the potential to improve the diagnostic reliability of NIPD for fetal sex determination and single gene disorders.

[PMID: 10985940]
Research in developing effective and accurate methods for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis has focused on two main techniques: the retrieval of trophoblast cells from the cervix and the enrichment of fetal erythroblasts from the blood of pregnant women. The isolation of fetal cells by both approaches has permitted the identification of fetal aneuploidies by the use of fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) with appropriate probes, as well as fetal single gene disorders by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In the latter instance, it has been shown that in order to attain the high degree of specificity required for prenatal diagnosis, it is necessary to analyse single fetal cells isolated by micromanipulation. This practice has permitted the successful characterization of fetal rhesus status, haemoglobinopathies, Duchenné's muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy, amongst others.Further developments include investigations into whether the diagnostic potential of fetal cells retrieved by either method can be expanded by the possible culturing of such cells, as well as the possibility of performing successive rounds of FISH and PCR by the recycling of isolated fetal cells.A novel observation that our group has made is that the traffic of fetal cells is enhanced in pregnancies affected by the pregnancy related disorder, pre-eclampsia. Our subsequent investigations have shown that this elevation in fetal cell traffic may serve as an early marker for those pregnancies at risk for this disorder.A very recent exciting discovery has been that free extracellular fetal DNA can be detected in the plasma and serum of pregnant women, which may permit the rapid and accurate detection of uniquely fetal loci, such as the fetal rhesus D gene in rhesus D negative pregnant women.

[PMID: 24204719]
Non-invasive prenatal testing of cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plasma can predict the fetal RhD type in D negative pregnant women. In Denmark, routine antenatal screening for the fetal RhD gene (RHD) directs the administration of antenatal anti-D prophylaxis only to women who carry an RhD positive fetus. Prophylaxis reduces the risk of immunization that may lead to hemolytic disease of the fetus and the newborn. The reliability of predicting the fetal RhD type depends on pre-analytical factors and assay sensitivity. We evaluated the testing setup in the Capital Region of Denmark, based on data from routine antenatal RHD screening. Blood samples were drawn at gestational age 25 weeks. DNA extracted from 1 mL of plasma was analyzed for fetal RHD using a duplex method for exon 7/10. We investigated the effect of blood sample transportation time (n = 110) and ambient outdoor temperatures (n = 1539) on the levels of cffDNA and total DNA. We compared two different quantification methods, the delta Ct method and a universal standard curve. PCR pipetting was compared on two systems (n = 104). The cffDNA level was unaffected by blood sample transportation for up to 9 days and by ambient outdoor temperatures ranging from -10 °C to 28 °C during transport. The universal standard curve was applicable for cffDNA quantification. Identical levels of cffDNA were observed using the two automated PCR pipetting systems. We detected a mean of 100 fetal DNA copies/mL at a median gestational age of 25 weeks (range 10-39, n = 1317). The setup for real-time PCR-based, non-invasive prenatal testing of cffDNA in the Capital Region of Denmark is very robust. Our findings regarding the transportation of blood samples demonstrate the high stability of cffDNA. The applicability of a universal standard curve facilitates easy cffDNA quantification.

[PMID: 22386678]
Fetal rhesus D (RhD) status determination using circulating cell-free fetal DNA from maternal plasma or serum is now recognized in Europe as a reliable and useful tool. A few countries are presently using this test in their management policy of rhesus D negative patients. The objective of this study is to evaluate the impact of this test on the costs of managing RhD-negative pregnant women, whether or not they are allo-immunized. A prospective follow-up of rhesus D negative women during their pregnancy was performed in three French obstetric departments. Non-invasive fetal RhD genotyping was performed in the first trimester and pregnancies were followed The costs of all procedures (biological tests and medication) associated with patient management in relation to their RhD-negative status were calculated according to different management options. A comprehensive follow-up, including medical and biological monitoring, was obtained for 99 of the 101 patients included in the study. Patients were separated into two groups: the "Adverse Event" group (AE, n=23) for which a potentially sensitizing event occurred and the "No Adverse Event" group (NAE, n=76). Fetal RhD status was accurately determined in all cases. The mean cost per patient was estimated at 237€ (range: 115-644) with differences observed depending on the group, notably 331€ (range: 236-644) for the AE group and 208€ (range: 115-366) for the NAE group. Various cost simulations were performed according to various policies of allo-immunization antenatal prophylaxis. Variations ranged from +36.2% to +105.3%. This study demonstrates that fetal RhD genotyping early during pregnancy is not an effective cost-reduction strategy whether or not antenatal prophylaxis is given. The economic issues could, however, be overcome by the fact that there is a major clinical benefit to offering the test systematically to all RhD-negative pregnant women while avoiding unnecessary testing and immunoglobulin injections.

[PMID: 26152007]
Anti-D immunoglobulin is applied to all pregnant women having RhD incompatibility to prevent hemolytic disease of the newborn. The aim of this study is to determine fetal RhD status in the Rh incompatible pregnancies with an non-invasive technique; free fetal DNA isolation from maternal circulation. In the case of Rh incompatibility especially with a history of previous fetal anemia, it can be beneficial to know Rh status antenatally in terms of monitoring fetuses with Rh positive [RhD(+)] status consciously. Total free DNA was isolated in 50 Rh negative [RhD(-)] pregnant women, who had RhD alloimmunisation with their husbands. The gene in isolated DNA was investigated with TagMan prob and real time PCR by using primers belonging to exon 7 of the RhD gene. The authors analyzed 50 RhD(-) women by using quantitative real time PCR technique. Five of them were RhD(-) and the rest of them were found to be RhD(+). After birth one of the infants who were analyzed as RhD(+) were found to be RhD(-). The detection of fetal RhD status by using a non-invasive method from maternal circulation was found to be possible. Assessing fetal RhD status non-invasively by using free fetal DNA in maternal blood will be cost-efficient, avoiding unnecessary indirect Coombs test and unnecessary Rhogam applications that is used in RH incompatible pregnancies. This study will throw a fresh light on prenatal diagnosis.

[PMID: 26140187]
Discovery of short cell free fetal DNA (cffDNA) fragments in maternal plasma has created major changes in the field of prenatal diagnosis. The use of cffDNA to set up noninvasive prenatal test is limited due to the low concentration of fetal DNA in maternal plasma therefore, employing a high efficiency extraction method leads to more accurate results. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficiency of Triton/Heat/Phenol (THP) protocol in comparison with the QIAamp DNA Blood mini Kit for cffDNA purification. In order to evaluate the efficiency of THP protocol, DNA of Rhesus D (RhD) negative pregnant women's plasma was collected, then real-time PCR for RHD exon 7 was performed. The Ct value data of real time PCR obtained by two different methods were compared and after delivery serology test on cord blood was done to validate the real time PCR results. The results indicated significant differences between two extraction methods (p=0.001). The mean±SD of Ct-value using THP protocol was 33.8±1.6 and 36.1±2.47 using QIAamp DNA Blood mini Kit. Our finding demonstrated that THP protocol was more effective than the QIAamp DNA Blood mini Kits for cffDNA extraction and lead to decrease the false negative results.

[PMID: 24786470]
Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis and testing by analysis of cell-free DNA in the maternal circulation is a rapidly evolving field. Current clinical applications include fetal sex determination, fetal rhesus D determination, the diagnosis of some single gene disorders, and a highly accurate screening test for aneuploidies. In the future it is likely to be used for the diagnosis of an increasing range of monogenic disorders, and may even be used to profile entire fetal genomes. The introduction of these tests into clinical practice brings clear benefits but also poses several ethical, social and service delivery challenges. Here, we discuss the current clinical applications, discuss some of the technical and ethical challenges, and look to what the future might bring as technology continues to evolve.

[PMID: 20938838]
The discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal plasma of pregnant women has facilitated the development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD). This has been successfully implemented in diagnostic laboratories for Rhesus typing and fetal sex determination for X-linked disorders and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) from 7 weeks gestation. Using real-time PCR, fluorescently labelled target gene specific probes can identify and quantify low copy number fetal-specific sequences in a high background of maternal DNA in the cell-free DNA extracted from maternal plasma.NIPD to detect specific fetal mutations in single gene disorders, currently by standard PCR techniques, can only be undertaken for paternally derived or de novo mutations because of the background maternal DNA. For routine use, this testing is limited by the large amounts of cell-free maternal DNA in the sample, the lack of universal fetal markers, and appropriate reference materials.

[PMID: 21075065]
Prenatal diagnosis is an important part of obstetrics care. In the current prenatal programmes, definitive diagnosis of fetal genetic or chromosomal conditions is conducted through fetal sampling by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. To obviate the risks of fetal miscarriage that are associated with the invasive sampling procedures, we have been developing non-invasive prenatal diagnostic tests based on cell-free fetal DNA analysis from maternal plasma. To date, fetal sex and rhesus D status determination by circulating fetal DNA analysis is performed clinically in many centres. Strategies for the non-invasive diagnosis of monogenic diseases have been developed. Accurate detection of fetal trisomy 21 by next-generation sequencing has been achieved. Many of the non-invasive prenatal tests could be introduced to the clinics as soon as cost-effective and high throughput protocols are developed.

[PMID: 18751991]
To examine the potential high throughput capability and efficiency of an automated DNA extraction system in combination with mass spectrometry for the non-invasive determination of the foetal Rhesus D status. A total of 178 maternal plasma samples from RHD-negative pregnant women were examined, from which DNA was extracted using the automated Roche MagNA Pure system. Presence of the foetal RHD gene was detected by PCR for RHD exon 7 and subsequent analysis using the Sequenom MassArray mass spectrometric system. We determined that as little as 15 pg of RHD-positive genomic DNA could be detected in a background of 585 pg of RHD-negative genomic DNA. The analysis of the clinical samples yielded a sensitivity and specificity of 96.1 and 96.1%, respectively. Our study indicated that automated DNA extraction in combination with mass spectrometry permits the determination of foetal Rhesus D genotype with an accuracy comparable to the current approaches using real-time PCR.

[PMID: 26259290]
DNA sequencing technologies have advanced at an exponential rate in recent years: the first human genome was sequenced in 2001 after many years of effort by dozens of international laboratories at a cost of tens of millions of dollars, while in 2013 a genome can be sequenced within 24 hours for a few hundred dollars (exome sequencing takes only a few hours). More and more hospital laboratories are acquiring new high-throughput sequencing devices ("next-generation sequencers", NGS), allowing them to analyze tens or hundreds of genes, or even the entire exome. This is having a major impact on medical concepts and practices, especially with respect to genetics and oncology. This ability to search for mutations simultaneously in a large number of genes is finding applications in the diagnosis of Mendelian diseases (including at birth), routine screening for heterozygotes, and pre-conception diagnosis. NGS is now sufficiently sensitive to analyze circulating fetal DNA in maternal blood (cell-free fetal DNA, cffDNA), enabling applications such as non invasive diagnosis of fetal sex (and X-linked diseases), fetal rhesus among rhesus-negative women, trisomy and, in the near future, Mendelian mutations. Data on multifactorial diseases are still preliminary, but it should soon be possible to identify "strong" factors of genetic predisposition that have so far been beyond the scope of genome-wide association studies (GWAS). In the field of constitutional oncogenetics, NGS can also be used for simultaneous analysis of genes involved in " hereditary " cancers (21 breast cancer genes, 6 colon cancer genes, etc.). More generally, NGS can identify all genomic abnormalities (deletions, translocations, mutations) in a given malignant tissue (hemopathy or solid tumor), and has the potential to distinguish between important mutations (those that drive tumor progression) from " bystander " or accessory mutations, and also to identify "druggable" mutations amenable to targeted therapies (e.g. imatinib and Bcr/Abl rearrangement; verumafemib and the BRAF V600E mutation). Systematic sequencing of all the genes involved in drug metabolism and responsiveness will lead to individualized pharmacogenetics. Finally, sequencing of the tumoral and constitutional genomes, identfication of somatic mutations, and detection of pharmacogenetic variants will open up the era of personalized medicine. The first results of these targeted therapeutic indications show a gain in the duration of remission and survival, although the cost-effectiveness of these approaches remains to be determined. Finally, this huge capacity for genome sequencing raises a number of regulatory and ethical issues.

[PMID: 21576416]
To design a protocol for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal Rhesus D (RhD) status. A total of 112 single lymphocytes were used to test the efficiency of the assay. The protocol was validated using blood samples from 84 RhD-negative pregnant women at 7-24 weeks of gestation. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) was enzymatically digested using AciI and analyzed by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) that allowed simultaneous amplification of RHD exons 7 and 10, SRY, RASFF1A and ACTB. On the one genome-equivalent level, the efficiency of the protocol was ≥ 94.6% for each locus amplified. Conclusive results from the first set of PCRs were obtained for 79 cases with one false-positive. In five cases the analysis was repeated and, subsequently, all cases were accurately diagnosed. The proposed protocol is rapid, applicable in most molecular diagnostic laboratories and provides the basis for non-invasive examination of fetal RhD with 96.7% specificity and 100% sensitivity.

[PMID: 21686347]
Alloimmunisation against the RhD red cell surface antigen was the most common cause of haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn until recently. Maternal plasma has now almost replaced fetal cells obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villous sampling, as the source of fetal DNA, hence eliminating the need for invasive sampling procedures. The fetal rhesus typing was done from maternal plasma in a woman in her fourth pregnancy, though she was isoimmunised in her previous pregnancies and needed invasive tests like cordocentesis in the past. The fetus was diagnosed to be rhesus negative from maternal plasma and that avoided the need for amniocentesis or cordocentesis.

[PMID: 23072857]
The collection of fetal genetic materials is required for the prenatal diagnosis of fetal genetic diseases. The conventional methods for sampling fetal genetic materials, such as amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling, are invasive in nature and are associated with a risk of fetal miscarriage. For decades, scientists had been pursuing studies with goals to develop non-invasive methods for prenatal diagnosis. In 1997, the existence of fetal derived cell-free DNA molecules in plasma of pregnant women was first demonstrated. This finding provided a new source of fetal genetic material that could be obtained safely through the collection of a maternal blood sample and provided a new avenue for the development of non-invasive prenatal diagnostic tests. Now 15 years later, the diagnostic potential of circulating fetal DNA analysis has been realized. Fruitful research efforts have resulted in the clinical implementation of a number of non-invasive prenatal tests based on maternal plasma DNA analysis and included tests for fetal sex assessment, fetal rhesus D blood group genotyping and fetal chromosomal aneuploidy detection. Most recently, research groups have succeeded in decoding the entire fetal genome from maternal plasma DNA analysis which paved the way for the achievement of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of many single gene diseases. A paradigm shift in the practice of prenatal diagnosis has begun.

[PMID: 15980640]
In this prospective study, we assessed the feasibility of foetal RHD genotyping by analysis of DNA extracted from plasma samples of Rhesus (Rh) D-negative pregnant women using real-time PCR and primers and probes targeted toward exon 7 and 10 of RHD gene. We analysed 24 RhD-negative pregnant woman and 4 patients with weak D phenotypes at a gestational age ranging from 11th to 38th week of gestation and correlated the results with serological analysis of cord blood after the delivery. Non-invasive prenatal foetal RHD exon 7 genotyping analyses of maternal plasma samples was in complete concordance with the serological analysis of cord blood in all 24 RhD-negative pregnant women delivering 12 RhD-positive and 12 RhD-negative newborns. RHD exon-10-specific PCR amplicons were not detected in 2 out of 12 studied plasma samples from women bearing RhD-positive foetus, despite the positive amplification in RHD exon 7 region observed in all cases. In 1 case red cell serology of cord blood revealed that the mother had D-C-E-c+e+ C(w)- and the infant D+C-E-c+e+ C(w)+ phenotypes. RhD exon 10 real-time PCR analysis of cord blood was also negative. These findings may reflect that DC(w)- paternally inherited haplotype probably possesses no RHD exon 10. In another case no cord blood sample has been available for additional studies. The specificity of both RHD exon 7 and 10 systems approached 100% since no RhD-positive signals were detected in women currently pregnant with RhD-negative foetus (n = 8). Using real-time PCR and DNA isolated from maternal plasma, we easily differentiated pregnant woman whose RBCs had a weak D phenotype (n = 4) from truly RhD-negative patients since the threshold cycle (C(T)) for RHD exon 10 or 7 amplicons reached nearly the same value like C(T) for control beta-globin gene amplicons detecting the total DNA present in maternal plasma. However in these cases foetal RhD status cannot be determined. Prediction offoetal RhD status from maternal plasma is highly accurate and enables implementation into clinical routine. We suggest that safe non-invasive prenatal foetal RHD genotyping using maternal plasma should involve the amplification of at least two RHD-specific products.

[PMID: 10519426]
To develop a non-invasive method for determining fetal RhD status in order to provide improved care for women most at risk. A prospective study. Fetal erythroblasts were enriched from the peripheral circulation of 96 RhD negative women with pregnancies at various stages in gestation using discontinuous density gradients. Amplification of RhD-specific mRNAs was carried out by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. RNA, rather than DNA, was selected for amplification because it rarely contaminates samples, thus resulting in fewer false positives; moreover, its presence in multiple copies per cell should enhance the sensitivity of the assay, resulting in fewer false negatives. The study was prospective, relying on postnatal serological confirmation of RhD phenotype. The assay was 75% accurate at predicting fetal RhD status, comparing favourably with standard genomic DNA-based assays. However, we found that accuracy dropped from 85% (29/34) in the third trimester of pregnancy, to 82% (32/39) in the second and 48% (11/23) in the first trimester. Discordant data were due to false negatives in the majority (78%) of cases. We suggest that reverse transcription may be a useful and perhaps more sensitive alternative to standard genomic polymerase chain reaction in the majority of cases. However, under certain circumstances the absence or reduction of fetal erythroblasts or possibly RhD mRNA in some preparations may compromise the accuracy of the assay.

[PMID: 20482298]
Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDN) is caused primarily by feto-maternal RhD incompatibility. Although all RhD negative pregnant women undergo routine antenatal RhD prophylaxis at 28 weeks of gestation, and following delivery if the newborn is RhD positive, HDN has not been eradicated. Here, we investigated fetal Rhesus D (RHD) genotype in maternal plasma during the first trimester of pregnancy in our area. Plasma samples were obtained from 111 RhD negative pregnant women, between 9 and 13 weeks of gestation. DNA from maternal plasma containing cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) was analyzed by quantitative PCR (qPCR) to detect RHD exons 5 and 7. A beta-globin (HBB) sequence was quantified to estimate total DNA concentration. qPCR results were compared with newborn RhD determined in cord blood serum. The influence of several gestational parameters on DNA concentration was also analyzed. The specificity and sensitivity of the assay was 93% and 100%, respectively, with 97% diagnostic accuracy. Cell-free DNA concentrations during the first trimester of pregnancy were not affected by the gestational parameters studied (free-beta fraction of human chorionic gonadotropin and pregnancy-associated plasma protein A concentrations, fetal sex, materno-fetal ABO blood group incompatibility, maternal weight and gestational age). Non-invasive fetal RHD genotyping during the first trimester of pregnancy can be determined with a high specificity, thus representing a valuable tool for improving the management of RhD negative pregnant women. As a high percentage of pregnant women participate in the routine first trimester combined screening program for aneuploidies, the fetal RHD study could be of immediate implementation, since the same blood collection could be used.

[PMID: 18945714]
Cell-free fetal nucleic acids (cffNA) can be detected in the maternal circulation during pregnancy, potentially offering an excellent method for early non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of the genetic status of a fetus. Using molecular techniques, fetal DNA and RNA can be detected from 5 weeks gestation and are rapidly cleared from the circulation following birth. We searched PubMed systematically using keywords free fetal DNA and NIPD. Reference lists from relevant papers were also searched to ensure comprehensive coverage of the area. Cell-free fetal DNA comprises only 3-6% of the total circulating cell-free DNA, therefore diagnoses are primarily limited to those caused by paternally inherited sequences as well as conditions that can be inferred by the unique gene expression patterns in the fetus and placenta. Broadly, the potential applications of this technology fall into two categories: first, high genetic risk families with inheritable monogenic diseases, including sex determination in cases at risk of X-linked diseases and detection of specific paternally inherited single gene disorders; and second, routine antenatal care offered to all pregnant women, including prenatal screening/diagnosis for aneuploidy, particularly Down syndrome (DS), and diagnosis of Rhesus factor status in RhD negative women. Already sex determination and Rhesus factor diagnosis are nearing translation into clinical practice for high-risk individuals. The analysis of cffNA may allow NIPD for a variety of genetic conditions and may in future form part of national antenatal screening programmes for DS and other common genetic disorders.