[PMID: 33571591]
Karyopherins mediate the macromolecular transport between the cytoplasm and the nucleus and participate in cancer progression. However, the role and mechanism of importin-11 (IPO11), a member of the karyopherin family, in glioma progression remain undefined. Effects of IPO11 on glioma progression were detected using CCK-8, colony formation assay, flow cytometry analysis, caspase-3 activity assay, and Transwell invasion assay. Western blot analysis was used to detect the expression of active caspase-3, active caspase-7, active caspase-9, N-cadherin, Vimentin, E-cadherin, β-catenin, and c-Myc. The activity of Wnt/β-catenin pathway was evaluated by the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) transcription factor reporter assay. Results showed that IPO11 knockdown inhibited proliferation and reduced colony number in glioma cells. IPO11 silencing promoted the apoptotic rate, increased expression levels of active caspase-3, caspase-7, and caspase-9, and enhanced caspase-3 activity. Moreover, IPO11 silencing inhibited glioma cell invasion by suppressing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Mechanistically, IPO11 knockdown inactivated the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. β-Catenin overexpression abolished the effects of IPO11 silencing on the proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion in glioma cells. Furthermore, IPO11 silencing blocked the malignant phenotypes and repressed the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in vivo. In conclusion, IPO11 knockdown suppressed the malignant phenotypes of glioma cells by inactivating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway.

[PMID: 21347375]
The Karyopherin (Kap) family of nuclear transport receptors enables trafficking of proteins to and from the nucleus in a precise, regulated manner. Individual members function in overlapping pathways, while simultaneously being very specific for their main cargoes. The details of this apparent contradiction and rules governing pathway preference remain to be further elucidated. S. cerevisiae Lhp1 is an abundant protein that functions as an RNA chaperone in a variety of biologically important processes. It localizes almost exclusively to the nucleus and is imported by Kap108. We show that mutation of 3 of the 275 residues in Lhp1 alters its import pathway to a Kap121-dependent process. This mutant does not retain wild-type function and is bound by several chaperones. We propose that Kap121 also acts as a chaperone, one that can act as a genetic buffer by transporting mutated proteins to the nucleus.

[PMID: 10385521]
Binding of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) to the promoter is the first and rate limiting step in the formation of transcriptional complexes. We show here that nuclear import of TBP is mediated by a new karyopherin (Kap) (importin) family member, Kap114p. Kap114p is localized to the cytoplasm and nucleus. A complex of Kap114p and TBP was detected in the cytosol and could be reconstituted using recombinant proteins, suggesting that the interaction was direct. Deletion of the KAP114 gene led to specific mislocalization of TBP to the cytoplasm. We also describe two other potential minor import pathways for TBP. Consistent with other Kaps, the dissociation of TBP from Kap114p is dependent on RanGTP. However, we could show that double stranded, TATA-containing DNA stimulates this RanGTP-mediated dissociation of TBP, and is necessary at lower RanGTP concentrations. This suggests a mechanism where, once in the nucleus, TBP is preferentially released from Kap114p at the promoter of genes to be transcribed. In this fashion Kap114p may play a role in the intranuclear targeting of TBP.

[PMID: 11777942]
We have identified a novel human karyopherin (Kap) beta family member that is related to human Crm1 and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein, Msn5p/Kap142p. Like other known transport receptors, this Kap binds specifically to RanGTP, interacts with nucleoporins, and shuttles between the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. We report that interleukin enhancer binding factor (ILF)3, a double-stranded RNA binding protein, associates with this Kap in a RanGTP-dependent manner and that its double-stranded RNA binding domain (dsRBD) is the limiting sequence required for this interaction. Importantly, the Kap interacts with dsRBDs found in several other proteins and binding is blocked by double-stranded RNA. We find that the dsRBD of ILF3 functions as a novel nuclear export sequence (NES) in intact cells, and its ability to serve as an NES is dependent on the expression of the Kap. In digitonin-permeabilized cells, the Kap but not Crm1 stimulated nuclear export of ILF3. Based on the ability of this Kap to mediate the export of dsRNA binding proteins, we named the protein exportin-5. We propose that exportin-5 is not an RNA export factor but instead participates in the regulated translocation of dsRBD proteins to the cytoplasm where they interact with target mRNAs.

[PMID: 34034774]
Karyopherin α-2 (KPNA2) is a member of karyopherin family, which is proved to be responsible for the import or export of cargo proteins. Studies have determined that KPNA2 is associated with the development and prognosis of various cancers, yet the role of KPNA2 in ovarian carcinoma and its potential molecular mechanisms remains unclear. The expression and prognosis of KPNA2 in ovarian cancer was investigated using GEPIA and Oncomine analyses. Mutations of KPNA2 in ovarian cancer were analyzed by cBioPortal database. The prognostic value of KPNA2 expression was evaluated by our own ovarian carcinoma samples using RT-qPCR. Subsequently, the cell growth, migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells were investigated by CCK-8 and transwell assay, respectively. The protein levels of KPNA2 and KIF4A were determined by western blot. We obtained the following important results. (1) KPNA2 and KIF4A wereoverexpressed in ovairan cancer tissues and cells. (2) Among patients with ovarian cancer, overexpressed KPNA2 was associated with lower survival rate. (3) Mutations (R197* and S140F) in KPNA2 will have some influences on protein structure, and then may cause protein function abnormal. (4) KPNA2 konckdown inhibited proliferation, migration, invasion, as well as the expression of KIF4A. KPNA2, as a tumorigenic gene in ovarian cancer, accelerated tumor progression by up-regulating KIF4A, suggesting that KPNA2 might be a hopeful indicator of treatment and poor prognosis.

[PMID: 33728352]
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the deadliest malignancies and is known for its high resistance and low response to treatment. Tumor immune evasion is a major stumbling block in designing effective anticancer therapeutic strategies. Karyopherin alpha 2 (KPNA2), a member of the nuclear transporter family, is elevated in multiple human cancers and accelerates carcinogenesis. However, the specific role of KPNA2 in PDAC remains unclear. In this study, we found that expression of KPNA2 was significantly upregulated in PDAC compared to adjacent nontumor tissue and its high expression was correlated with poor survival outcome by analyzing the GEO datasets. Similar KPNA2 expression pattern was also found in both human patient samples and KPC mouse models through IHC staining. Although KPNA2 knockdown failed to impair the vitality and migration ability of PDAC cells <i>in vitro</i>, the <i>in vivo</i> tumor growth was significantly impeded and the expression of immune checkpoint ligand PD-L1 was reduced by silencing KPNA2. Furthermore, we uncovered that KPNA2 modulated the expression of PD-L1 by mediating nuclear translocation of STAT3. Collectively, our data suggested that KPNA2 has the potential to serve as a promising biomarker for diagnosis in PDAC.

[PMID: 31487436]
Nuclear import of proteins relies on nuclear import receptors called importins/karyopherins (Kaps), whose functions were reported in yeasts, fungi, plants, and animal cells, including cell cycle control, morphogenesis, stress sensing/response, and also fungal pathogenecity. However, limited is known about the physiological function and regulatory mechanism of protein import in the rice-blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae. Here, we identified an ortholog of β-importin in M. oryzae encoded by an ortholog of KAP119 gene. Functional characterisation of this gene via reverse genetics revealed that it is required for vegetative growth, conidiation, melanin pigmentation, and pathogenicity of M. oryzae. The mokap119Δ mutant was also defective in formation of appressorium-like structure from hyphal tips. By affinity assay and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we identified potential MoKap119-interacting proteins and further verified that MoKap119 interacts with the cyclin-dependent kinase subunit MoCks1 and mediates its nuclear import. Transcriptional profiling indicated that MoKap119 may regulate transcription of infection-related genes via MoCks1 regulation of MoSom1. Overall, our findings provide a novel insight into the regulatory mechanism of M. oryzae pathogenesis likely by MoKap119-mediated nuclear import of the cyclin-dependent kinase subunit MoCks1.

[PMID: 17116750]
Many cargoes destined for nuclear import carry nuclear localization signals that are recognized by karyopherins (Kaps). We present methods to quantitate import rates and measure Kap and cargo concentrations in single yeast cells in vivo, providing new insights into import kinetics. By systematically manipulating the amounts, types, and affinities of Kaps and cargos, we show that import rates in vivo are simply governed by the concentrations of Kaps and their cargo and the affinity between them. These rates fit to a straightforward pump-leak model for the import process. Unexpectedly, we deduced that the main limiting factor for import is the poor ability of Kaps and cargos to find each other in the cytoplasm in a background of overwhelming nonspecific competition, rather than other more obvious candidates such as the nuclear pore complex and Ran. It is likely that most of every import round is taken up by Kaps and nuclear localization signals sampling other cytoplasmic proteins as they locate each other in the cytoplasm.

[PMID: 33482249]
Nuclear translocation of large proteins is mediated through specific protein carriers, collectively named karyopherins (importins, exportins and adaptor proteins). Cargo proteins are recognized by importins through specific motifs, known as nuclear localization signals (NLS). However, only the NLS recognized by importin α and transportin (M9 NLS) have been identified so far METHODS: An unsupervised in silico approach was used, followed by experimental validation. We identified the sequence EKRKI(E/R)(K/L/R/S/T) as an NLS signal for importin 7 recognition. This sequence was validated in the breast cancer cell line T47D, which expresses importin 7. Finally, we verified that importin 7-mediated nuclear protein transport is affected by cargo protein phosphorylation. The NLS sequence for importin 7 was identified and we propose this approach as an identification method of novel specific NLS sequences for β-karyopherin family members. Elucidating the complex relationships of the nuclear transporters and their cargo proteins may help in laying the foundation for the development of novel therapeutics, targeting specific importins, with an immediate translational impact.

[PMID: 32474299]
Several aggregation-prone RNA-binding proteins, including FUS, EWS, TAF15, hnRNP A1, hnRNP A2, and TDP-43, are mutated in neurodegenerative diseases. The nuclear-cytoplasmic distribution of these proteins is controlled by proteins in the karyopherin family of nuclear transport factors (Kaps). Recent studies have shown that Kaps not only transport these proteins but also inhibit their self-association/aggregation, acting as molecular chaperones. This chaperone activity is impaired for disease-causing mutants of the RNA-binding proteins. Here, we review physical data on the mechanisms of self-association of several disease-associated RNA-binding proteins, through liquid-liquid phase separation and amyloid fiber formation. In each case, we relate these data to biophysical, biochemical, and cell biological data on the inhibition of self-association by Kaps. Our analyses suggest that Kaps may be effective chaperones because they contain large surfaces with diverse physical properties that enable them to engage multiple different regions of their cargo proteins, blocking self-association.

[PMID: 21029754]
Proteins in the karyopherin-β family mediate the majority of macromolecular transport between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Eleven of the 19 known human karyopherin-βs and 10 of the 14S. cerevisiae karyopherin-βs mediate nuclear import through recognition of nuclear localization signals or NLSs in their cargos. This receptor-mediated process is essential to cellular viability as proteins are translated in the cytoplasm but many have functional roles in the nucleus. Many known karyopherin-β-cargo interactions were discovered through studies of the individual cargos rather than the karyopherins, and this information is thus widely scattered in the literature. We consolidate information about cargos that are directly recognized by import-karyopherin-βs and review common characteristics or lack thereof among cargos of different import pathways. Knowledge of karyopherin-β-cargo interactions is also critical for the development of nuclear import inhibitors and the understanding of their mechanisms of inhibition. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Regulation of Signaling and Cellular Fate through Modulation of Nuclear Protein Import.

[PMID: 33681296]
Transportin-1 (Trn1), also known as karyopherin-β2 (Kapβ2), is probably the best-characterized nuclear import receptor of the karyopherin-β family after Importin-β, but certain aspects of its functions in cells are still puzzling or are just recently emerging. Since the initial identification of Trn1 as the nuclear import receptor of hnRNP A1 ∼25 years ago, several molecular and structural studies have unveiled and refined our understanding of Trn1-mediated nuclear import. In particular, the understanding at a molecular level of the NLS recognition by Trn1 made a decisive step forward with the identification of a new class of NLSs called PY-NLSs, which constitute the best-characterized substrates of Trn1. Besides PY-NLSs, many Trn1 cargoes harbour NLSs that do not resemble the archetypical PY-NLS, which complicates the global understanding of cargo recognition by Trn1. Although PY-NLS recognition is well established and supported by several structures, the recognition of non-PY-NLSs by Trn1 is far less understood, but recent reports have started to shed light on the recognition of this type of NLSs. Aside from its principal and long-established activity as a nuclear import receptor, Trn1 was shown more recently to moonlight outside nuclear import. Trn1 has for instance been caught in participating in virus uncoating, ciliary transport and in modulating the phase separation properties of aggregation-prone proteins. Here, we focus on the structural and functional aspects of Trn1-mediated nuclear import, as well as on the moonlighting activities of Trn1.

[PMID: 33300986]
The transport of histones from the cytoplasm to the nucleus of the cell, through the nuclear membrane, is a cellular process that regulates the supply of new histones in the nucleus and is key for DNA replication and transcription. Nuclear import of histones is mediated by proteins of the karyopherin family of nuclear transport receptors. Karyopherins recognize their cargos through linear motifs known as nuclear localization/export sequences or through folded domains in the cargos. Karyopherins interact with nucleoporins, proteins that form the nuclear pore complex, to promote the translocation of their cargos into the nucleus. When binding to histones, karyopherins not only function as nuclear import receptors but also as chaperones, protecting histones from non-specific interactions in the cytoplasm, in the nuclear pore and possibly in the nucleus. Studies have also suggested that karyopherins might participate in histones deposition into nucleosomes. In this review we describe structural and biochemical studies from the last two decades on how karyopherins recognize and transport the core histone proteins H3, H4, H2A and H2B and the linker histone H1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, which karyopherin is the major nuclear import receptor for each of these histones, the oligomeric state of histones during nuclear import and the roles of post-translational modifications, histone-chaperones and RanGTP in regulating these nuclear import pathways.

[PMID: 26947076]
The karyopherin (Kap) family of nuclear transport factors facilitates macromolecular transport through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). The binding of Kaps to their cargos can also regulate, both temporally and spatially, the interactions of the cargo protein with interacting partners. Here, we show that the essential yeast Kap, Kap121, binds Dam1 and Duo1, components of the microtubule (MT)-associated Dam1 complex required for linking dynamic MT ends with kinetochores (KTs). Like mutations in the Dam1 complex, loss of Kap121 function compromises the formation of normal KT-MT attachments during mitosis. We show that the stability of the Dam1 complex in vivo is dependent on its association with Kap121. Furthermore, we show that the Kap121/Duo1 complex is maintained in the presence of RanGTP but Kap121 is released by the cooperative actions of RanGTP and tubulin. We propose that Kap121 stabilizes the Dam1 complex and participates in escorting it to spindle MTs.

[PMID: 22357553]
Nucleocytoplasmic transport occurs through the nuclear pore complex (NPC), which in yeast is a ~50 MDa complex consisting of ~30 different proteins. Small molecules can freely exchange through the NPC, but macromolecules larger than ~40 kDa must be aided across by transport factors, most of which belong to a related family of proteins termed karyopherins (Kaps). These transport factors bind to the disordered phenylalanine-glycine (FG) repeat domains in a family of NPC proteins termed FG nups, and this specific binding allows the transport factors to cross the NPC. However, we still know little in terms of the molecular and kinetic details regarding how this binding translates to selective passage of transport factors across the NPC. Here we show that the specific interactions between Kaps and FG nups are strongly modulated by the presence of a cellular milieu whose proteins appear to act as very weak competitors that nevertheless collectively can reduce Kap/FG nup affinities by several orders of magnitude. Without such modulation, the avidities between Kaps and FG nups measured in vitro are too tight to be compatible with the rapid transport kinetics observed in vivo. We modeled the multivalent interactions between the disordered repeat binding sites in the FG nups and multiple cognate binding sites on Kap, showing that they should indeed be sensitive to even weakly binding competitors; the introduction of such competition reduces the availability of these binding sites, dramatically lowering the avidity of their specific interactions and allowing rapid nuclear transport.

[PMID: 11309407]
The first step in the assembly of new chromatin is the cell cycle-regulated synthesis and nuclear import of core histones. The core histones include H2A and H2B, which are assembled into nucleosomes as heterodimers. We show here that the import of histone H2A and H2B is mediated by several members of the karyopherin (Kap; importin) family. An abundant complex of H2A, H2B, and Kap114p was detected in cytosol. In addition, two other Kaps, Kap121p and Kap123p, and the histone chaperone Nap1p were isolated with H2A and H2B. Nap1p is not necessary for the formation of the Kap114p-H2A/H2B complex or for import of H2A and H2B. We demonstrate that both histones contain a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) in the amino-terminal tail. Fusions of the NLSs to green fluorescent protein were specifically mislocalized to the cytoplasm in kap mutant strains. In addition, we detected a specific mislocalization in a kap95 temperature-sensitive strain, suggesting that this Kap is also involved in the import of H2A and H2B in vivo. Importantly, we show that Kap114p, Kap121p, and Kap95 interact directly with both histone NLSs and that RanGTP inhibits this association. These data suggest that the import of H2A and H2B is mediated by a network of Kaps, in which Kap114p may play the major role.

[PMID: 9391096]
The alpha- and beta-karyopherins (Kaps), also called importins, mediate the nuclear transport of proteins. All alpha-Kaps contain a central domain composed of eight approximately 40 amino acid, tandemly arranged, armadillo-like (Arm) repeats. The number and order of these repeats have not changed since the common origin of fungi, plants, and mammals. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the various alpha-Kaps fall into two groups, alpha1 and alpha2. Whereas animals encode both types, the yeast genome encodes only an alpha1-Kap. The beta-Kaps are characterized by 14-15 tandemly arranged HEAT motifs. We show that the Arm repeats of alpha-Kaps and the HEAT motifs of beta-Kaps are similar, suggesting that the alpha-Kaps and beta-Kaps (and for that matter, all Arm and HEAT repeat-containing proteins) are members of the same protein superfamily. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that there are at least three major groups of beta-Kaps, consistent with their proposed cargo specificities. We present a model in which an alpha-independent beta-Kap progenitor gave rise to the alpha-dependent beta-Kaps and the alpha-Kaps.

[PMID: 32023817]
In eukaryotic cells, nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of macromolecules is largely mediated by Karyopherin β/Importin (KPNβ or Impβ) nuclear transport factors, and they import and export cargo proteins or RNAs via the nuclear pores across the nuclear envelope, consequently effecting the cellular signal cascades in response to pathogen attack and environmental cues. Although achievements on understanding the roles of several <i>KPNβ</i>s have been obtained from model plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, comprehensive analysis of potato <i>KPNβ</i> gene family is yet to be elucidated. In our genome-wide identifications, a total of 13 <i>StKPNβ</i> (<i>Solanum tuberosum</i> KPNβ) genes were found in the genome of the doubled monoploid <i>S. tuberosum</i> Group Phureja DM1-3. Sequence alignment and conserved domain analysis suggested the presence of importin-β N-terminal domain (IBN_N, PF08310) or Exporin1-like domain (XpoI, PF08389) at N-terminus and HEAT motif at the C-terminal portion in most StKPNβs. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that members of StKPNβ could be classified into 16 subgroups in accordance with their homology to human KPNβs, which was also supported by exon-intron structure, consensus motifs, and domain compositions. RNA-Seq analysis and quantitative real-time PCR experiments revealed that, except <i>StKPNβ3d</i> and <i>StKPNβ4</i>, almost all <i>StKPNβ</i>s were ubiquitously expressed in all tissues analyzed, whereas transcriptional levels of several <i>StKPNβ</i>s were increased upon biotic/abiotic stress or phytohormone treatments, reflecting their potential roles in plant growth, development or stress responses. Furthermore, we demonstrated that silencing of <i>StKPNβ3a</i>, a SA- and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-inducible <i>KPNβ</i> genes led to increased susceptibility to environmental challenges, implying its crucial roles in plant adaption to abiotic stresses. Overall, our results provide molecular insights into <i>StKPNβ</i> gene family, which will serve as a strong foundation for further functional characterization and will facilitate potato breeding programs.

[PMID: 11735022]
Human karyopherin alpha2 (KPNA2), a member of the karyopherin alpha family, plays a key role in the nuclear import of proteins with a classical nuclear localization signal (NLS). KPNA2, as part of a karyopherin alpha-beta heterodimer, directly binds to the NLS of proteins and functions as an adaptor that binds NLS-containing proteins via karyopherin beta to the nuclear pore complex. The NLS protein-receptor complex is translocated through the pore by an energy-dependent mechanism. Recently, we have identified and mapped the gene for KPNA2 in close proximity to a translocation breakpoint within 17q23-q24 associated with Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS). Therefore, we considered KPNA2 as a positional candidate gene for this heterogeneous disorder. RSS is mainly characterized by pre- and postnatal growth retardation, lateral asymmetry, and other dysmorphic features. Here, we present the genomic organization of the human KPNA2 gene with 11 exons spanning approximately 10 kb on chromosome 17q23-q24. Screening for mutations within all exons and adjacent intronic sequences from 31 unrelated RSS patients revealed three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in exons 1, 5, and 7, and five SNPs in introns 1, 4 (2 SNPs), 8, and 9, respectively. No disease-related mutation was identified by comparing the sequence data of the RSS patients with their clinically normal parents and controls.

[PMID: 15367670]
In yeast there are at least 14 members of the beta-karyopherin protein family that govern the movement of a diverse set of cargoes between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Knowledge of the cargoes carried by each karyopherin and insight into the mechanisms of transport are fundamental to understanding constitutive and regulated transport and elucidating how they impact normal cellular functions. Here, we have focused on the identification of nuclear import cargoes for the essential yeast beta-karyopherin, Kap121p. Using an overlay blot assay and coimmunopurification studies, we have identified 30 putative Kap121p cargoes. Among these were Nop1p and Sof1p, two essential trans-acting protein factors required at the early stages of ribosome biogenesis. Characterization of the Kap121p-Nop1p and Kap121p-Sof1p interactions demonstrated that, in addition to lysine-rich nuclear localization signals (NLSs), Kap121p recognizes a unique class of signals distinguished by the abundance of arginine and glycine residues and consequently termed rg-NLSs. Kap104p is also known to recognize rg-NLSs, and here we show that it compensates for the loss of Kap121p function. Sof1p is also transported by Kap121p; however, its import can be mediated by a piggyback mechanism with Nop1p bridging the interaction between Sof1p and Kap121p. Together, our data elucidate additional levels of complexity in these nuclear transport pathways.

[PMID: 19117056]
The Karyopherin proteins are involved in nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking and are critical for protein and RNA subcellular localization. Recent studies suggest they are important in nuclear envelope component assembly, mitosis and replication. Since these are all critical cellular functions, alterations in the expression of the Karyopherins may have an impact on the biology of cancer cells. In this study, we examined the expression of the Karyopherins, Crm1, Karyopherin beta1 (Kpnbeta1) and Karyopherin alpha2 (Kpnalpha2), in cervical tissue and cell lines. The functional significance of these proteins to cancer cells was investigated using individual siRNAs to inhibit their expression. Microarrays, quantitative RT-PCR and immunofluorescence revealed significantly higher expression of Crm1, Kpnbeta1 and Kpnalpha2 in cervical cancer compared to normal tissue. Expression levels were similarly elevated in cervical cancer cell lines compared to normal cells, and in transformed epithelial and fibroblast cells. Inhibition of Crm1 and Kpnbeta1 in cancer cells significantly reduced cell proliferation, while Kpnalpha2 inhibition had no effect. Noncancer cells were unaffected by the inhibition of Crm1 and Kpnbeta1. The reduction in proliferation of cancer cells was associated with an increase in a subG1 population by cell cycle analysis and Caspase-3/7 assays revealed increased apoptosis. Crm1 and Kpnbeta1 siRNA-induced apoptosis was accompanied by an increase in the levels of growth inhibitory proteins, p53, p27, p21 and p18. Our results demonstrate that Crm1, Kpnbeta1 and Kpnalpha2 are overexpressed in cervical cancer and that inhibiting the expression of Crm1 and Kpnbeta1, not Kpnalpha2, induces cancer cell death, making Crm1 and Kpnbeta1 promising candidates as both biomarkers and potential anticancer therapeutic targets.