[PMID: 34553354]
5-year survival data from the KEYNOTE-024 trial confirm the sustained efficacy of immuno-oncologic monotherapy in patients with NSCLC with high PD-L1 expression (≥ 50 %). DUAL IMMUNOTHERAPY IN COMBINATION WITH CHEMOTHERAPY AS FIRST-LINE THERAPY FOR NSCLC:  Nivolumab plus impilimumab in combination with 2 cycles of platinum-containing chemotherapy improves survival in NSCLC patients. Entrectinib and larotrectinib with efficacy in NTRK fusion-positive NSCLC. Selpercatinib and pralsetinib with efficacy in RET fusion-positive NSCLC. Mobocertinib with efficacy in EGFRex20ins mutation of the EGFR gene. Sotorasib with efficacy in kRAS-G12C mutation of NSCLC. The nationwide network nNGM provides NSCLC patients with access to state-of-the-art molecular diagnostics and the latest treatment options.

[PMID: 33547148]
The KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor sotorasib continues to impress in non-small cell lung cancer: In the phase II CodeBreak 100 trial, the agent elicited responses in more than a third of patients and led to a median progression-free survival of almost 7 months. Based on these results, Amgen has filed for the drug's approval with the FDA and the European Medicines Agency.

[PMID: 34800654]
RAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene in human cancer. Scientists attempted for decades to target this protein or its pathways, however, all the attempts failed and RAS was labeled as "undruggable". With KRAS-G12C covalent inhibitors entering clinical trials, the myth of this "undruggable" RAS is fading away. In 2021, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of Sotorasib (Lumakras) for the treatment of adult patients with KRAS-G12C mutated locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC, following at least one prior systemic therapy. However, and as every other drug, KRAS-G12C inhibitors are facing intrinsic and acquired resistances. In order to overcome these resistances, researchers are now working on combination strategies. Furthermore, studies are currently ongoing to better elucidate the status of KRAS-G12C as a predictive and prognostic tool and to strengthen its role in the field of personalized medicine.

[PMID: 34504076]
The HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS genes are collectively mutated in a fifth of all human cancers. These mutations render RAS GTP-bound and active, constitutively binding effector proteins to promote signaling conducive to tumorigenic growth. To further elucidate how RAS oncoproteins signal, we mined RAS interactomes for potential vulnerabilities. Here we identify EFR3A, an adapter protein for the phosphatidylinositol kinase PI4KA, to preferentially bind oncogenic KRAS. Disrupting EFR3A or PI4KA reduces phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate, phosphatidylserine, and KRAS levels at the plasma membrane, as well as oncogenic signaling and tumorigenesis, phenotypes rescued by tethering PI4KA to the plasma membrane. Finally, we show that a selective PI4KA inhibitor augments the antineoplastic activity of the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor sotorasib, suggesting a clinical path to exploit this pathway. In sum, we have discovered a distinct KRAS signaling axis with actionable therapeutic potential for the treatment of KRAS-mutant cancers.

[PMID: 32955176]
No therapies for targeting <i>KRAS</i> mutations in cancer have been approved. The <i>KRAS</i> p.G12C mutation occurs in 13% of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) and in 1 to 3% of colorectal cancers and other cancers. Sotorasib is a small molecule that selectively and irreversibly targets KRAS<sup>G12C</sup>. We conducted a phase 1 trial of sotorasib in patients with advanced solid tumors harboring the <i>KRAS</i> p.G12C mutation. Patients received sotorasib orally once daily. The primary end point was safety. Key secondary end points were pharmacokinetics and objective response, as assessed according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1. A total of 129 patients (59 with NSCLC, 42 with colorectal cancer, and 28 with other tumors) were included in dose escalation and expansion cohorts. Patients had received a median of 3 (range, 0 to 11) previous lines of anticancer therapies for metastatic disease. No dose-limiting toxic effects or treatment-related deaths were observed. A total of 73 patients (56.6%) had treatment-related adverse events; 15 patients (11.6%) had grade 3 or 4 events. In the subgroup with NSCLC, 32.2% (19 patients) had a confirmed objective response (complete or partial response) and 88.1% (52 patients) had disease control (objective response or stable disease); the median progression-free survival was 6.3 months (range, 0.0+ to 14.9 [with + indicating that the value includes patient data that were censored at data cutoff]). In the subgroup with colorectal cancer, 7.1% (3 patients) had a confirmed response, and 73.8% (31 patients) had disease control; the median progression-free survival was 4.0 months (range, 0.0+ to 11.1+). Responses were also observed in patients with pancreatic, endometrial, and appendiceal cancers and melanoma. Sotorasib showed encouraging anticancer activity in patients with heavily pretreated advanced solid tumors harboring the <i>KRAS</i> p.G12C mutation. Grade 3 or 4 treatment-related toxic effects occurred in 11.6% of the patients. (Funded by Amgen and others; CodeBreaK100 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03600883.).

[PMID: 33466360]
KRAS is one of the most common human oncogenes, but concerted efforts to produce direct inhibitors have largely failed, earning KRAS the title of "undruggable". Recent efforts to produce subtype specific inhibitors have been more successful, and several KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitors have reached clinical trials, including adagrasib and sotorasib, which have shown early evidence of efficacy in patients. Lessons from other inhibitors of the RAS pathway suggest that the effect of these drugs will be limited in vivo by the development of drug resistance, and pre-clinical studies of G12C inhibitors have identified evidence of this. In this review we discuss the current evidence for G12C inhibitors, the mechanisms of resistance to G12C inhibitors and potential approaches to overcome them. We discuss possible targets of combination therapy, including SHP2, receptor tyrosine kinases, downstream effectors and PD1/PDL1, and review the ongoing clinical trials investigating these inhibitors.

[PMID: 34520956]
Kirsten rat sarcoma virus oncogene (KRAS) mutation accounts for approximately 85% of RAS-driven cancers, and participates in multiple signaling pathways and mediates cell proliferation, differentiation and metabolism. KRAS has been considered as an "undruggable" target due to the lack of effective direct inhibitors, although high frequency of KRAS mutations have been identified in multiple carcinomas in the past decades. Encouragingly, the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor AMG510 (sotorasib), which has been approved for treating NSCLC and CRC recently, makes directly targeting KRAS the most promising strategy for cancer therapy. To better understand the current state of KRAS inhibitors, this review summarizes the biological functions of KRAS, the structure-activity relationship studies of the small-molecule inhibitors that directly target KRAS, and highlights the therapeutic agents with improved selectivity, bioavailability and physicochemical properties. Furthermore, the combined medication that can enhance efficacy and overcome drug resistance of KRAS covalent inhibitors is also reviewed.

[PMID: 34004237]
Sotorasib is a first-in class KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> covalent inhibitor in clinical development for the treatment of tumors with the KRAS p.G12C mutation. In the nonclinical toxicology studies of sotorasib, the kidney was identified as a target organ of toxicity in the rat but not the dog. Renal toxicity was characterized by degeneration and necrosis of the proximal tubular epithelium localized to the outer stripe of the outer medulla (OSOM), which suggested that renal metabolism was involved. Here, we describe an in vivo mechanistic rat study designed to investigate the time course of the renal toxicity and sotorasib metabolites. Renal toxicity was dose- and time-dependent, restricted to the OSOM, and the morphologic features progressed from vacuolation and necrosis to regeneration of tubular epithelium. The renal toxicity correlated with increases in renal biomarkers of tubular injury. Using mass spectrometry and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, a strong temporal and spatial association between renal toxicity and mercapturate pathway metabolites was observed. The rat is reported to be particularly susceptible to the formation of nephrotoxic metabolites via this pathway. Taken together, the data presented here and the literature support the hypothesis that sotorasib-related renal toxicity is mediated by a toxic metabolite derived from the mercapturate and β-lyase pathway. Our understanding of the etiology of the rat specific renal toxicity informs the translational risk assessment for patients.

[PMID: 34776511]
Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide, and its treatment and outcomes have been dramatically revolutionised by targeted therapies. As the most frequently mutated oncogene, Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (KRAS) has attracted substantial attention. The understanding of KRAS is constantly being updated by numerous studies on KRAS in the initiation and progression of cancer diseases. However, KRAS has been deemed a challenging therapeutic target, even "undruggable", after drug-targeting efforts over the past four decades. Recently, there have been surprising advances in directly targeted drugs for KRAS, especially in KRAS (G12C) inhibitors, such as AMG510 (sotorasib) and MRTX849 (adagrasib), which have obtained encouraging results in clinical trials. Excitingly, AMG510 was the first drug-targeting KRAS (G12C) to be approved for clinical use this year. This review summarises the most recent understanding of fundamental aspects of KRAS, the relationship between the KRAS mutations and tumour immune evasion, and new progress in targeting KRAS, particularly KRAS (G12C). Moreover, the possible mechanisms of resistance to KRAS (G12C) inhibitors and possible combination therapies are summarised, with a view to providing the best regimen for individualised treatment with KRAS (G12C) inhibitors and achieving truly precise treatment.

[PMID: 33004338]
Evidence continues to grow that KRAS, once considered an "undruggable" target, can be targeted successfully in non-small cell lung cancer. In a phase I trial, the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor sotorasib elicited responses in about a third of patients with the disease and was generally well tolerated.

[PMID: 34607583]
Across a broad range of human cancers, gain-of-function mutations in RAS genes (HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS) lead to constitutive activity of oncoproteins responsible for tumorigenesis and cancer progression. The targeting of RAS with drugs is challenging because RAS lacks classic and tractable drug binding sites. Over the past 30 years, this perception has led to the pursuit of indirect routes for targeting RAS expression, processing, upstream regulators, or downstream effectors. After the discovery that the KRAS-G12C variant contains a druggable pocket below the switch-II loop region, it has become possible to design irreversible covalent inhibitors for the variant with improved potency, selectivity and bioavailability. Two such inhibitors, sotorasib (AMG 510) and adagrasib (MRTX849), were recently evaluated in phase I-III trials for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer with KRAS-G12C mutations, heralding a new era of precision oncology. In this review, we outline the mutations and functions of KRAS in human tumors and then analyze indirect and direct approaches to shut down the oncogenic KRAS network. Specifically, we discuss the mechanistic principles, clinical features, and strategies for overcoming primary or secondary resistance to KRAS-G12C blockade.

[PMID: 34200676]
Around 20% of all malignancies harbour activating mutations in RAS isoforms. Despite this, there is a deficiency of RAS-targeting agents licensed for therapeutic use. The picomolar affinity of RAS for GTP, and the lack of suitable pockets for high-affinity small-molecule binding, precluded effective therapies despite decades of research. Recently, characterisation of the biochemical properties of KRAS-G12C along with discovery of its 'switch-II pocket' have allowed development of effective mutant-specific inhibitors. Currently seven KRAS-G12C inhibitors are in clinical trials and sotorasib has become the first one to be granted FDA approval. Here, we discuss historical efforts to target RAS directly and approaches to target RAS effector signalling, including combinations that overcome limitations of single-agent targeting. We also review pre-clinical and clinical evidence for the efficacy of KRAS-G12C inhibitor monotherapy followed by an illustration of combination therapies designed to overcome primary resistance and extend durability of response. Finally, we briefly discuss novel approaches to targeting non-G12C mutant isoforms.

[PMID: 33971321]
KRAS mutations have been recognized as undruggable for many years. Recently, novel KRAS G12C inhibitors, such as sotorasib and adagrasib, are being developed in clinical trials and have revealed promising results in metastatic NSCLC. Nevertheless, it is strongly anticipated that acquired resistance will limit their clinical use. In this study, we developed in vitro models of the KRAS G12C cancer, derived from resistant clones against sotorasib and adagrasib, and searched for secondary KRAS mutations as on-target resistance mechanisms to develop possible strategies to overcome such resistance. We chronically exposed Ba/F3 cells transduced with KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> to sotorasib or adagrasib in the presence of N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea and searched for secondary KRAS mutations. Strategies to overcome resistance were also investigated. We generated 142 Ba/F3 clones resistant to either sotorasib or adagrasib, of which 124 (87%) harbored secondary KRAS mutations. There were 12 different secondary KRAS mutations. Y96D and Y96S were resistant to both inhibitors. A combination of novel SOS1 inhibitor, BI-3406, and trametinib had potent activity against this resistance. Although G13D, R68M, A59S and A59T, which were highly resistant to sotorasib, remained sensitive to adagrasib, Q99L was resistant to adagrasib but sensitive to sotorasib. We identified many secondary KRAS mutations causing resistance to sotorasib, adagrasib, or both, in vitro. The differential activities of these two inhibitors depending on the secondary mutations suggest sequential use in some cases. In addition, switching to BI-3406 plus trametinib might be a useful strategy to overcome acquired resistance owing to the secondary Y96D and Y96S mutations.

[PMID: 34158284]
The FDA has approved the first KRAS-targeted therapy, sotorasib, for patients with previously treated non-small cell lung cancer with KRASG12C mutations. In a phase II trial, the drug yielded a median progression-free survival of 6.8 months in patients whose disease had advanced despite treatment with standard therapies, namely platinum-based chemotherapy and PD-1-PD-L1 inhibitors.

[PMID: 34715449]
Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) is a proto-oncogene of the RAS-MAPK pathway. KRAS mutations are present in a variety of malignancies including lung, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer. Until the recent approval of sotorasib, a KRAS G12C inhibitor, lack of targeted therapy for KRAS has resulted in poor prognosis of patients with tumors harboring KRAS mutations. While the conditional approval of sotorasib was a major breakthrough for those patients harboring KRAS G12C mutations, G12C only accounts for a fraction of those with KRAS mutations and eventual resistance to G12C inhibitors are unavoidable. This comprehensive review on KRAS inhibitors covers accumulating evidence on not only the G12C inhibitors but also other therapeutic attempts to tackle KRAS including combination therapy as well as direct inhibition with vaccines, adoptive T cell therapy, proteolysis-targeted chimeras (PROTACs) and CRISPR/Cas9.

[PMID: 34838325]
Effective therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) depends on morphological and genomic classification, with comprehensive screening for guideline-recommended biomarkers critical to guide treatment. Companion diagnostics, which provide robust genotyping results, represent an important component of personalized oncology. We evaluated the clinical validity of Guardant360 CDx as a companion diagnostic for sotorasib for detection of KRAS p.G12C, an important oncogenic NSCLC driver mutation. KRAS p.G12C was tested in NSCLC patients from CodeBreaK100 (NCT03600833) in pretreatment plasma samples using Guardant360 CDx liquid biopsy and archival tissue samples using therascreen® KRAS RGQ polymerase chain reaction (PCR) kit tissue testing. Matched tissue and plasma samples were procured from other clinical trials or commercial vendors, and results were compared. Demographics and clinical characteristics and objective response rate (ORR) were evaluated. Of 126 CodeBreaK patients, 112 (88.9%) were tested for KRASp.G12C mutations with Guardant360 CDx. Among 189 patients in the extended analysis cohort, the positive and negative percent agreement (95% CI) for Guardant360 CDx plasma testing relative to therascreen® KRAS RGQ PCR kit tissue testing were 0.71 (0.62, 0.79) and 1.00 (0.95, 1.00), respectively; overall percent agreement (95% CI) was 0.82 (0.76, 0.87). TP53 co-mutations were the most common regardless of KRAS p.G12C status (KRAS p.G12C-positive, 53.4%; KRAS p.G12C-negative, 45.5%). STK11 was co-mutated in 26.1% of KRAS p.G12C-positive samples. The ORR was similar among patients selected by plasma and tissue testing. Comprehensive genotyping for all therapeutic targets including KRAS p.G12C is critical for management of NSCLC. Liquid biopsy using Guardant360 CDx has clinical validity for identification of patients with KRASp.G12C-mutant NSCLC and, augmented by tissue testing methodologies as outlined on the approved product label, will identify patients for treatment with sotorasib.

[PMID: 34607832]
In phase I/II KRYSTAL-1 trial, the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor adagrasib demonstrated encouraging clinical activity against metastatic colorectal cancer, both as a monotherapy and when combined with the EGFR inhibitor cetuximab. In patients who received adagrasib alone, the disease control rate was 87% and progression-free survival was 5.6 months. Among patients who received the drug combination, the disease control rate was 100%; data on progression-free survival were immature. The findings, along with data on the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor sotorasib, were presented at the 2021 European Society for Medical Oncology Congress.

[PMID: 34590053]
Sotorasib is a first-in-class small molecule that irreversibly inhibits KRAS G12C, locking it in an inactive state, inhibiting oncogenic signaling, and inducing a proinflammatory microenvironment. Here, we report the first case of life-threatening hepatitis in a patient with NSCLC shortly after commencing sotorasib, in which biopsy result was consistent with checkpoint inhibitor (CPI) immune-related adverse event, implicating sotorasib as being able to trigger CPI immune hepatitis. Given the large proportion of patients potentially treatable with sequential sotorasib after CPI, coupled with limited trial data, sotorasib-triggered CPI immune-related hepatitis should be considered in patients with sotorasib hepatotoxicity.

[PMID: 34558391]
KRAS genes belong to the most frequently mutated family of oncogenes in cancer. The G12C mutation, found in a third of lung, half of colorectal and pancreatic cancer cases, is believed to be responsible for a substantial number of cancer deaths. For 30 years, KRAS has been the subject of extensive drug-targeting efforts aimed at targeting KRAS protein itself, but also its post-translational modifications, membrane localization, protein-protein interactions and downstream signalling pathways. So far, most KRAS targeting strategies have failed, and there are no KRAS-specific drugs available. However, clinical candidates targeting the KRAS G12C protein have recently been developed. MRTX849 and recently approved Sotorasib are covalent binders targeting the mutated cysteine 12, occupying Switch II pocket.Herein, we describe two fragment screening drug discovery campaigns that led to the identification of binding pockets on the KRAS G12C surface that have not previously been described. One screen focused on non-covalent binders to KRAS G12C, the other on covalent binders.

[PMID: 34675734]
Mutations in codon 12 of <i>KRAS</i> have been identified in 13% of non-small cell lung cancer patients. Developing targeted therapies against <i>KRAS<sup>G12C</sup></i> mutation has proven to be challenging due to the abundance of GTP in the cytoplasm, rapid hydrolysis of GTP, and difficulty designing small molecules to achieve sufficient concentration for <i>KRAS</i> inhibition. Based on promising results in both preclinical and clinical trials, sotorasib, a novel <i>KRAS<sup>G12C</sup></i> inhibitor, was given conditional approval by the FDA in May 2021. The Phase I portion of the clinical trial produced 32% confirmed response with 56% of patients with stable disease. About 91.2% of patients who received the highest dose of 960mg daily achieved disease control. The Phase II portion, which used 960mg daily dosing resulted in 37.1% of patients with confirmed response and 80.6% of patients with disease control. Both phase I and phase II had similar progression-free survival, in 6.3 months and 6.8 months, respectively. In both phases, grade 4 adverse events occurred in only one patient. The most common adverse events were elevations in LFTs, which down-trended upon dose reduction and steroid treatment. While the conditional approval of sotorasib was a major breakthrough for those patients harboring <i>KRAS<sup>G12C</sup></i> mutations, resistance mutations to sotorasib are increasingly common. Many proposals have been made to address this, such as the use of combination therapy for synthetic lethality, which are producing encouraging results. Here, we explore in further detail the development of sotorasib, its efficacy, mechanism of resistance, and strategies to overcome these resistances.

[PMID: 33097477]
Evidence continues to grow that KRAS, once considered an "undruggable" target, can be targeted successfully in non-small cell lung cancer. In a phase I trial, the KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor sotorasib elicited responses in about a third of patients with the disease and was generally well tolerated.

[PMID: 34137282]
Sotorasib is a first-in-class KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> covalent inhibitor in clinical development for the treatment of tumors with the <i>KRAS p.G12C</i> mutation. A comprehensive nonclinical safety assessment package, including secondary/safety pharmacology and toxicology studies, was conducted to support the marketing application for sotorasib. Sotorasib was negative in a battery of genotoxicity assays and negative in an in vitro phototoxicity assay. Based on in vitro assays, sotorasib had no off-target effects against various receptors, enzymes (including numerous kinases), ion channels, or transporters. Consistent with the tumor-specific target distribution (ie, KRAS<sup>G12C</sup>), there were no primary pharmacology-related on-target effects identified. The kidney was identified as a target organ in the rat but not the dog. Renal toxicity in the rat was characterized by tubular degeneration and necrosis restricted to a specific region suggesting that the toxicity was attributed to the local formation of a putative toxic reactive metabolite. In the 3-month dog study, adaptive changes of hepatocellular hypertrophy due to drug metabolizing enzyme induction were observed in the liver that was associated with secondary effects in the pituitary and thyroid gland. Sotorasib was not teratogenic and had no direct effect on embryo-fetal development in the rat or rabbit. Human, dog, and rat circulating metabolites, M24, M10, and M18, raised no clinically relevant safety concerns based on the general toxicology studies, primary/secondary pharmacology screening, an in vitro human ether-à-go-go-related gene assay, or mutagenicity assessment. Overall, the results of the nonclinical safety program support a high benefit/risk ratio of sotorasib for the treatment of patients with <i>KRAS p.G12C</i>-mutated tumors.