[PMID: 19858287]
The mammalian circadian rhythm is observed not only at the suprachiasmatic nucleus, a master pacemaker, but also throughout the peripheral tissues. Its conserved molecular basis has been thought to consist of intracellular transcriptional feedback loops of key clock genes. However, little is known about posttranscriptional regulation of these genes. In the present study, we investigated the role of the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR) of the mouse cryptochrome 1 (mcry1) gene at the posttranscriptional level. Mature mcry1 mRNA has a 610-nucleotide 3'UTR and mediates its own degradation. The middle part of the 3'UTR contains a destabilizing cis-acting element. The deletion of this element led to a dramatic increase in mRNA stability, and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D (hnRNP D) was identified as an RNA binding protein responsible for this effect. Cytoplasmic hnRNP D levels displayed a pattern that was reciprocal to the mcry1 oscillation. Knockdown of hnRNP D stabilized mcry1 mRNA and resulted in enhancement of the oscillation amplitude and a slight delay of the phase. Our results suggest that hnRNP D plays a role as a fine regulator contributing to the mcry1 mRNA turnover rate and the modulation of circadian rhythm.

[PMID: 16731656]
In mammals, circadian rhythms in behavior and physiology are controlled by a central pacemaker, the SCN, and subordinated clocks throughout the body. On the molecular level, these clocks are based on transcriptional/translational feedback loops involving a set of clock genes that regulate their own transcription. Among the components driving the mammalian circadian clock are the Period 1 and 2 (Per1 and Per2) and Cryptochrome 1 and 2 (Cry1 and Cry2) genes. In the present study, the authors characterize the behavioral and molecular rhythms of Per2/Cry1 double mutant mice under 3 different lighting conditions. In an LD cycle, the activity of these animals is masked by light, while in DD, the mutants lose circadian rhythmicity but exhibit strong ultradian rhythms. In LL of higher intensity, circadian rhythms are restored on the behavioral level with a drastically shortened endogenous period. Furthermore, both in the SCN and in the periphery, clock gene rhythms are restored. Based on these observations and also on the fact that light-mediated induction of Per gene expression is preserved in these mutants, the authors propose a mechanism by which endogenous ultradian rhythms may relay timed light exposure to the SCN, leading to a reinitiation of self-sustained circadian rhythms in LL.

[PMID: 12381662]
Many biochemical, physiological, and behavioral processes display daily rhythms generated by an internal timekeeping mechanism referred to as the circadian clock. The core oscillator driving this clock is located in the ventral part of the hypothalamus, the so called suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). At the molecular level, this oscillator is thought to be composed of interlocking autoregulatory feedback loops involving a set of clock genes. Among the components driving the mammalian circadian clock are the Period 1 and 2 (mPer1 and mPer2) and Cryptochrome 1 and 2 (mCry1 and mCry2) genes. A mutation in the mPer2 gene leads to a gradual loss of circadian rhythmicity in mice kept in constant darkness (DD). Here we show that inactivation of the mCry2 gene in mPer2 mutant mice restores circadian rhythmicity and normal clock gene expression patterns. Thus, mCry2 can act as a nonallelic suppressor of mPer2, which points to direct or indirect interactions of PER2 and CRY2 proteins. In marked contrast, inactivation of mCry1 in mPer2 mutant mice does not restore circadian rhythmicity but instead results in complete behavioral arrhythmicity in DD, indicating different effects of mCry1 and mCry2 in the clock mechanism

[PMID: 16061665]
It has been reported that disruption of the circadian clock may lead to increased risk of breast cancer in humans and to a high rate or ionizing radiation-induced tumors and mortality in mice. Cryptochrome 1 and cryptochrome 2 proteins are core components of the mammalian circadian clock and mice mutated in both genes are arrhythmic. We tested Cry1-/- Cry2-/- mice and fibroblasts derived from these mice for radiation-induced cancer and killing and DNA damage checkpoints and killing, respectively. We find that the mutant mice are indistinguishable from the wild-type controls with respect to radiation-induced morbidity and mortality. Similarly, the Cry1-/- Cry2-/-mutant fibroblasts are indistinguishable from the wild-type controls with respect to their sensitivity to ionizing radiation and UV radiation and ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage checkpoint response. Our data suggest that disruption of the circadian clock in itself does not compromise mammalian DNA repair and DNA damage checkpoints and does not predispose mice to spontaneous and ionizing radiation-induced cancers. We conclude that the effect of circadian clock disruption on cellular response to DNA damage and cancer predisposition in mice may depend on the mechanism by which the clock is disrupted.

[PMID: 19833968]
Circadian clocks coordinate behavioral and physiological processes with daily light-dark cycles by driving rhythmic transcription of thousands of genes. Whereas the master clock in the brain is set by light, pacemakers in peripheral organs, such as the liver, are reset by food availability, although the setting, or "entrainment," mechanisms remain mysterious. Studying mouse fibroblasts, we demonstrated that the nutrient-responsive adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylates and destabilizes the clock component cryptochrome 1 (CRY1). In mouse livers, AMPK activity and nuclear localization were rhythmic and inversely correlated with CRY1 nuclear protein abundance. Stimulation of AMPK destabilized cryptochromes and altered circadian rhythms, and mice in which the AMPK pathway was genetically disrupted showed alterations in peripheral clocks. Thus, phosphorylation by AMPK enables cryptochrome to transduce nutrient signals to circadian clocks in mammalian peripheral organs.

[PMID: 12495442]
The cryptochrome 1 and 2 genes (cry1 and cry2) are necessary for the generation of circadian rhythms, as mice lacking both of these genes (cry1,2-/-) lack circadian rhythms. We studied sleep in cry1,2-/- mice under baseline conditions as well as under conditions of constant darkness and enforced wakefulness to determine whether cryptochromes influence sleep regulatory processes. Under all three conditions, cry1,2-/- mice exhibit the hallmarks of high non-REM sleep (NREMS) drive (i.e., increases in NREMS time, NREMS consolidation, and EEG delta power during NREMS). This unexpected phenotype was associated with elevated brain mRNA levels of period 1 and 2 (per1,2), and albumin d-binding protein (dbp), which are known to be transcriptionally inhibited by CRY1,2. To further examine the relationship between circadian genes and sleep homeostasis, we examined wild type mice and rats following sleep deprivation and found increased levels of per1,2 mRNA and decreased levels of dbp mRNA specifically in the cerebral cortex; these changes subsided with recovery sleep. The expression of per3, cry1,2, clock, npas2, bmal1, and casein-kinase-1epsilon did not change with sleep deprivation. These results indicate that mice lacking cryptochromes are not simply a genetic model of circadian arrhythmicity in rodents and functionally implicate cryptochromes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep.

[PMID: 15047890]
In the retina, dopamine plays a central role in neural adaptation to light. Progress in the study of dopaminergic amacrine (DA) cells has been limited because they are very few (450 in each mouse retina, 0.005% of retinal neurons). Here, we applied transgenic technology, single-cell global mRNA amplification, and cDNA microarray screening to identify transcripts present in DA cells. To profile gene expression in single neurons, we developed a method (SMART7) that combines a PCR-based initial step (switching mechanism at the 5' end of the RNA transcript or SMART) with T7 RNA polymerase amplification. Single-cell targets were synthesized from genetically labeled DA cells to screen the RIKEN 19k mouse cDNA microarrays. Seven hundred ninety-five transcripts were identified in DA cells at a high level of confidence, and expression of the most interesting genes was confirmed by immunocytochemistry. Twenty-one previously undescribed proteins were found in DA cells, including a chloride channel, receptors and other membrane glycoproteins, kinases, transcription factors, and secreted neuroactive molecules. Thirty-eight percent of transcripts were ESTs or coding for hypothetical proteins, suggesting that a large portion of the DA cell proteome is still uncharacterized. Because cryptochrome-1 mRNA was found in DA cells, immunocytochemistry was extended to other components of the circadian clock machinery. This analysis showed that DA cells contain the most common clock-related proteins.

[PMID: 23471982]
The mammalian circadian clock is composed of interlocking feedback loops. Cryptochrome is a central component in the core negative feedback loop, whereas Rev-Erbα, a member of the nuclear receptor family, is an essential component of the interlocking loop. To understand the roles of different clock genes, we conducted a genetic interaction screen by generating single- and double-mutant mice. We found that the deletion of Rev-erbα in F-box/leucine rich-repeat protein (Fbxl3)-deficient mice rescued its long-circadian period phenotype, and our results further revealed that FBXL3 regulates Rev-Erb/retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor-binding element (RRE)-mediated transcription by inactivating the Rev-Erbα:histone deacetylase 3 corepressor complex. By analyzing the Fbxl3 and Cryptochrome 1 double-mutant mice, we found that FBXL3 also regulates the amplitudes of E-box-driven gene expression. These two separate roles of FBXL3 in circadian feedback loops provide a mechanism that contributes to the period determination and robustness of the clock.

[PMID: 16777965]
The circadian clock is driven by cell-autonomous transcription/translation feedback loops. The BMAL1 transcription factor is an indispensable component of the positive arm of this molecular oscillator in mammals. Here, we present a molecular genetic screening assay for mutant circadian clock proteins that is based on real-time circadian rhythm monitoring in cultured fibroblasts. By using this assay, we identified a domain in the extreme C terminus of BMAL1 that plays an essential role in the rhythmic control of E-box-mediated circadian transcription. Remarkably, the last 43 aa of BMAL1 are required for transcriptional activation, as well as for association with the circadian transcriptional repressor CRYPTOCHROME 1 (CRY1), depending on the coexistence of CLOCK protein. C-terminally truncated BMAL1 mutant proteins still associate with mPER2 (another protein of the negative feedback loop), suggesting that an additional repression mechanism may converge on the N terminus. Taken together, these results suggest that the C-terminal region of BMAL1 is involved in determining the balance between circadian transcriptional activation and suppression.

[PMID: 21236481]
Direct evidence for the requirement of delay in feedback repression in the mammalian circadian clock has been elusive. Cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), an essential clock component, displays evening-time expression and serves as a strong repressor at morning-time elements (E box/E' box). In this study, we reveal that a combination of day-time elements (D box) within the Cry1-proximal promoter and night-time elements (RREs) within its intronic enhancer gives rise to evening-time expression. A synthetic composite promoter produced evening-time expression, which was further recapitulated by a simple phase-vector model. Of note, coordination of day-time with night-time elements can modulate the extent of phase delay. A genetic complementation assay in Cry1(-/-):Cry2(-/-) cells revealed that substantial delay of Cry1 expression is required to restore circadian rhythmicity, and its prolonged delay slows circadian oscillation. Taken together, our data suggest that phase delay in Cry1 transcription is required for mammalian clock function.

[PMID: 19405859]
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells present in adult bone marrow that replicate as undifferentiated cells and can differentiate to lineages of mesenchymal tissues. Homeostatic control of bone remodeling maintains bone mass by ensuring that bone resorption and bone formation occur sequentially and in a balanced manner. As most homeostatic functions occur in a circadian manner, a circadian clock could control bone mass. Here we show that laser irradiation can direct the extracellular calcification of mouse MSCs by altering the intracellular localization of the circadian rhythm protein cryptochrome 1 (CRY1). MSCs were irradiated with a blue laser (wavelength 405 nm) for 180 sec via a fiber attached to the bottom of the culture dish. After laser irradiation, the MSCs were incubated in osteogenic differentiation medium for 5 d. After laser irradiation, circadian rhythm protein CRY1 was immunostained and histochemical staining for extracellular calcification was observed. Laser irradiation promoted extracellular calcification of MSCs, induced the translocation of CRY1 protein from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and decreased CRY1 mRNA levels quantified by real-time PCR. Since the timing of nuclear accumulation of clock proteins constitutes an important step in the transcription-translation feedback loop driving the circadian core oscillator, laser irradiation could provide a simple and effective technology for clock protein localization and turnover. Our results also indicate that CRY1 is a master regulator of circadian rhythm that regulates the extracellular calcification of MSCs. Laser irradiation could provide a simple and effective means of controlling the fate of MSCs as a therapeutic strategy, and act as a "molecular switch" of regulatory proteins by suppressing CRY transcription. Furthermore, this model system may be useful for exploring the cross-talk between circadian rhythm and cell function.

[PMID: 22952936]
This study was aimed to examine circadian variations of hepatic antioxidant components, including the Nrf2- pathway, the glutathione (GSH) system, antioxidant enzymes and metallothionein in mouse liver. Adult mice were housed in light- and temperature-controlled facilities for 2 weeks, and livers were collected every 4 h during the 24 h period. Total RNA was isolated, purified, and subjected to real-time RT-PCR analysis. Hepatic mRNA levels of Nrf2, Keap1, Nqo1 and Gclc were higher in the light-phase than the dark-phase, and were female-predominant. Hepatic GSH presented marked circadian fluctuations, along with glutathione S-transferases (GST-α1, GST-µ, GST-π) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx1). The expressions of GPx1, GST-µ and GST-π mRNA were also higher in females. Antioxidant enzymes Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (Sod1), catalase (CAT), cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and heme oxygenase-1 (Ho-1) showed circadian rhythms, with higher expressions of Cox-2 and CAT in females. Metallothionein, a small non-enzymatic antioxidant protein, showed dramatic circadian variation in males, but higher expression in females. The circadian variations of the clock gene Brain and Muscle Arnt-like Protein-1(Bmal1), albumin site D-binding protein (Dbp), nuclear receptor Rev-Erbα (Nr1d1), period protein (Per1 and Per2) and cryptochrome 1(Cry1) were in agreement with the literature. Furthermore, acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is more severe when administered in the afternoon when hepatic GSH was lowest. Circadian variations and gender differences in transcript levels of antioxidant genes exist in mouse liver, which could affect body responses to oxidative stress at different times of the day.

[PMID: 22140039]
This study was designed to determine whether the 24-h rhythms of clock gene expression and vascular smooth muscle (VSM) contractile responses are altered in type 2 diabetic db/db mice. Control and db/db mice were euthanized at 6-h intervals throughout the day. The aorta, mesenteric arteries, heart, kidney, and brain were isolated. Clock and target gene mRNA levels were determined by either real-time PCR or in situ hybridization. Isometric contractions were measured in isolated aortic helical strips, and pressor responses to an intravenous injection of vasoconstrictors were determined in vivo using radiotelemetry. We found that the 24-h mRNA rhythms of the following genes were suppressed in db/db mice compared with control mice: the clock genes period homolog 1/2 (Per1/2) and cryptochrome 1/2 (Cry1/2) and their target genes D site albumin promoter-binding protein (Dbp) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (Pparg) in the aorta and mesenteric arteries; Dbp in the heart; Per1, nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1 (Rev-erba), and Dbp in the kidney; and Per1 in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The 24-h contractile variations in response to phenylephrine (α(1)-agonist), ANG II, and high K(+) were significantly altered in the aortas from db/db mice compared with control mice. The diurnal variations of the in vivo pressor responses to phenylephrine and ANG II were lost in db/db mice. Moreover, the 24-h mRNA rhythms of the contraction-related proteins Rho kinase 1/2, PKC-potentiated phosphatase inhibitory protein of 17 kDa, calponin-3, tropomyosin-1/2, and smooth muscle protein 22-α were suppressed in db/db mice compared with control mice. Together, our data demonstrated that the 24-h rhythms of clock gene mRNA, mRNA levels of several contraction-related proteins, and VSM contraction were disrupted in db/db mice, which may contribute to the disruption of their blood pressure circadian rhythm.

[PMID: 22170608]
Mammalian metabolism is highly circadian and major hormonal circuits involving nuclear hormone receptors display interlinked diurnal cycling. However, mechanisms that logically explain the coordination of nuclear hormone receptors and the clock are poorly understood. Here we show that two circadian co-regulators, cryptochromes 1 and 2, interact with the glucocorticoid receptor in a ligand-dependent fashion and globally alter the transcriptional response to glucocorticoids in mouse embryonic fibroblasts: cryptochrome deficiency vastly decreases gene repression and approximately doubles the number of dexamethasone-induced genes, suggesting that cryptochromes broadly oppose glucocorticoid receptor activation and promote repression. In mice, genetic loss of cryptochrome 1 and/or 2 results in glucose intolerance and constitutively high levels of circulating corticosterone, suggesting reduced suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis coupled with increased glucocorticoid transactivation in the liver. Genomically, cryptochromes 1 and 2 associate with a glucocorticoid response element in the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 promoter in a hormone-dependent manner, and dexamethasone-induced transcription of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 gene was strikingly increased in cryptochrome-deficient livers. These results reveal a specific mechanism through which cryptochromes couple the activity of clock and receptor target genes to complex genomic circuits underpinning normal metabolic homeostasis.

[PMID: 18974860]
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells present in adult bone marrow that replicate as undifferentiated cells and can differentiate to lineages of mesenchymal tissues. Homeostatic control of bone remodelling maintains bone mass by insuring that bone resorption and bone formation occur sequentially and in a balanced manner. As most homeostatic functions occur in a circadian manner, a circadian clock could control bone mass. Here, we show that laser irradiation can direct the osteogenesis and adipogenesis of mouse MSCs by altering the intracellular localization of the circadian rhythm protein Cryptochrome 1 (mCRY1). After laser irradiation (wavelength: 405 nm) to MSCs, circadian rhythm protein, mCRY1 and mPER2, were immunostained and histochemical stainings for osteogenic or adipogenic differentiation were observed. Laser irradiation promoted osteogenesis and reduced adipogenesis of MSCs, induced the translocation of mCRY1 and mPER2 protein from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and decreased mCRY1 mRNA levels quantified by real-time PCR. Since the timing of nuclear accumulation of clock proteins constitutes an important step in the transcription-translation feedback loop driving the circadian core oscillator, laser irradiation could provide a simple and effective technology for clock protein localization and turnover. Our results also indicate that mCRY1 is a master regulator of circadian rhythm that regulates the differentiation of MSCs. Laser irradiation could provide a simple and effective means of controlling the fate of MSCs as a therapeutic strategy and act 'molecular switch' of regulatory proteins by suppressing CRY transcription. Furthermore, this model system may be useful for exploring the crosstalk between circadian rhythm and cell differentiation.

[PMID: 20100521]
We investigated the amino acid sequences of rat PERIOD2 (rPER2) that are required for interaction with CRYPTOCHROME1 (CRY1) to understand the molecular mechanism of the circadian clock. Co-immunoprecipitation assays using various C-terminal fragments of rPER2 with internal deletions revealed that amino acid residues 1179-1198 are necessary for interaction with CRY1. To identify precisely which amino acid residues are responsible for the interaction, we substituted alanine for residues conserved among PER isoforms and species. We found that more than three mutations of conserved PER2 residues impaired not only binding to CRY1 but also subsequent nuclear translocation, although mutations of non-conserved residues did not affect interaction with CRY1. Thus, the conserved amino acid residues of 1179-1198 in PER2 are apparently responsible for binding to CRY1.

[PMID: 15980066]
Cryptochrome 1 and 2 act as essential components of the central and peripheral circadian clocks for generation of circadian rhythms in mammals. Here we show that mouse cryptochrome 2 (mCRY2) is phosphorylated at Ser-557 in the liver, a well characterized peripheral clock tissue. The Ser-557-phosphorylated form accumulates in the liver during the night in parallel with mCRY2 protein, and the phosphorylated form reaches its maximal level at late night, preceding the peak-time of the protein abundance by approximately 4 h in both light-dark cycle and constant dark conditions. The Ser-557-phosphorylated form of mCRY2 is localized in the nucleus, whereas mCRY2 protein is located in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Importantly, phosphorylation of mCRY2 at Ser-557 allows subsequent phosphorylation at Ser-553 by glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), resulting in efficient degradation of mCRY2 by a proteasome pathway. As assessed by phosphorylation of GSK-3beta at Ser-9, which negatively regulates the kinase activity, GSK-3beta exhibits a circadian rhythm in its activity with a peak from late night to early morning when Ser-557 of mCRY2 is highly phosphorylated. Altogether, the present study demonstrates an important role of sequential phosphorylation at Ser-557/Ser-553 for destabilization of mCRY2 and illustrates a model that the circadian regulation of mCRY2 phosphorylation contributes to rhythmic degradation of mCRY2 protein.

[PMID: 20825493]
Cryptochrome 1 and 2 (Cry1 and Cry2) are considered essential for generating circadian rhythms in mammals. The role of Cry1 and Cry2 in circadian rhythm expression and acute light-induced suppression of pineal melatonin was assessed using Cry1 and Cry2 double-deficient mice (Cry1(-/-) /Cry2(-/-) ) developed from the C3H strain that synthesizes melatonin. We examined the circadian variation of pineal melatonin under a 12:12-h light-dark (LD) cycle and constant darkness (DD). Light suppression of pineal melatonin concentration was analyzed by subjecting a 30-min light pulse at the peak phase of melatonin concentration. Wild-type mice showed significant rhythmicity in pineal melatonin concentration with the highest level at Zeitgeber time 22 (ZT22, where time of light on was defined as ZT0) under LD or ZT18 on the first day of DD. In contrast, Cry1(-/-) /Cry2(-/-) mice did not show significant circadian rhythmicity, with only a small peak observed at ZT22 in LD. Nevertheless, a significant daily variation could be observed under DD, with a small increase at ZT6 and ZT18 h. Melatonin concentration was significantly suppressed by acute light pulse at ZT22 in wild-type mice but not in Cry1(-/-) /Cry2(-/-) mice. The present results suggest that Cry genes are required for regulating pineal melatonin synthesis via circadian and photic signals from the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus (SCN).

[PMID: 12121621]
The mammalian master clock driving circadian rhythmicity in physiology and behavior resides within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the anterior hypothalamus. Circadian rhythms are generated by a set of clock genes via intertwined negative and positive autoregulatory transcription-translation feedback loops. The Cryptochrome 1 and 2 genes are indispensable for molecular core oscillator function, as evident from the arrhythmic wheel-running behavior and lack of rhythmic clock gene expression in mCry1/mCry2 double-mutant mice in constant darkness. In the present study, using real-time multiunit electrode activity recordings in hypothalamic slices, we show that SCN neurons from mCry-deficient mice kept in constant darkness lack circadian oscillations in firing patterns. This proves that cryptochromes, and thus an intact circadian clockwork, are prerequisites for circadian electrical activity in SCN neurons. Interestingly, when mCry-deficient mice were kept in normal light-dark conditions and SCN slices were prepared 2 hr after the beginning of the day, a single noncircadian peak in neuronal activity was detected. This light-induced rise in electrical activity of the SCN may explain why mCry-deficient mice lack the arrhythmic short bouts of wheel-running activity and instead show apparently normal behavior in normal day-night cycles.

[PMID: 20023637]
Malfunction of the circadian clock has been linked to the pathogenesis of a variety of diseases. We show that mice lacking the core clock components Cryptochrome-1 (Cry1) and Cryptochrome-2 (Cry2) (Cry-null mice) show salt-sensitive hypertension due to abnormally high synthesis of the mineralocorticoid aldosterone by the adrenal gland. An extensive search for the underlying cause led us to identify type VI 3beta-hydroxyl-steroid dehydrogenase (Hsd3b6) as a new hypertension risk factor in mice. Hsd3b6 is expressed exclusively in aldosterone-producing cells and is under transcriptional control of the circadian clock. In Cry-null mice, Hsd3b6 messenger RNA and protein levels are constitutively high, leading to a marked increase in 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase (3beta-HSD) enzymatic activity and, as a consequence, enhanced aldosterone production. These data place Hsd3b6 in a pivotal position through which circadian clock malfunction is coupled to the development of hypertension. Translation of these findings to humans will require clinical examination of human HSD3B1 gene, which we found to be functionally similar to mouse Hsd3b6.

[PMID: 22669941]
The mammalian circadian clock coordinates various physiological activities with environmental cues to achieve optimal adaptation. The clock manifests oscillations of key clock proteins, which are under dynamic control at multiple post-translational levels. As a major post-translational regulator, the ubiquitination-dependent proteasome degradation system is counterbalanced by a large group of deubiquitin proteases with distinct substrate preference. Until now, whether deubiquitination by ubiquitin-specific proteases can regulate the clock protein stability and circadian pathways remains largely unclear. The mammalian clock protein, cryptochrome 1 (CRY1), is degraded via the FBXL3-mediated ubiquitination pathway, suggesting that it is also likely to be targeted by the deubiquitination pathway. Here, we identified that USP2a, a circadian-controlled deubiquitinating enzyme, interacts with CRY1 and enhances its protein stability via deubiquitination upon serum shock. Depletion of Usp2a by shRNA greatly enhances the ubiquitination of CRY1 and dampens the oscillation amplitude of the CRY1 protein during a circadian cycle. By stabilizing the CRY1 protein, USP2a represses the Per2 promoter activity as well as the endogenous Per2 gene expression. We also demonstrated that USP2a-dependent deubiquitination and stabilization of the CRY1 protein occur in the mouse liver. Interestingly, the pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-α, increases the CRY1 protein level and inhibits circadian gene expression in a USP2a-dependent fashion. Therefore, USP2a potentially mediates circadian disruption by suppressing the CRY1 degradation during inflammation.

[PMID: 14712914]
The mammalian master clock driving circadian rhythmicity in physiology, metabolism, and behaviour resides within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the anterior hypothalamus and is composed of intertwined negative and positive autoregulatory transcription-translation feedback loops. The Cryptochrome 1 and 2 gene products act in the negative feedback loop and are indispensable for molecular core oscillator function, as evident from the arrhythmic wheel running behaviour and absence of cyclic clock gene expression in mCry1/mCry2 double mutant mice in constant darkness. Recently, we have measured real-time multi-unit electrode activity recordings in hypothalamic slices from mCry-deficient mice kept in constant darkness and observed a complete lack of circadian oscillations in firing patterns. This proves that CRY proteins, and thus an intact circadian clock, are prerequisite for circadian rhythmicity in membrane excitability in SCN neurons. Strikingly, when mCry-deficient mice are housed in normal light-dark cycles, a single non-circadian peak in neuronal activity can be detected in SCN slices prepared two hours after the beginning of the day. This light-induced increase in electric activity of the SCN suggests that deletion of the mCry genes converts the core oscillator in an hour-glass-like timekeeper and may explain why in normal day-night cycles mCry-deficient mice show apparently normal behaviour.