[PMID: 23757386]
To review the place in therapy of mirabegron, a new oral β3-adrenergic receptor agonist, for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). A literature search of MEDLINE and MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations Databases (1996-April 2013) was conducted using the key words mirabegron, receptor, adrenergic, beta-3; adrenergic beta-3 receptor; beta-3 receptor, and overactive bladder; urinary bladder; overactive. All published articles regarding mirabegron were included. References of selected articles, data from poster presentations, and abstract publications were additionally reviewed. Available English-language data from reviews, abstracts, presentations, and clinical trials of mirabegron in humans were reviewed; relevant clinical data were selected and included. Mirabegron is the newest option for treatment of OAB with symptoms of urge incontinence. As a β3-receptor agonist, it reduces bladder muscle contractions. In two 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 studies, mirabegron significantly reduced the number of incontinence episodes per 24 hours from baseline (-1.47, -1.63, and -1.13; p < 0.05; and -1.57, -1.46, and -1.17; p < 0.05; all values for mirabegron 50 mg, 100 mg, and placebo). Micturitions per 24 hours were also reduced from baseline (-1.66, -1.75, and -1.05; p < 0.05; and -1.93, -1.77, and -1.34; p < 0.05; all values for mirabegron 50 mg, 100 mg, and placebo). A 12-month trial found mirabegron to have a safety and efficacy profile similar to that of tolterodine. Treatment of OAB initially includes lifestyle and nonpharmacologic intervention; for patients with persistent symptoms despite these treatments, drug therapy represents a next-step approach for symptom control. Mirabegron alleviates symptoms of OAB while having a mechanism of action that provides an alternative for patients who are intolerant of or who have contraindications to anticholinergic agents. The place in therapy of mirabegron relative to anticholinergics in the treatment of urge incontinence has not yet been established.

[PMID: 24127366]
Mirabegron, the first β3 -adrenoceptor agonist to enter clinical practice, has a different mechanism of action from antimuscarinic agents. This review presents data on the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of mirabegron in studies conducted to date. All clinical data on mirabegron that are currently in the public domain are included, including some in-press manuscripts. In Phase III clinical trials in patients with overactive bladder (OAB), mirabegron at daily doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg demonstrated significant efficacy in treating the symptoms of OAB, including micturition frequency, urgency incontinence, and urgency. Significant improvements in micturition frequency, urgency incontinence, and mean volume voided/micturition were seen as early as the first assessment (week 4) for mirabegron 50 and 100 mg, and were maintained throughout treatment. Responder analyses showed a significant improvement with mirabegron 50 and 100 mg in terms of dry rates, ≥50% reduction in mean number of incontinence episodes/24 hr, and the proportion of patients with ≤8 micturitions/24 hr at final visit. The benefit of mirabegron 50 and 100 mg was also evident in patients ≥65 years of age, and in both treatment-naïve patients and those who previously discontinued antimuscarinic therapy. These data therefore demonstrate a clinically meaningful benefit with mirabegron in the objective endpoints of OAB. Assessment of measures of health-related quality of life and treatment satisfaction showed that patients perceived treatment with mirabegron as meaningful. In OAB clinical trials of up to 12 months mirabegron appeared to be well tolerated. The most common adverse events (AEs) observed with mirabegron in clinical trials of up to 12 months were hypertension, nasopharyngitis, and urinary tract infection. The incidence of dry mouth was similar to placebo, and was between three and fivefold less than for tolterodine extended release 4 mg. Since dry mouth is the most bothersome AE associated with antimuscarinic drugs and often a reason for treatment discontinuation, mirabegron may be a valuable treatment option for these patients. In Phase III clinical trials, mirabegron at daily doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg demonstrated significant efficacy in treating symptoms of OAB and, at doses of 50 and 100 mg, demonstrated significant improvements versus placebo on key secondary endpoints, as early as the first assessment (week 4), and these were maintained throughout treatment. In OAB clinical trials of up to 12 months, mirabegron appeared to be well tolerated.

[PMID: 24078498]
To discuss the pharmacotherapeutic aspects of Mirabegron which is a first-in class novel β3 receptor agonist drug recently approved by the food and drug administration (FDA) for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). We conducted a computerized search of the MEDLINE/PUBMED databases with the word Mirabegron, β3 receptor agonist and overactive bladder. Effect of Mirabegron on β3 adrenergic receptor purportedly releases nitric oxide(NO) by an increase in intracellular Ca2+ through accumulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Along with NO which relaxes the detrusor muscle, it also releases an urothelial-derived inhibiting factor (UDIF) that inhibits contractions. It increases the bladder capacity by causing bladder relaxation during the storage phase. Mirabegron appears to be a promising treatment in OAB patients by shifting its management from reducing detrusor over-activity to inducing relaxation. Also it lacks the troublesome side effects associated with the standard antimuscarinic management.

[PMID: 24610862]
mirabegron is a β3-adrenoceptor agonist developed for the treatment of symptoms of overactive bladder (OAB). As the prevalence of OAB increases with age, a prospective subanalysis of individual and pooled efficacy and tolerability data from three 12-week, randomised, Phase III trials, and of tolerability data from a 1-year safety trial were conducted in order to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron in subgroups of patients aged ≥65 and ≥75 years. primary efficacy outcomes were change from baseline to final visit in the mean number of incontinence episodes/24 h and the mean number of micturitions/24 h. Tolerability was assessed by the incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs). over 12 weeks mirabegron 25 mg and 50 mg once-daily reduced the mean numbers of incontinence episodes and micturitions/24 h from baseline to final visit in patients aged ≥65 and ≥75 years. Mirabegron was well tolerated: in both age groups, hypertension and urinary tract infection were among the most common TEAEs over 12 weeks and 1 year. The incidence of dry mouth, a typical anticholinergic TEAE, was up to sixfold higher among the older patients randomised to tolterodine than any dose of mirabegron. these analyses have demonstrated the efficacy of mirabegron over 12 weeks and the tolerability of mirabegron over 12 weeks and 1 year in OAB patients aged ≥65 and ≥75 years, supporting mirabegron as a therapeutic option in older patients with OAB.

[PMID: 26908514]
OnabotulinumtoxinA and mirabegron have recently gained marketing authorisation to treat symptoms of overactive bladder (OAB). To evaluate the relative efficacy of mirabegron and onabotulinumtoxinA in patients with idiopathic OAB. Network meta-analysis. A search of 9 electronic databases, review documents, guidelines and websites. Randomised trials comparing any licensed dose of onabotulinumtoxinA or mirabegron with each other, anticholinergic drugs or placebo were eligible (19 randomised trials were identified). 1 reviewer extracted data from the studies and a second reviewer checked the data. Candidate trials were assessed for similarity and networks were developed for each outcome. Bayesian network meta-analysis was conducted using both fixed-effects and random-effects models. When there were differences in mean baseline values between mirabegron and onabotulinumtoxinA trials they were adjusted for using network meta-regression (NMR). No studies directly comparing onabotulinumtoxinA to mirabegron were identified. A network was created for each of the 7 outcomes, with 3-9 studies included in each individual network. The trials included in the networks were broadly similar. Patients in the onabotulinumtoxinA trials had more urinary incontinence and urgency episodes at baseline than patients in the mirabegron trials and these differences were adjusted for using NMR. Both onabotulinumtoxinA and mirabegron were more efficacious than placebo at reducing the frequency of urinary incontinence, urgency, urination and nocturia. OnabotulinumtoxinA was more efficacious than mirabegron (50 and 25 mg) in completely resolving daily episodes of urinary incontinence and urgency and in reducing the frequency of urinary incontinence, urgency and urination. NMR supported the results of the network meta-analysis. In the absence of head-to-head trials comparing onabotulinumtoxinA to mirabegron, this indirect comparison indicates that onabotulinumtoxinA may be superior to mirabegron in improving symptoms of urinary incontinence, urgency and urinary frequency in patients with idiopathic OAB.

[PMID: 26665779]
Mirabegron is the first drug in a new class of oral therapy for overactive bladder (OAB). It is a beta-3 adrenergic agonist, a class of drugs for the first time used for the treatment of urination disorders. Recently, following many years of rigorous multicenter randomized trials mirabegron has been approved for use in Europe and North America. The clinical indication for mirabegron is overactive bladder with symptoms of urge urinary incontinence, urgency, and urinary frequency and other storage symptoms in both men and women. Mirabegron is used in primary patients, or in patients who previously were unsuccessfully treated with anticholinergics. The drug has a good safety profile and causes no side effects typical of anticholinergics.

[PMID: 27124860]
To examine the effects of mirabegron, a selective β3 -adrenoceptor agonist that has recently been approved for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB), on erectile function. Stimulation of β3 -adrenoceptors localised in cavernosal smooth muscle cells may play a physiological role in mediating penile erection, and offer a beneficial pharmacological action for patients who have OAB and erectile dysfunction (ED). Corpus cavernosal (CC) specimens were obtained from patients with ED and Peyronie's disease undergoing penile prosthesis implantation. Erectile responses were also evaluated in vivo after intracavernosal injection (ICI) of mirabegron in anaesthetised rats. Mirabegron-elicited relaxation responses (10(-8) -10(-3) m) on phenylephrine-induced contraction were seen in human CC (HCC) and rat CC strips in isolated organ-bath studies. The effects of inhibitors, namely L-NAME [N(G) -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester, a competitive inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), 100 μm], ODQ [1H-(1,2,4) oxadiazolo(4,3-α) quinoxalin-1-one, a soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) inhibitor, 30μm], methylene blue (a NOS and sGC inhibitor, 20μm), SR59230A (β3 -adrenoceptor blocker, 1 μm), and fasudil [Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK) inhibitor, 0.1 μm], on mirabegron-induced relaxation responses were evaluated. Responses to mirabegron were compared with responses to isoprenaline and nebivolol. Immunohistochemistry was used to localise β3 -adrenoceptors and ROCK in CC smooth muscle cells. In vivo rat data were expressed as intracavernosal pressure (ICP)/mean arterial pressure, and total ICP. Mirabegron resulted in a relaxation of phenylephrine-evoked CC contractions in a concentration-dependent manner and SR59230A antagonised the mirabegron-induced relaxations in HCC and rat CC. Other inhibitors, L-NAME, ODQ, and methylene blue, did not affect the mirabegron-induced relaxation responses. Mirabegron relaxation responses at concentrations (0.1-10 μm) were enhanced by fasudil (ROCK inhibitor) in rat but not in HCC strips. KCl-induced contractions in HCC and rat CC were partially inhibited by mirabegron. In vivo, ICI of mirabegron (doses of 0.1-1 mg/kg) had a minor effect on ICP when compared with vehicle administration. Immunohistochemistry data showed β3 -adrenoceptors localised in the smooth muscle cells of the HCC and rat CC. Mirabegron markedly relaxed isolated CC strips by activating β3 -adrenoceptors independently of the NO-cGMP pathway. There is also evidence of the existence of a close functional link between β3 -adrenoceptors and the RhoA/ROCK pathway. These results may support further clinical studies using combinations of mirabegron with ROCK and phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5i) for the treatment of ED, especially in patients who do not respond to PDE5i therapy.

[PMID: 23063375]
Mirabegron (YM178) is a β(3)-adrenoceptor agonist for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). As part of the clinical development program for mirabegron, 2 human volunteer studies were performed to derive detailed data on the multiple-dose pharmacokinetic (PK) properties of mirabegron. Two randomized Phase I studies were conducted to evaluate the PK properties of mirabegron, including metabolic profile and effects of age and sex, following multiple oral doses in healthy subjects. In study 1, mirabegron oral controlled absorption system (OCAS) tablets were administered once daily to healthy young subjects (18-55 years) at doses of 50, 100, 200, and 300 mg and in elderly subjects (65-80 years) at 50 and 200 mg in a double-blind placebo-controlled, parallel-group design. In study 2, mirabegron OCAS was administered once daily to healthy young (18-45 years) and older (≥55 years) subjects at doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg in an open-label crossover design. Blood samples were collected up to 72 hours (study 1) and 168 hours (study 2) after the last dose. Urine samples were collected up to 24 hours after the last dose. Plasma and urine concentrations of mirabegron and its metabolites (study 2 only) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. PK parameters were determined using noncompartmental methods. Tolerability assessments included physical examinations, supine blood pressure and pulse rate, orthostatic stress testing (study 1), resting 12-lead ECGs, clinical laboratory tests (biochemistry, hematology, and urinalysis), and adverse-events (AE) monitoring using investigators' questionnaires and subjects' spontaneous reports. Thirty-two young male (mean age, 30.3 years; mean weight, 77.1 kg), 32 young female (27.6 years; 64.6 kg), 16 elderly male (69.8 years; 79.3 kg), and 16 elderly female (68.1 years; 67.4 kg) subjects were enrolled in study 1. Eighteen young male (mean age, 28.6 years; mean weight, 68.9 kg), 18 young female (28.7 years; 58.8 kg), 21 older male (63.4 years; 72.6 kg), and 18 older female (65.1 years; 62.3 kg) subjects were enrolled in study 2. Most of the subjects were white (91% in study 1 and 88% in study 2). Mirabegron plasma concentrations peaked at ∼3 to 5 hours and declined multiexponentially with a t of ∼32 hours in study 1 and 60 hours in study 2. Steady state was achieved within 7 days of once daily administration, with an accumulation ratio of ∼2. Mirabegron and its metabolites demonstrated a greater-than-dose-proportional increase in C(max) and AUC(0-τ) after multiple-dose administration. Two major circulating metabolites were observed, representing 17% and 10% of total drug-related AUC(0-τ). Excretion of unchanged mirabegron in urine over the 24-hour dosing interval (Ae(0-τ)%) increased from approximately 7% at 25 mg to 18% at 300 mg once daily in young subjects. Renal clearance (CL(R)) of mirabegron was independent of dose and averaged ∼13 L/h. Mirabegron C(max) and AUC(0-τ) were similar in older and young subjects. Women exhibited ∼40% higher mirabegron C(max) and AUC(0-τ) than men; weight-corrected values were ∼20% higher in women. Mirabegron was generally well tolerated up to 300 mg once daily. No clear trends for increased incidence of AEs occurred with higher doses of mirabegron. The AE with the highest incidence was headache. Oral mirabegron exhibited a greater-than-dose-proportional increase in exposure. Sex but not age significantly affected mirabegron exposure. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01478503 (Study 1) and NCT01285596 (Study 2).

[PMID: 25521658]
To review the literature regarding the efficacy and safety of mirabegron for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). A literature search was performed using MEDLINE (PubMed) prior to December 31, 2013, using the terms "mirabegron" and "randomized-controlled trial." All published, double-blind, randomized-controlled trials assessing mirabegron were included. Articles were reviewed and included if mirabegron was used as monotherapy and if the primary outcome analyzed drug efficacy. The efficacy of mirabegron for the treatment of OAB has been demonstrated in the selected five randomized, placebo-controlled trials. The majority of these trials lasted 12 weeks and compared various doses of mirabegron with placebo and/or tolterodine extended-release (ER). Primary efficacy outcomes for the trials included mean number of micturitions per 24 hours and mean number of incontinence episodes per 24 hours. Included trials showed statistically significant reductions in both efficacy outcomes for various doses of mirabegron when compared with placebo. Based on the trials reviewed, mirabegron has been efficacious in reducing mean number of micturitions and incontinence episodes per 24 hours, as well as in improving other secondary outcomes such as OAB symptoms and quality-of-life measures. Common adverse drug events seen with mirabegron include: hypertension, nasopharyngitis, urinary tract infections, headache, constipation, upper respiratory tract infection, arthralgia, diarrhea, tachycardia, abdominal pain, and fatigue. Given the efficacy and safety data currently available, mirabegron represents a reasonable alternative to antimuscarinics for patients with OAB. Future studies are needed to determine the utility of mirabegron for OAB in a variety of demographics.

[PMID: 23089348]
Researchers are constantly seeking ways to improve existing drugs, drug mechanisms of activity, find new indications for old drugs or to develop new drugs to treat urological diseases and conditions. In Canada, tadalafil in a 5 mg daily dosage (old drug), and a new drug, silodosin, have recently become available to treat patients who have benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). In clinical studies, silodosin has shown promise as a treatment for ureteral stones, whereas it has shown conflicting results as a potential treatment for prostatitis. Two new therapies have emerged for treating overactive bladder (OAB): Mirabegron (not yet available in Canada) and fesoterodine (newly introduced in the marketplace). New therapies--denosumab (to prevent skeletal events) and abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide--were recently approved to treat certain patients with advanced prostate cancer. With the advent of new therapies to treat urological diseases, in many cases, primary management of the patient is often shifted from the urologist to the family physician, and sometimes moved from the oncologist to the urologist.

[PMID: 23850394]
Mirabegron, the selective β3-adrenoceptor agonist, heralds the latest development for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). To present the evidence available on the efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron and to discuss this treatment's potential in our setting. We reviewed 11 studies conducted with mirabegron in patients with OAB (2 phase II, 9 phase III), all studies were compared to placebo with 6 studies also including tolterodine as an additional arm. Greater emphasis shall be given to the main phase III trials performed in Europe, the USA and Australia evaluating efficacy and safety after 12 weeks (NCT00662909, NCT00689104, NCT00912964) and safety after 12 months (NCT00688688). The combined analyses of these 12 week studies is also available, with emphasis on global efficacy (FAS), efficacy with regard to incontinence (FAS i) and safety (SAF). More than 50% of patients had previously discontinued anticholinergics medication for OAB, thus allowing us to obtain data on the effectiveness of mirabegron in patients already treated with anticholinergics. Mirabegron is an efficacious drug which presents a statistically significant reduction in the number of incontinence episodes and in urinary frequency as of 4 weeks, with a higher percentage of dry patients and a higher percentage of patients with reduction ≥50% in the number of incontinence episodes than placebo. The efficacy of mirabegron 50 and 100mg in the reduction of incontinence episodes occurs in de novo patients and who have received antimuscarinics, with adjusted mean difference and improvement in urinary frequency greater in treated patients. Its tolerability is very similar to placebo particularly for the adverse effects of the antimuscarinics (dry mouth, constipation and blurred vision). A minimal, non-clinically significant change is observed in systolic and diastolic blood pressure and pulse. Its efficacy is long-term. Mirabegron at the doses of 50 and 100mg presents an improvement versus placebo in patient satisfaction, health-related quality of life (HRQoL), symptom bother and patient's perception of bladder condition (PPBC). In the 12 week Phase III European study tolterodine delivered a lesser degree of improvement than mirabegron versus placebo in patient satisfaction, HRQoL, symptom bother and PPBC. Mirabegron is the first of a new class of compounds with a novel mechanism of action that is different to the antimuscarinics. It presents significant and clinically important efficacy in the treatment of the symptoms of OAB. It has advantages with regard to the results described by the patient in treatment satisfaction. Studies on its combined use with anticholinergics are ongoing.

[PMID: 23182126]
Mirabegron, a β(3)-adrenoceptor agonist, has been developed for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). To assess the efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron versus placebo. Multicenter randomised double-blind, parallel-group placebo- and tolterodine-controlled phase 3 trial conducted in 27 countries in Europe and Australia in patients ≥ 18 yr of age with symptoms of OAB for ≥ 3 mo. After a 2-wk single-blind placebo run-in period, patients were randomised to receive placebo, mirabegron 50mg, mirabegron 100mg, or tolterodine extended release 4 mg orally once daily for 12 wk. Patients completed a micturition diary and quality-of-life (QoL) assessments. Co-primary efficacy end points were change from baseline to final visit in the mean number of incontinence episodes and micturitions per 24h. The primary comparison was between mirabegron and placebo with a secondary comparison between tolterodine and placebo. Safety parameters included adverse events (AEs), laboratory assessments, vital signs, electrocardiograms, and postvoid residual volume. A total of 1978 patients were randomised and received the study drug. Mirabegron 50-mg and 100-mg groups demonstrated statistically significant improvements (adjusted mean change from baseline [95% confidence intervals]) at the final visit in the number of incontinence episodes per 24h (-1.57 [-1.79 to -1.35] and -1.46 [-1.68 to -1.23], respectively, vs placebo -1.17 [-1.39 to -0.95]) and number of micturitions per 24h (-1.93 [-2.15 to -1.72] and -1.77 [-1.99 to -1.56], respectively, vs placebo -1.34 [-1.55 to -1.12]; p<0.05 for all comparisons). Statistically significant improvements were also observed in other key efficacy end points and QoL outcomes. The incidence of treatment-emergent AEs was similar across treatment groups. The main limitation of this study was the short (12-wk) duration of treatment. Mirabegron represents a new class of treatment for OAB with proven efficacy and good tolerability. TRIAL IDENTIFICATION: This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT00689104.

[PMID: 26501573]
Antimuscarinic medications have long been the mainstay of drug treatment for overactive bladder. This article describes mirabegron, one of a new class of agents that relaxes the detrusor muscle directly via a beta3 adrenoceptor agonist. Mirabegron's efficacy on frequency, urgency, and urge incontinence was tested in several trials before its wide clinical introduction. However, caution is still needed as data are lacking on the drug's efficacy and safety in frail older adults and for long-term therapy.

[PMID: 22981677]
Mirabegron is the first β3-adrenoceptor agonist that is clinically effective for overactive bladder. The effects of mirabegron on primary bladder mechanosensitive single-unit afferent activities (SAAs) and bladder microcontractions were evaluated and compared with the effects of oxybutynin. Female Sprague-Dawley rats were anesthetized. The SAAs generated from left L6 dorsal roots were identified by electrical stimulation of the left pelvic nerve and bladder distension. Nerves with conduction velocities (CVs) >2.5 m/s were designated as Aδ-fibers, and nerves with CVs<2.5 m/s were designated as C-fibers. Two measurements were performed in separate animals. First, after measuring the baselines of SAA during constant filling cystometry, the procedure was repeated with each intravenous administration of mirabegron at three doses-0.1, 0.3, and 1.0mg/kg-cumulatively. Second, the bladder was filled with saline until the intravesical pressure reached 30 cm H(2)O and was kept under an isovolumetric condition; then the recording was performed for 5 min with vehicle and mirabegron or oxybutynin administrated intravenously. A total of 74 single-unit afferent fibers were isolated from 55 rats (Aδ-fibers: n=34; C-fibers: n=40). SAAs of both Aδ-fibers and C-fibers in response to bladder filling significantly decreased after mirabegron administration in a dose-dependent manner, which was more remarkable for Aδ-fibers. During an isovolumetric condition of the bladder, the mean bladder pressure and the number of microcontractions decreased after mirabegron administration, whereas these parameters did not change with oxybutynin administration. SAAs of Aδ-fibers were significantly decreased by mirabegron administration at both 0.3 and 1mg/kg, whereas SAAs of C-fibers decreased only at 1mg/kg. In contrast, oxybutynin (1mg/kg) did not alter either type of SAA. The present study demonstrates that mirabegron can inhibit mechanosensitive bladder afferent activity, especially of Aδ-fibers, which may be related to suppression of bladder microcontractions.

[PMID: 25791612]
The objective of these studies was to evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile, safety, and tolerability of mirabegron, a β3-adrenoceptor agonist for the treatment of overactive bladder, including food effects (low- or high-fat meals) and sex, in healthy East Asian subjects. In total, 5 pharmacokinetic studies of mirabegron were conducted in healthy East Asian subjects. Food effects were assessed in 3 randomized, single-dose studies in young Japanese male subjects (study 1), male and female subjects (study 2), and young Taiwanese male and female subjects (study 3). In the other 2 single- and multiple-dose studies in young Chinese male and female subjects (study 4 and study 5), mirabegron was administered as a single dose under fasted conditions. After the washout period, mirabegron was administered once daily under fed conditions for 8 days. Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined using noncompartmental methods. Safety and tolerability assessments included physical examinations, vital signs, 12-lead ECG, clinical laboratory tests (biochemistry, hematology, and urinalysis), and adverse event monitoring. After administration of single oral doses of mirabegron, exposure under fed conditions was lower than under fasted conditions in Japanese and Taiwanese subjects. In Japanese subjects, a greater reduction in mirabegron Cmax and AUC0-∞ was observed after a low-fat meal compared with a high-fat meal. In Chinese subjects, Cmax was reached at approximately 4.0 hours after single oral doses. Mirabegron accumulated 2- to 3-fold on once-daily dosing of multiple-dose relative to single-dose data. Steady state was reached within 7 days. After administration of mirabegron, mean values for Cmax and AUC in female subjects were higher than those in male subjects. Mirabegron was well tolerated in Japanese, Taiwanese, and Chinese subjects. Our studies confirm the higher exposure levels of mirabegron in female compared with male East Asian subjects as found earlier in Western subjects. Furthermore, the effects of food on the pharmacokinetic profiles appeared to be similar among the 3 populations tested in our studies. The findings suggest that there are no significant pharmacokinetic differences among the Japanese, Taiwanese, and Chinese populations.

[PMID: 26422675]
Mirabegron, the first β3-adrenoceptor agonist in clinical practice, is approved for treatment of overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome symptoms. Because β3-adrenoceptors are expressed in cardiovascular (CV) tissues, there are concerns that OAB treatment with β3-adrenoceptor agonists may affect the heart and vasculature. To provide a summary of CV effects of β3-adrenoceptor agonists in clinical studies. A systematic literature search from inception until November 2014 was performed on studies in PubMed and Medline. Twenty papers, published between 1994 and 2014, were identified: mirabegron (16), solabegron (2), AK-677 (1), and BRL35135 (1). More detailed CV data from mirabegron studies were available in online regulatory documents filed with the US Food and Drug Administration and the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. The CV safety of mirabegron appears to be acceptable at therapeutic doses and comparable with that of antimuscarinic agents, currently first-line therapy for OAB. In this review we looked at the cardiovascular (CV) effects of β3-adrenoceptor agonists used for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). The CV safety of mirabegron (the only clinically approved β3-adrenoceptor agonist) appears to be acceptable at therapeutic doses and comparable with that of antimuscarinic agents, the current first-line therapy for OAB.

[PMID: 24602031]
To critically analyse available phase II and III randomised control trials (RCTs) reporting clinical data about the efficacy and tolerability of Mirabegron (a β₃-adrenoceptor agonist) in the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome. A review of the literature was performed in September 2013 using the MEDLINE database. A 'free text' protocol was used for the search strategy using 'overactive bladder' and 'Mirabegron' as keywords. Subsequently, the searches were pooled and limited to phase II and III RCTs. Two phase II and five phase III RCTs were selected and analysed. The available phase II studies showed the efficacy and tolerability of different doses of Mirabegron compared with placebo. Moreover, a dose-ranging study showed that 50 mg once daily should be considered the most promising dose for clinical use. The 12-week phase III studies confirmed the effectiveness of Mirabegron to significantly reduce the mean number of incontinence episodes/24 h and the mean number of micturitions/24 h compared with placebo. A post hoc analysis confirmed that favourable results with Mirabegron were reported both in patients with OAB who were antimuscarinic naïve and in those who had discontinued prior antimuscarinic therapy. Moreover, a phase III trial showed the safety and tolerability of 12-month treatment of Mirabegron. Discontinuation due to adverse events was low both using the 50 and 100 mg dose of Mirabegron. Mirabegron is the first of a new class of drugs for the treatment of OAB able to influence non-voiding activity and produce an increased storage capacity and inter-void interval. Recently published phase II and III RCTs have shown that the β₃-adrenoceptor-selective agonist, Mirabegron, is an effective and safe drug for the symptomatic treatment of OAB syndrome. Mirabegron represents a valid medical option both for patients with OAB who are antimuscarinic naïve, as well as in those where antimuscarinics are ineffective or not tolerated.

[PMID: 26663687]
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the β3 -adrenoceptor agonist, mirabegron, compared with placebo in Japanese patients with overactive bladder (OAB). Patients with OAB symptoms for ≥24 weeks, ≥8 micturitions/24 h on average, and ≥1 episode of urgency and/or urgency incontinence/24 h were randomized to mirabegron (25, 50 or 100 mg) or placebo for 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was change from baseline to end of study in the mean number of micturitions/24 h. Secondary endpoints included micturition variables related to urgency, incontinence, volume voided, and quality of life based on the King's Health Questionnaire (KHQ). Safety was evaluated based on adverse events (AEs), laboratory findings, vital signs, electrocardiogram, and post-void residual volume. In total, 842 patients were randomized to placebo (n = 214), mirabegron 25 mg (n = 211), 50 mg (n = 208), or 100 mg (n = 209). The primary endpoint was significantly improved in each mirabegron group compared with placebo (P < 0.001; Williams' multiple comparison test). The maximal efficacy in the primary endpoint was observed at the 50 mg dose. Significant improvements were also observed in incontinence, urgency incontinence, mean volume voided, and 3 of the 9 domains from the KHQ (incontinence impact, physical limitations, and severity measures) at each mirabegron dose. Urgency episodes decreased, and mean volume voided increased, dose-dependently. The incidence of AEs in each mirabegron dose was comparable with placebo. Mirabegron demonstrated significant improvements in OAB symptoms compared with placebo and was well tolerated.

[PMID: 26493129]
This article is commented on by Michel, M. C., pp. 429-430 of this issue. To view this commentary visit http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.13379. Mirabegron is the first β3 -adrenoceptor agonist approved for treatment of overactive bladder syndrome. This study aimed to investigate the effects of β3 -adrenoceptor agonist mirabegron in mouse urethra. The possibility that mirabegron also exerts α1 -adrenoceptor antagonism was also tested in rat smooth muscle preparations presenting α1A - (vas deferens and prostate), α1D - (aorta) and α1B -adrenoceptors (spleen). Functional assays were carried out in mouse and rat isolated tissues. Competition assays for the specific binding of [(3) H]prazosin to membrane preparations of HEK-293 cells expressing each of the human α1 -adrenoceptors, as well as β-adrenoceptor mRNA expression and cyclic AMP measurements in mouse urethra, were performed. Mirabegron produced concentration-dependent urethral relaxations that were shifted to the right by the selective β3 -adrenoceptor antagonist L-748,337 but unaffected by β1 - and β2 -adrenoceptor antagonists (atenolol and ICI-118,551 respectively). Mirabegron-induced relaxations were enhanced by the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram, and the agonist stimulated cAMP synthesis. Mirabegron also produced rightward shifts in urethral contractions induced by the α1 -adrenoceptor agonist phenylephrine. Schild regression analysis revealed that mirabegron behaves as a competitive antagonist of α1 -adrenoceptors in urethra, vas deferens and prostate (α1A -adrenoceptor, pA2  ≅ 5.6) and aorta (α1D -adrenoceptor, pA2  ≅ 5.4) but not in spleen (α1B -adrenoceptor). The affinities estimated for mirabegron in functional assays were consistent with those estimated in radioligand binding with human recombinant α1A - and α1D -adrenoceptors (pKi  ≅ 6.0). The effects of mirabegron in urethral smooth muscle are the result of β3 -adrenoceptor agonism together with α1A and α1D -adrenoceptor antagonism.

[PMID: 20878594]
Mirabegron (YM-178), currently in development by Astellas Pharma Inc, is an orally active β₃-adrenoceptor (AR) agonist for the potential symptomatic treatment of overactive bladder (OAB). Mirabegron demonstrates nanomolar EC50 values against the human β₃-AR in biochemical assays with potent selectivity over the β₁- and β₂-ARs. Originally developed as a treatment for diabetes, the development of mirabegron was later refocused to OAB. Cystometric experiments in rats reported a reduction in resting intravesical pressure and contraction frequency in anesthetized rats, without any effect on the amplitude of micturition contraction. Mirabegron also reduced non-micturition bladder contractions in an awake rat model of bladder outlet obstruction. Top-line results from clinical trials to date indicate that mirabegron has been well tolerated with significant efficacy in reducing the number of incontinence episodes and mean micturition frequency in patients. Evidence of cytochrome P450 (CYP)2D6 inhibition in clinical trials highlighted a concern for pharmacokinetic interaction with other drugs that are CYP2D6 substrates, as confirmed by a rise in the pharmacokinetic parameters of desipramine with concomitant administration of mirabegron. Mirabegron exhibits a novel mode of action in targeting the β₃-AR for bladder relaxation, and the studies and trials conducted to date suggest mirabegron as a promising new treatment in the management of OAB symptoms, such as increased urinary urgency and frequency, and urgency incontinence.

[PMID: 22384458]
Overactive bladder (OAB) syndrome is defined as urinary urgency, usually accompanied by frequency and nocturia, with or without urge urinary incontinence, in the absence of urinary tract infection or other obvious pathology. Mirabegron (YM-178, Betanis®) is a novel, once-daily, orally active, first-in-class selective β(3)-adrenoceptor agonist that improves symptoms associated with OAB by enhancing storage function and relaxing the urinary bladder. Mirabegron has been approved in Japan for the indication of urgency, urinary frequency and urge urinary incontinence associated with OAB, and was recently submitted for approval to U.S. and European authorities for the same indication. In phase III clinical trials performed in Europe, the U.S. and Australia, mirabegron at doses of 50 or 100 mg for 12 weeks significantly decreased the mean number of incontinence episodes and micturition episodes per 24 hours, and was safe and well tolerated. Mirabegron may be an alternative in patients with OAB who are poor responders to antimuscarinic agents or intolerant of their adverse effects.

[PMID: 24458878]
Long-term persistence with pharmacotherapy for overactive bladder (OAB) requires a drug with an early onset of action and good efficacy and tolerability profile. Although antimuscarinics improve OAB symptoms within 1-2 weeks of initiating treatment, adherence after 3 months is relatively poor due to bothersome side effects (e.g., dry mouth and constipation). Mirabegron, a β3-adrenoceptor agonist, has demonstrated significant improvements in key symptoms of OAB and good tolerability after 12 weeks in Phase III studies. This was a prespecified pooled analysis of three randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 12-week studies, and a Phase II study, to evaluate efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron 25 and 50 mg versus placebo. The main efficacy endpoints were change from baseline to week 1 (Phase II only), week 4, and final visit in mean number of incontinence episodes/24 h, micturitions/24 h, and mean volume voided/micturition (MVV). A significant benefit for mirabegron 25 and 50 mg versus placebo was evident at the first assessment point, 4 weeks after initiation of therapy, in Phase III studies for incontinence, micturitions, and MVV. The earliest measured benefit was after 1 week, in the Phase II study. Quality-of-life parameters also significantly improved with mirabegron 25 and 50 mg as early as week 4. Significant benefits continued throughout the studies. Mirabegron was well tolerated. The early onset of action and good overall efficacy and tolerability balance that mirabegron offers may lead to high rates of persistence with mirabegron in the long-term treatment of OAB.