[PMID: 24043741]
Aurora A kinase (AAK) is overexpressed in aggressive lymphomas and can correlate with more histologically aggressive forms of disease. We therefore designed a phase II study of alisertib, a selective AAK inhibitor, in patients with relapsed and refractory aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Patients age ≥ 18 years were eligible if they had relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL), transformed follicular lymphoma, Burkitt's lymphoma, or noncutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Alisertib was administered orally at 50 mg twice daily for 7 days in 21-day cycles. We enrolled 48 patients. Histologies included DLBCL (n = 21), MCL (n = 13), peripheral T-cell lymphoma (n = 8), transformed follicular lymphoma (n = 5), and Burkitt's (n = 1). Most common grade 3 to 4 adverse events were neutropenia (63%), leukopenia (54%), anemia (35%), thrombocytopenia (33%), stomatitis (15%), febrile neutropenia (13%), and fatigue (6%). Four deaths during the study were attributed to progressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma (n = 2), treatment-related sepsis (n = 1), and unknown cause (n = 1). The overall response rate was 27%, including responses in three of 21 patients with DLBCL, three of 13 with MCL, one of one with Burkitt's lymphoma, two of five with transformed follicular lymphoma, and four of eight with noncutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The alisertib steady-state trough concentration (n = 25) revealed the expected pharmacokinetic variability, with a trend for higher incidence of adverse event-related dose reductions at higher trough concentrations. Analysis for AAK gene amplification and total AAK protein revealed no differences between histologies or correlation with clinical response. The novel AAK inhibitor alisertib seems clinically active in both B- and T-cell aggressive lymphomas. On the basis of these results, confirmatory single-agent and combination studies have been initiated.

[PMID: 22488249]
Novel therapies are urgently needed to improve clinical outcomes for patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The investigational drug alisertib (MLN8237) is a novel Aurora A kinase inhibitor being studied in multiple Phase I and II studies. We investigated the preclinical efficacy and pharmacodynamics of alisertib in AML cell lines, primary AML cells and mouse models of AML. Here, we report that alisertib disrupted cell viability, diminished clonogenic survival, induced expression of the FOXO3a targets p27 and BIM and triggered apoptosis. A link between Aurora A expression and sensitivity to ara-C was established, suggesting that Aurora A inhibition may be a promising strategy to increase the efficacy of ara-C. Accordingly, alisertib significantly potentiated the antileukemic activity of ara-C in both AML cell lines and primary blasts. Targeted FOXO3a knockdown significantly blunted the pro-apoptotic effects of the alisertib/ara-C combination, indicating that it is an important regulator of sensitivity to these agents. In vivo studies demonstrated that alisertib significantly augmented the efficacy of ara-C without affecting its pharmacokinetic profile and led to the induction of p27 and BIM. Our collective data indicate that targeting Aurora A with alisertib represents a novel approach to increase the efficacy of ara-C that warrants further investigation.

[PMID: 22940834]
We investigated the effects of targeting the mitotic regulators aurora kinase A and B in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Aurora protein expression levels in pediatric ALL and AML patient samples were determined by western blot and reverse phase protein array. Both kinases were overexpressed in ALL and AML patients (P<0.0002), especially in E2A-PBX1-translocated ALL cases (P<0.002), compared with normal bone-marrow mononuclear cells. Aurora kinase expression was silenced in leukemic cell lines using short hairpin RNAs and locked nucleic acid-based mRNA antagonists. Aurora B knockdown resulted in proliferation arrest and apoptosis, whereas aurora A knockdown caused no or only minor growth delay. Most tested cell lines were highly sensitive to the AURKB-selective inhibitor barasertib-hydroxyquinazoline-pyrazol-anilide (AZD1152-HQPA) in the nanomolar range, as tested with an MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium) assay. But most importantly, primary ALL cells with a high aurora B protein expression, especially E2A-PBX1-positive cases, were sensitive as well. In adult AML early clinical trials, clear responses are observed with barasertib. Here we show that inhibition of aurora B, more than aurora A, has an antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effect on acute leukemia cells, indicating that particularly targeting aurora B may offer a new strategy to treat pediatric ALL and AML.

[PMID: 23037716]
Amplification of aurora kinase A (AK-A) overrides the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint, inducing resistance to taxanes. RNA interference targeting AK-A in human pancreatic cancer cell lines enhanced taxane chemosensitivity. In this study, a novel AK-A inhibitor, CYC3, was investigated in pancreatic cancer cell lines, in combination with paclitaxel. Western blot, flow cytometry and immunostaining were used to investigate the specificity of CYC3. Sulforhodamine B staining, time-lapse microscopy and colony-formation assays were employed to evaluate the cytotoxic effect of CYC3 and paclitaxel. Human colony-forming unit of granulocyte and macrophage (CFU-GM) cells were used to compare the effect in tumour and normal tissue. CYC3 was shown to be a specific AK-A inhibitor. Three nanomolar paclitaxel (growth inhibition 50% (GI(50)) 3 nM in PANC-1, 5.1 nM in MIA PaCa-2) in combination with 1 μM CYC3 (GI(50) 1.1 μM in MIA PaCa2 and 2 μM in PANC-1) was synergistic in inhibiting pancreatic cell growth and causing mitotic arrest, achieving similar effects to 10-fold higher concentrations of paclitaxel (30 nM). In CFU-GM cells, the effect of the combination was simply additive, displaying significantly less myelotoxicity compared with high concentrations of paclitaxel (30 nM; 60-70% vs 100% inhibition). The combination of lower doses of paclitaxel and CYC3 merits further investigation with the potential for an improved therapeutic index in vivo.

[PMID: 23431463]
The initial response of lymphoid malignancies to glucocorticoids (GCs) is a critical parameter predicting successful treatment. Although being known as a strong inducer of apoptosis in lymphoid cells for almost a century, the signaling pathways regulating the susceptibility of the cells to GCs are only partly revealed. There is still a need to develop clinical tests that can predict the outcome of GC therapy. In this paper, I discuss important parameters modulating the pro-apoptotic effects of GCs, with a specific emphasis on the microRNA world comprised of small players with big impacts. The journey through the multifaceted complexity of GC-induced apoptosis brings forth explanations for the differential treatment response and raises potential strategies for overcoming drug resistance.

[PMID: 22753585]
Aurora A kinase (AAK) is a key regulator of mitosis and a target for anticancer drug development. This phase I study investigated the safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of MLN8237 (alisertib), an investigational, oral, selective AAK inhibitor, in 59 adults with advanced solid tumors. Patients received MLN8237 once daily or twice daily for 7, 14, or 21 consecutive days, followed by 14 days recovery, in 21-, 28-, or 35-day cycles. Dose-limiting toxicities (DLT) and the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) for the 7- and 21-day schedules were determined. Pharmacokinetic parameters were derived from plasma concentration-time profiles. AAK inhibition in skin and tumor biopsies was evaluated and antitumor activity assessed. Neutropenia and stomatitis were the most common DLTs. The MTD for the 7- and 21-day schedules was 50 mg twice daily and 50 mg once daily, respectively. MLN8237 absorption was fast (median time to maximum concentration, 2 hours). Mean terminal half-life was approximately 19 hours. At steady state, pharmacodynamic effects were shown by accumulation of mitotic and apoptotic cells in skin, and exposure-related increases in numbers of mitotic cells with characteristic spindle and chromosomal abnormalities in tumor specimens, supporting AAK inhibition by MLN8237. Stable disease was observed and was durable with repeat treatment cycles, administered over 6 months, in 6 patients, without notable cumulative toxicity. The recommended phase II dose of MLN8237 is 50 mg twice daily on the 7-day schedule, which is being evaluated further in a variety of malignancies, including in a phase III trial in peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

[PMID: 22772063]
Aurora A kinase (AAK), a key mitotic regulator, is implicated in the pathogenesis of several tumors, including ovarian cancer. This single-arm phase II study assessed single-agent efficacy and safety of the investigational AAK inhibitor MLN8237 (alisertib), in patients with platinum-refractory or -resistant epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal carcinoma. Adult women with malignant, platinum-treated disease received MLN8237 50mg orally twice daily for 7 days plus 14 days' rest (21-day cycles). The primary endpoint was combined objective tumor response rate per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) and/or CA-125 criteria. Secondary endpoints included response duration, clinical benefit rate, progression-free survival (PFS), time-to-progression (TTP), and safety. Thirty-one patients with epithelial ovarian (n=25), primary peritoneal (n=5), and fallopian tube carcinomas (n=1) were enrolled. Responses of 6.9-11.1 month duration were observed in 3 (10%) patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Sixteen (52%) patients achieved stable disease with a mean duration of response of 2.86 months and which was durable for ≥3 months in 6 (19%). Median PFS and TTP were 1.9 months. Most common drug-related grade≥3 adverse events were neutropenia (42%), leukopenia (23%), stomatitis, and thrombocytopenia (each 19%); 6% reported febrile neutropenia. These data suggest that MLN8237 has modest single-agent antitumor activity and may produce responses and durable disease control in some patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. MLN8237 is currently undergoing evaluation in a phase I/II trial with paclitaxel in recurrent ovarian cancer.

[PMID: 23153524]
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCL) are a diverse group of rare non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) that carry a poor prognosis and are in need of effective therapies. Alisertib (MLN8237) an investigational agent that inhibits Aurora A Ser/Thr kinase has shown activity in PTCL patients. Here we demonstrate that aurora A and B are highly expressed in T-cell lymphoma cell lines. In PTCL patient samples aurora A was positive in 3 of 24 samples and co-expressed with aurora B. Aurora B was positive in tumor cells in 22 of 32 samples. Of the subtypes of PTCL, aurora B was over-expressed in PTCL (NOS) [73%], T-NHL [100%], ALCL (Alk-Neg) [100%] and AITL [100%]. Treatment with MLN8237 inhibited PTCL cell proliferation in CRL-2396 and TIB-48 cells with an IC50 of 80-100nM. MLN8237 induced endo-reduplication in a dose and time dependent manner in PTCL cell lines leading to apoptosis demonstrated by flow cytometry and PARP-cleavage at concentrations achieved in early phase clinical trials. Moreover, inhibition of HisH3 and aurora A phosphorylation was dose dependent and strongly correlated with endo-reduplication. The data provide a sound rationale for aurora inhibition in PTCL as a therapeutic modality and warrants clinical trial evaluation.

[PMID: 23755375]
Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCL) are a diverse group of lymphoproliferative disorders, which share a common denominator of overall poor prognosis, with few exceptions. In this article, the authors review current standard of care approaches for the treatment of PTCLs, the role of stem-cell/bone marrow transplantation, and current developments in novel targeted therapies.

[PMID: 23180582]
Oncogene-induced senescence can provide a protective mechanism against tumour progression. However, production of cytokines and growth factors by senescent cells may contribute to tumour development. Thus, it is unclear whether induction of senescence represents a viable therapeutic approach. Here, using a mouse model with orthotopic implantation of metastatic melanoma tumours taken from 19 patients, we observed that targeting aurora kinases with MLN8054/MLN8237 impaired mitosis, induced senescence and markedly blocked proliferation in patient tumour implants. Importantly, when a subset of tumour-bearing mice were monitored for tumour progression after pausing MLN8054 treatment, 50% of the tumours did not progress over a 12-month period. Mechanistic analyses revealed that inhibition of aurora kinases induced polyploidy and the ATM/Chk2 DNA damage response, which mediated senescence and a NF-κB-related, senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Blockade of IKKβ/NF-κB led to reversal of MLN8237-induced senescence and SASP. Results demonstrate that removal of senescent tumour cells by infiltrating myeloid cells is crucial for inhibition of tumour re-growth. Altogether, these data demonstrate that induction of senescence, coupled with immune surveillance, can limit melanoma growth.

[PMID: 24501545]
Androgen deprivation therapy remains the single most effective treatment for the initial therapy of advanced prostate cancer, but is uniformly marked by progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Residual tumor androgens and androgen axis activation are now recognized to play a prominent role in mediating CRPC progression. Despite suppression of circulating testosterone to castrate levels, castration does not eliminate androgens from the prostate tumor microenvironment and residual androgen levels are well within the range capable of activating the androgen receptor (AR) and AR-mediated gene expression. Accordingly, therapeutic strategies that more effectively target production of intratumoral androgens are necessary. The introduction of abiraterone, a potent suppressor of cytochrome P450 17 α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-mediated androgen production, has heralded a new era in the hormonal treatment of men with metastatic CRPC. Herein, the androgen and AR-mediated mechanisms that contribute to CRPC progression and establish cytochrome P450 17 α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase as a critical therapeutic target are briefly reviewed. The mechanism of action and pharmacokinetics of abiraterone are reviewed and its recently described activity against AR and 3-β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase is discussed. The Phase I and II data initially demonstrating the efficacy of abiraterone and Phase III data supporting its approval for patients with metastatic CRPC are reviewed. The safety and tolerability of abiraterone, including the incidence and management of side effects and potential drug interactions, are discussed. The current place of abiraterone in CRPC therapy is reviewed and early evidence regarding cross-resistance of abiraterone with taxane therapy, mechanisms of resistance to abiraterone, and observations of an abiraterone withdrawal response are presented. Future directions in the use of abiraterone, including optimal dosing strategies, the role of abiraterone in earlier disease settings, including castration sensitive, biochemically recurrent, or localized disease, and the rationale for combinatorial treatment strategies of abiraterone with enzalutamide and other targeted agents are also discussed.

[PMID: 22863010]
The mechanism by which cells decide to skip mitosis to become polyploid is largely undefined. Here we used a high-content image-based screen to identify small-molecule probes that induce polyploidization of megakaryocytic leukemia cells and serve as perturbagens to help understand this process. Our study implicates five networks of kinases that regulate the switch to polyploidy. Moreover, we find that dimethylfasudil (diMF, H-1152P) selectively increased polyploidization, mature cell-surface marker expression, and apoptosis of malignant megakaryocytes. An integrated target identification approach employing proteomic and shRNA screening revealed that a major target of diMF is Aurora kinase A (AURKA). We further find that MLN8237 (Alisertib), a selective inhibitor of AURKA, induced polyploidization and expression of mature megakaryocyte markers in acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) blasts and displayed potent anti-AMKL activity in vivo. Our findings provide a rationale to support clinical trials of MLN8237 and other inducers of polyploidization and differentiation in AMKL.

[PMID: 24101146]
Alisertib (MLN8237) is an investigational inhibitor of Aurora A kinase (AAK). Aurora A plays an essential role in the regulation of spindle assembly and chromosome alignment during mitosis. Inhibition of Aurora A by alisertib in tissue culture has previously been demonstrated to lead to improper chromosomal alignment and disruption of spindle organization, resulting in a transient mitotic delay. The spindle organization defects induced by alisertib have been used to develop a pharmacodynamic (PD) assay for Aurora A inhibition based on the percentage of mitotic cells with proper chromosomal alignment at the metaphase plate (% aligned spindles, abbreviated as AS). The transient mitotic delay that occurs with AAK inhibition permits the use of the mitotic index (the fraction of cells in the population currently undergoing mitosis, abbreviated as MI) as an additional PD assay. When the two PD assays were used in Phase I clinical trials, the reduction in AS was strongly correlated with dose levels and exposures in patients from single time point PD measurements; however, MI failed to show any correlation. To further understand this clinical finding, we constructed PK/PD/efficacy models for AS and MI that can precisely capture the temporal dynamics of the PD markers from in vivo xenograft studies. A PK/PD study was conducted using a single oral dose of alisertib at 3, 10, and 20 mg/kg in HCT-116 xenografts implanted subcutaneously in mice. An extravascular, two-compartmental pharmacokinetic (PK) model was used to describe the drug kinetics. Consistent with the mechanistic hypothesis for AAK inhibition, the PD biomarkers such as AS and MI were fitted to PK using a direct response inhibitory sigmoid model and an indirect response turnover model, respectively. The antitumor activity of alisertib dosed orally for 21 days with different dose levels and schedules was evaluated. The PK/PD models showed a fast, sustained response for AS after alisertib administration, whereas MI exhibited a slow, transient response. The PK/efficacy relationship for alisertib in HCT-116 xenografts closely corresponds to the PK/PD relationship for the PD markers, with all three IC50s in close agreement (303, 270, and 280 nM, respectively). The PK/PD and PK/efficacy models show that both AS and MI are equally relevant as mechanism-based PD markers to capture drug activity. However, of the two PD markers, the fast, sustained response of AS makes it the only clinically viable PD marker for defining a dose-response relationship, as its maximal effect can be captured from a wider time window with a single PD sampling; while the window to capture dose-related MI response is narrower.

[PMID: 22767670]
This phase I study evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and efficacy of the investigational oral drug MLN8237 (alisertib), a small-molecule Aurora A kinase (AAK) inhibitor, in 87 adult patients with advanced solid tumors. Sequential cohorts of patients received MLN8237 5 to 150 mg orally once daily or twice daily for 7, 14, or 21 days, followed by 14 days' rest per cycle. MLN8237 pharmacokinetics was characterized, and the relative bioavailability of an enteric-coated tablet (ECT) formulation was evaluated in reference to the original powder-in-capsule (PIC) formulation. Pharmacodynamic effects of MLN8237 on inhibition of AAK activity were evaluated in skin biopsies. Tolerability and response to treatment were assessed. Common toxicities included fatigue, nausea, and neutropenia. Plasma exposures increased dose proportionally (5-150 mg/d), and were similar for PIC and ECT. The terminal half-life was 23 hours. At the maximum tolerated dose of 50 mg twice daily on the 7-day schedule, the mitotic index of the skin basal epithelium was increased within 24 hours after MLN8237 administration on days 1 and 7, a finding consistent with AAK inhibition. One (1%) patient achieved a partial response lasting for more than 1 year and received MLN8237 for 51 cycles; 20 (23%) patients achieved stable disease for ≥3 months. This first-in-human trial of MLN8237 showed tolerability and favorable pharmacokinetics in this patient population. The recommended phase II dose of MLN8237 is 50 mg twice daily orally for 7 days in 21-day cycles, which is being evaluated further in the treatment of various solid tumors and hematologic malignancies.

[PMID: 23755370]
Osteosarcoma, the most common malignant bone tumor of childhood, is a high-grade primary bone sarcoma that occurs mostly in adolescence. Standard treatment consists of surgery in combination with multi-agent chemotherapy regimens. The development and approval of imatinib for Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children and the fully human monoclonal antibody, anti-GD2, as part of an immune therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma patients have established the precedent for use of targeted inhibitors along with standard chemotherapy backbones. However, few targeted agents tested have achieved traditional clinical endpoints for osteosarcoma. Many biological agents demonstrating anti-tumor responses in preclinical and early-phase clinical testing have failed to reach response thresholds to justify randomized trials with large numbers of patients. The development of targeted therapies for pediatric cancer remains a significant challenge. To aid in the prioritization of new agents for clinical testing, the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP) has developed reliable and robust preclinical pediatric cancer models to rapidly screen agents for activity in multiple childhood cancers and establish pharmacological parameters and effective drug concentrations for clinical trials. In this article, we examine a range of standard and novel agents that have been evaluated by the PPTP, and we discuss the preclinical and clinical development of these for the treatment of osteosarcoma. We further demonstrate that committed resources for hypothesis-driven drug discovery and development are needed to yield clinical successes in the search for new therapies for this pediatric disease.

[PMID: 22016509]
Small-molecule inhibitors of Aurora A (AAK) and B (ABK) kinases, which play important roles in mitosis, are currently being pursued in oncology clinical trials. We developed three novel assays to quantitatively measure biomarkers of AAK inhibition in vivo. Here, we describe preclinical characterization of alisertib (MLN8237), a selective AAK inhibitor, incorporating these novel pharmacodynamic assays. We investigated the selectivity of alisertib for AAK and ABK and studied the antitumor and antiproliferative activity of alisertib in vitro and in vivo. Novel assays were used to assess chromosome alignment and mitotic spindle bipolarity in human tumor xenografts using immunofluorescent detection of DNA and alpha-tubulin, respectively. In addition, 18F-3'-fluoro-3'-deoxy-l-thymidine positron emission tomography (FLT-PET) was used to noninvasively measure effects of alisertib on in vivo tumor cell proliferation. Alisertib inhibited AAK over ABK with a selectivity of more than 200-fold in cells and produced a dose-dependent decrease in bipolar and aligned chromosomes in the HCT-116 xenograft model, a phenotype consistent with AAK inhibition. Alisertib inhibited proliferation of human tumor cell lines in vitro and produced tumor growth inhibition in solid tumor xenograft models and regressions in in vivo lymphoma models. In addition, a dose of alisertib that caused tumor stasis, as measured by volume, resulted in a decrease in FLT uptake, suggesting that noninvasive imaging could provide value over traditional measurements of response. Alisertib is a selective and potent inhibitor of AAK. The novel methods of measuring Aurora A pathway inhibition and application of tumor imaging described here may be valuable for clinical evaluation of small-molecule inhibitors.

[PMID: 23847761]
Despite dramatic advances in the treatment of pediatric leukemia over the past 50 years, there remain subsets of patients who respond poorly to treatment. Many of the high-risk cases of childhood leukemia with the poorest prognosis have been found to harbor specific genetic signatures, often resulting from chromosomal rearrangements. With increased understanding of the genetic and epigenetic makeup of high-risk pediatric leukemia has come the opportunity to develop targeted therapies that promise to be both more effective and less toxic than current chemotherapy. Of particular importance is an understanding of the interconnections between different targets within the same cancer, and observations of synergy between two different targeted therapies or between a targeted drug and conventional chemotherapy. It has become clear that many cancers are able to circumvent a single specific blockade, and pediatric leukemias are no exception in this regard. This review highlights the most promising approaches to new drugs and drug combinations for high-risk pediatric leukemia. Key biological evidence supporting selection of molecular targets is presented, together with a critical survey of recent progress toward the discovery, pre-clinical development, and clinical study of novel molecular therapeutics.

[PMID: 23446853]
Centrosome amplification plays a key role in the origin of chromosomal instability (CIN) during cancer development and progression. In this study, MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines harboring abrogated p53 function (vMCF-7DNp53) were employed to investigate the relationship between induction of genotoxic stress, activation of cyclin-A/Cdk2 and Aurora-A oncogenic signalings and development of centrosome amplification. Introduction of genotoxic stress in the vMCF-7DNp53 cell line by treatment with hydroxyurea (HU) induced centrosome amplification that was mechanistically linked to Aurora-A kinase activity. In cells carrying defective p53, the development of centrosome amplification also occurred following treatment with another DNA damaging agent, methotrexate. Importantly, we demonstrated that Aurora-A kinase-induced centrosome amplification was mediated by Cdk2 kinase since molecular inhibition of Cdk2 activity by SU9516 suppressed Aurora-A centrosomal localization and consequent centrosome amplification. In addition, we employed vMCF-7DRaf-1 cells that display high levels of endogenous cyclin-A and demonstrated that molecular targeting of Aurora-A by Alisertib reduces cyclin-A expression. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a novel positive feed-back loop between cyclin-A/Cdk2 and Aurora-A pathways in the development of centrosome amplification in breast cancer cells. They also provide the translational rationale for targeting 'druggable cell cycle regulators' as an innovative therapeutic strategy to inhibit centrosome amplification and CIN in breast tumors resistant to conventional chemotherapeutic drugs.

[PMID: 22350019]
The Aurora kinases (serine/threonine kinases) were discovered in 1995 during studies of mutant alleles associated with abnormal spindle pole formation in Drosophila melanogaster. They soon became the focus of much attention because of their importance in human biology and association with cancer. Aurora kinases are essential for cell division and are primarily active during mitosis. Following their identification as potential targets for cancer chemotherapy, many Aurora kinase inhibitors have been discovered, and are currently under development. The binding modes of Aurora kinase inhibitors to Aurora kinases share specific hydrogen bonds between the inhibitor core and the back bone of the kinase hinge region, while others parts of the molecules may point to different parts of the active site via noncovalent interactions. Currently there are about 30 Aurora kinase inhibitors in different stages of pre-clinical and clinical development. This review summarizes the characteristics and status of Aurora kinase inhibitors in preclinical, Phase I, and Phase II clinical studies, with particular emphasis on the mechanisms of action and resistance to these promising anticancer agents. We also discuss the validity of Aurora kinases as oncology targets, on/off-target toxicities, and other important aspects of overall clinical performance and future of Aurora kinase inhibitors.

[PMID: 23723712]
In the last decade, better understanding of the role of epidermal growth factor receptor in the pathogenesis and progression of non-small cell lung cancer has led to a revolution in the work-up of these neoplasms. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as erlotinib and gefitinib, have been approved for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, demonstrating an improvement in progression-free and overall survival, particularly in patients harboring activating EGFR mutations. Nevertheless, despite initial responses and long-lasting remissions, resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors invariably develops, most commonly due to the emergence of secondary T790M mutations or to the amplification of mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-Met), which inevitably leads to treatment failure. Several clinical studies are ongoing (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov), aimed to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of combined approaches and to develop novel irreversible or multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors and mutant-selective inhibitors to overcome such resistance. This review is an overview of ongoing Phase I, II, and III trials of novel small molecule epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors and combinations in non-small cell lung cancer patients.

[PMID: 24240108]
Suppression of P53 (tumor protein 53) transcriptional function mediates poor therapeutic response in patients with cancer. Aurora kinase A (AURKA) and human double minute 2 (HDM2) are negative regulators of P53. Herein, we examined the role of AURKA in regulating HDM2 and its subsequent effects on P53 apoptotic function in gastric cancer. Primary tumors and in vitro gastric cancer cell models with overexpression or knockdown of AURKA were used. The role of AURKA in regulating HDM2 and cell survival coupled with P53 expression and activity were investigated. Overexpression of AURKA enhanced the HDM2 protein level; conversely, knockdown of endogenous AURKA decreased expression of HDM2 in AGS and SNU-1 cells. Dual co-immunoprecipitation assay data indicated that AURKA was associated with HDM2 in a protein complex. The in vitro kinase assay using recombinant AURKA and HDM2 proteins followed by co-immunoprecipitation revealed that AURKA directly interacts and phosphorylates HDM2 protein in vitro. The activation of HDM2 by AURKA led to induction of P53 ubiquitination and attenuation of cisplatin-induced activation of P53 in gastric cancer cells. Inhibition of AURKA using an investigational small-molecule specific inhibitor, alisertib, decreased the HDM2 protein level and induced P53 transcriptional activity. These effects markedly decreased cell survival in vitro and xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Notably, analysis of immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays revealed significant overexpression of AURKA and HDM2 in human gastric cancer samples (P < 0.05). Collectively, our novel findings indicate that AURKA promotes tumor growth and cell survival through regulation of HDM2-induced ubiquitination and inhibition of P53. Clin Cancer Res; 20(1); 76-86. ©2013 AACR.

[PMID: 22972611]
Upper gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas (UGCs) respond poorly to current chemotherapeutic regimes. The authors and others have previously reported frequent Aurora kinase A (AURKA) gene amplification and mRNA and protein overexpression in UGCs. The objective of the current study was to determine the therapeutic potential of alisertib (MLN8237) alone and in combination with docetaxel in UGCs. After treatment with alisertib and/or docetaxel, clonogenic cell survival, cell cycle analyses, Western blot analyses, and tumor xenograft growth assays were carried out to measure cell survival, cell cycle progression, apoptotic protein expression, and tumor xenograft volumes, respectively. By using the AGS, FLO-1, and OE33 UGC cell lines, which have constitutive AURKA overexpression and variable tumor protein 53 (p53) status, significantly enhanced inhibition of cancer cell survival was observed with alisertib and docetaxel treatment in combination (P < .001), compared with single-agent treatments. Cell cycle analyses, after 48 hours of treatment with alisertib, produced a significant increase in the percentage of polyploidy in UGC cells (P < .01) that was further enhanced by docetaxel (P < .001). In addition, an increase in the percentage of cells in sub-G1-phase observed with alisertib (P < .01) was significantly enhanced with the combination treatment (P < .001). Western blot analysis demonstrated higher induction of cleaved caspase 3 protein expression with the combined treatment compared with single-agent treatments. In addition, FLO-1 and OE33 cell xenograft models demonstrated enhanced antitumor activity for the alisertib and docetaxel combination compared with single-agent treatments (P < .001). The current study demonstrated that alisertib combined with docetaxel can mediate a better therapeutic outcome in UGC cell lines.