[PMID: 25899749]
Lack of specific antidotes is a major concern in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) related to direct anticoagulants including dabigatran (OAC-ICH). We examined the efficacy of idarucizumab, an antibody fragment binding to dabigatran, in a mouse model of OAC-ICH. Dabigatran etexilate (DE) dose-dependently prolonged diluted thrombin time and tail-vein bleeding time, which were reversed by idarucizumab. Pretreatment with DE increased intracerebral hematoma volume and cerebral hemoglobin content. Idarucizumab in equimolar dose prevented excess hematoma expansion for both DE doses. In more extensive ICH, idarucizumab significantly reduced mortality. Thus, idarucizumab prevents excess intracerebral hematoma formation in mice anticoagulated with dabigatran and reduces mortality.

[PMID: 28416406]
Dabigatran is a direct thrombin inhibitor used to reduce the risk of stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. For patients who present with an acute stroke despite dabigatran therapy, clinical data on the use of intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (IV-tPA) is limited. There is an anticipated increased risk of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage (sICH) when using IV-tPA in patients on dabigatran therapy. In 2015, the humanized monoclonal antibody fragment idarucizumab was approved for rapid (minutes) reversal of anticoagulant effects of dabigatran. Dabigatran reversal with idarucizumab before administration of IV-tPA might reduce the risk of sICH. We report a case of a 69-year-old stroke patient on dabigatran for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation who presented with an initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of 12. There was no early evidence of ischemic stroke or hemorrhage on head computed tomography, and coagulation studies implied therapeutic dabigatran levels. After controlling blood pressure, dabigatran was reversed with idarucizumab, and IV-tPA was administrated beginning 197 minutes after he was last seen at his baseline. Subsequent brain magnetic resonance imaging showed 2 punctate infarcts in the left temporal lobe and occipital lobe with no evidence of hemorrhage. The patient was discharged with an NIHSS of 1. Telephone follow-up 2 months later indicated that he was at his prestroke baseline, except for a complaint of worsened short-term memory. Idarucizumab reversal of dabigatran may reduce the risk of sICH and should be considered for acute stroke patients arriving in the IV-tPA time window.

[PMID: 27727040]
The development of novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) has revolutionized oral anticoagulation. Rapid incorporation of NOACs into general practice has heightened the demand for directed reversal agents. Idarucizumab is a targeted reversal agent that is approved for the urgent reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran. While it is a welcome addition to reversal strategies of dabigatran, a number of clinical questions exist regarding its place in therapy. We describe controversies regarding the use of idarucizumab therapy in patients with dabigatran-associated bleeding. Although existing clinical studies show a rapid reversal of coagulation assays, these studies did not describe a corresponding improvement in mortality or rapid cessation of hemorrhage. It is questionable how heavily clinicians can rely upon the use of the surrogate endpoints in clinical studies, such as ecarin clotting time and dilute thrombin time. Another issue is whether patients exhibiting re-elevation of coagulation assays would benefit from an additional dose of idarucizumab, because this has not been studied. It is currently unclear if blood products must be given in addition to idarucizumab can be used as monotherapy. The initial data suggest a definite role for idarucizumab in treatment of bleeding associated with dabigatran. As more clinical practice experience is gained with the agent and the remaining data on its use are released, clinicians can better guide the clinical use of idarucizumab. At present, there is currently not enough evidence for idarucizumab to be used as monotherapy.

[PMID: 27920714]
Non-vitamin K anticoagulants (NOAC) such as dabigatran have become important therapeutic options for the prevention of stroke. Until recently, there were only nonspecific agents to reverse their anticoagulant effects in a case of emergency. Idarucizumab, an antibody fragment targeting dabigatran, is the first specific antidote for a NOAC to be approved, but real-world experience is limited. We report two cases of patients on dabigatran with acute intracerebral hemorrhage who received idarucizumab. In both cases, idarucizumab promptly reversed the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran and there was no hematoma expansion in follow-up imaging. In addition to clinical and preclinical studies, our cases add to the experience regarding the safety and efficacy of idarucizumab. They show that idarucizumab may be an important safety option for patients on dabigatran in emergency situations.

[PMID: 27625113]
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) offer noninferior efficacy and improved safety compared to vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) for the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism and for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Unlike VKAs, DOACs do not require routine laboratory monitoring of anticoagulant effect and dose adjustment. In certain situations, however, laboratory assessment of anticoagulant effect may be desirable. Here we review the utility of currently available assays for assessment of DOAC effect and recommend an optimal assessment strategy for each drug, including calibrated dilute thrombin time or ecarin-based assays for dabigatran and calibrated anti-Xa activity assays for the factor Xa inhibitors. We also discuss reversal strategies, both specific and nonspecific, for each drug, including the preferential use of idarucizumab for the reversal of dabigatran and two agents, andexanet and ciraparantag, currently under development for the reversal of rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban.

[PMID: 26872887]
The vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) have been the standard (and only) oral anticoagulants used for the long-term treatment or prevention of venous thromboembolism or stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. The coagulopathy induced by VKAs can be reversed with vitamin K, and in urgent situations, the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors can be replaced by transfusion. In the last decade, a new class of oral anticoagulants has been developed, direct oral anticoagulants that bind to a specific coagulation factor and neutralize it. These compounds were shown to be effective and safe compared with the VKAs and were licensed for specific indications, but without a specific reversal agent. The absence of a reversal agent is a barrier to more widespread use of these agents. Currently, for the management of major life-threatening bleeding with the direct oral anticoagulants, most authorities recommend the use of four factor prothrombin complex concentrates. There are now three reversal agents in development and poised to enter the market. Idarucizumab is a specific antidote targeted to reverse the direct thrombin inhibitor, dabigatran, which was recently approved for use in the USA. Andexanet alfa is an antidote targeted to reverse the oral direct factor Xa inhibitors as well as the indirect inhibitor enoxaparin. Ciraparantag is an antidote targeted to reverse the direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors as well as the indirect inhibitor enoxaparin.

[PMID: 28887767]
We review the current evidence for medical and surgical treatments of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). Therapy with hemostatic agents (e.g. factor VIIa and tranexamic acid) if started early after bleeding onset may reduce hematoma expansion, but their clinical effectiveness has not been shown. Rapid anticoagulation reversal with prothrombin concentrates (PCC) plus vitamin K is the first choice in vitamin K antagonist-related ICH. In ICH related to dabigatran, anticoagulation can be rapidly reversed with idarucizumab. PCC are recommended for ICH related to FXa inhibitors, whereas specific reversal agents are not yet approved. While awaiting ongoing trials studying minimally invasive approaches or hemicraniectomy, the role of surgery in ICH remains to be defined. Therapies targeting downstream molecular cascades in order to prevent secondary neuronal damage are promising, but the complexity and multi-phased nature of ICH pathophysiology is challenging. Finally, in addition to blood pressure control, antithrombotic prevention after ICH has to consider the risk of recurrent bleeding as well as the risk of ischemic events. Treatment of acute ICH remains challenging, and many promising interventions for acute ICH await further evidence from trials.

[PMID: 27224445]
An overdose of oral anticoagulants represents a challenging scenario for emergency physicians. Dabigatran, an oral direct thrombin inhibitor, is increasingly used in place of warfarin. The lack of an antidote is a concern in patients who overdose on dabigatran, even though the drug can be eliminated with hemodialysis. Idarucizumab is an antibody fragment that binds dabigatran with high affinity. It reverses the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran within minutes and is approved for the reversal of dabigatran during emergency situations. We describe the use of idarucizumab in the management of a 68-year-old woman who was taking dabigatran 150 mg twice daily and ingested 125 capsules. Despite gastric lavage and administration of activated charcoal within two hours of drug intake, the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT) remained prolonged. The administration of 5 g of intravenous idarucizumab promptly and completely reversed the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran as assessed by routine and specific coagulation assays (aPTT from to 75 to 26 s, PT from 26 to 11 s and diluted thrombin time from 92 to 27 s). The initially planned emergency hemodialysis was canceled. This case highlights the potential use of idarucizumab for the management of massive dabigatran overdoses.

[PMID: 28479184]
Idarucizumab is a reversal agent for dabigatran etexilate. By reversing the anticoagulating effect of dabigatran etexilate with idarucizumab (Praxbind), patients presenting with an acute ischemic stroke can now be eligible for thrombolysis. We describe our experience with idarucizumab in a 71-year-old male patient pretreated with dabigatran etexilate. The patient arrived with a hemiparesis, central facial palsy, and dysarthria. Dabigatran etexilate was antagonized with idarucizumab, approximately 2.5 hours after the patient's last dose. Immediately after the infusion of idarucizumab, the patient received thrombolytic therapy. The hemiparesis and the central facial palsy were fully remitted 3 days after the onset of symptoms, and the dysarthria was remitted 2 days afterwards. Non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs) are widely used for the prevention of embolic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. Dabigatran etexilate is an oral thrombin inhibitor that can be reversed by idarucizumab. Idarucizumab, a monoclonal antibody fragment, directly binds dabigatran etexilate and neutralizes its activity. Reversal of dabigatran etexilate using idarucizumab was safe and successful with no recombinant tissue plasminogen activator interactions.

[PMID: 26894245]
To evaluate the role of idarucizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody fragment, as a specific reversal agent for the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran and to review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetic properties, efficacy, and safety of this agent. A literature search was conducted consisting of a PubMed database using the MeSH term idarucizumab and the key word dabigatran antidote. Studies evaluating the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of idarucizumab for the reversal of the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran were included. Idarucizumab represents a novel treatment option as it is the only humanized, monoclonal antibody fragment that specifically binds to dabigatran. Studies evaluating reversal of dabigatran-induced anticoagulation have demonstrated immediate, complete, and sustained effects with idarucizumab. Idarucizumab did not overcorrect thrombin generation. Additionally, evaluations have shown that dabigatran can be safely reinitiated 24 hours after the administration of idarucizumab. The United States Food and Drug Administration granted priority review for the biologic license application and accelerated approval for idarucizumab. Idarucizumab represents an encouraging development in the reversal of dabigatran. Its novel mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, tolerability, and lack of thrombotic events contribute positively to its use in patients who experience bleeding or for those who require emergent surgery or procedures.

[PMID: 27268941]
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Factors such as the presence of transient risk factors for VTE, risk of bleeding, and location of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) determine the duration of anticoagulation. Extended anticoagulation is offered to patients with unprovoked pulmonary embolism (PE) or proximal DVT and a low risk of bleeding. Anticoagulation for 3 months is advised in patients with provoked DVT or PE, high risk of bleeding, and isolated distal or upper extremity DVT. In patients with unprovoked PE or proximal DVT and a low risk of bleeding, who want to stop anticoagulation after 3 months, further risk stratification is necessary. Clinical scoring system, and thrombophilia testing otherwise not routinely performed, may be considered to measure risk of annual recurrence in such cases. Short-term anticoagulation may be considered in subsegmental PE and superficial vein thrombosis, particularly if patients are at low risk of bleeding and have persistent risk factors for recurrent VTE. In cases of catheter-associated thrombosis, the catheter need not be removed routinely, and the patient may be anticoagulated for 3 months or longer if the catheter is maintained in patients with cancer. Extensive screening for occult cancer in cases of unprovoked VTE is not beneficial. New oral anticoagulants such as apixaban, rivaroxaban, or dabigatran may be preferred to vitamin K antagonists in patients without cancer or renal failure, more so after the development of reversal agents such as idarucizumab and andexanet alfa.

[PMID: 27477871]
Atrial fibrillation (AF), a common cardiac arrhythmia associated with increased risk of heart failure, thromboembolic phenomena and death, is a leading cause of hospitalization of adults. A major complication of AF is an increased risk of ischemic stroke leading to long-term disability and in severe cases, death. Historically, Coumadin has been the drug of choice for chronic anticoagulation and stroke prevention in AF patients however, given the need for constant monitoring and multiple drug interactions, newer anticoagulants have been developed. One such drug is dabigatran, with the promise of less frequent monitoring and decreased bleeding tendencies as compared to Coumadin. The main disadvantage of dabigatran has been the lack of a reversal agent in case of severe bleeding or emergent surgical intervention. This was until the recent The Food and Drug Administration approval of idarucizumab, a potential reversal agent for dabigatran. In this article, we discuss the evidence addressing idarucizumab safety, tolerability and its efficacy for reversing effect of dabigatran.

[PMID: 27215215]
Anticoagulation therapy is indicated for management of various clinical conditions to prevent adverse events and introduction of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) has ushered in a new era in anticoagulation therapy. Major advantages of DOACS include fewer drug interactions and that they do not need periodic monitoring. Several patients who were not on anticoagulation before due to older age, polypharmacy/drug interaction concerns, and logistics of periodic monitoring are now on anticoagulation with DOACs. Despite their many advantages, a challenge while prescribing DOACs is very limited availability of specific reversal agents and lack of understanding or guidance about the treatment strategy in case of major life threatening bleeding or need for urgent surgery. So far only one reversal agent has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), idarucizumab for one of the DOACs i.e., dabigatran. Several other reversal agents are under final phases of development such as andexanet alfa and PER977 (ciraparantag) and will help in developing specific strategies for reversal of these agents. In this article, we review current strategies to manage bleeding with DOACs and provide guidance to clinicians of inhibiting LF activity in vitro and in cells, as well as in animal models of anthrax infection.

[PMID: 27568285]
Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody fragment specifically targeted to dabigatran. It has demonstrated prompt and durable reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in animal studies and phase 1 studies of young, elderly, and renally impaired volunteers. Although elective invasive procedures and most bleeding complications in dabigatran-treated patients can be managed by temporarily stopping dabigatran therapy and using supportive measures, there are rare clinical situations that require urgent reversal of the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran. The effectiveness and safety of 5 g of intravenous idarucizumab is being investigated in a prospective, open-label, single-cohort study in patients with serious bleeding or in those requiring an urgent procedure. In an interim analysis of the first 90 participants, idarucizumab rapidly and completely reversed the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran in 88%-98% of participants, and there were no safety concerns, with no deaths or serious adverse events being attributable to idarucizumab. Supported by these interim results, idarucizumab has been approved in the United States and the European Union for use when reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran is needed for emergency surgery/urgent procedures or in patients with life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding. Clinical use of idarucizumab should follow the same processes as patient enrollment in this study, which is projected to be completed in 2016. The outcomes achieved with this specific reversal agent are likely to be of continued interest to treating physicians.

[PMID: 26088268]
Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran with high affinity in a 1:1 molar ratio. We investigated the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of increasing doses of idarucizumab for the reversal of anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in a two-part phase 1 study (rising-dose assessment and dose-finding, proof-of-concept investigation). Here we present the results of the proof-of-concept part of the study. In this randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, proof-of-concept phase 1 study, we enrolled healthy volunteers (aged 18-45 years) with a body-mass index of 18·5-29·9 kg/m(2) into one of four dose groups at SGS Life Sciences Clinical Research Services, Belgium. Participants were randomly assigned within groups in a 3:1 ratio to idarucizumab or placebo using a pseudorandom number generator and a supplied seed number. Participants and care providers were masked to treatment assignment. All participants received oral dabigatran etexilate 220 mg twice daily for 3 days and a final dose on day 4. Idarucizumab (1 g, 2 g, or 4 g 5-min infusion, or 5 g plus 2·5 g in two 5-min infusions given 1 h apart) was administered about 2 h after the final dabigatran etexilate dose. The primary endpoint was incidence of drug-related adverse events, analysed in all randomly assigned participants who received at least one dose of dabigatran etexilate. Reversal of diluted thrombin time (dTT), ecarin clotting time (ECT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and thrombin time (TT) were secondary endpoints assessed by measuring the area under the effect curve from 2 h to 12 h (AUEC2-12) after dabigatran etexilate ingestion on days 3 and 4. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01688830. Between Feb 23, and Nov 29, 2013, 47 men completed this part of the study. 12 were enrolled into each of the 1 g, 2 g, or 5 g plus 2·5 g idarucizumab groups (nine to idarucizumab and three to placebo in each group), and 11 were enrolled into the 4 g idarucizumab group (eight to idarucizumab and three to placebo). Drug-related adverse events were all of mild intensity and reported in seven participants: one in the 1 g idarucizumab group (infusion site erythema and hot flushes), one in the 5 g plus 2·5 g idarucizumab group (epistaxis); one receiving placebo (infusion site haematoma), and four during dabigatran etexilate pretreatment (three haematuria and one epistaxis). Idarucizumab immediately and completely reversed dabigatran-induced anticoagulation in a dose-dependent manner; the mean ratio of day 4 AUEC2-12 to day 3 AUEC2-12 for dTT was 1·01 with placebo, 0·26 with 1 g idarucizumab (74% reduction), 0·06 with 2 g idarucizumab (94% reduction), 0·02 with 4 g idarucizumab (98% reduction), and 0·01 with 5 g plus 2·5 g idarucizumab (99% reduction). No serious or severe adverse events were reported, no adverse event led to discontinuation of treatment, and no clinically relevant difference in incidence of adverse events was noted between treatment groups. These phase 1 results show that idarucizumab was associated with immediate, complete, and sustained reversal of dabigatran-induced anticoagulation in healthy men, and was well tolerated with no unexpected or clinically relevant safety concerns, supporting further testing. Further clinical studies are in progress. Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG.

[PMID: 25567155]
Urgent surgery or life-threatening bleeding requires prompt reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran. This study assessed the ability of three- and four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) and idarucizumab (specific antidote for dabigatran) to reverse the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in a porcine model of trauma. Twelve animals were given dabigatran etexilate (DE) orally and dabigatran intravenously, before infliction of trauma. Six animals received tranexamic acid plus fibrinogen concentrate 12 minutes post-injury. Six PCCs (each 30 and 60 U/kg) and idarucizumab (30 and 60 mg/kg) were added to blood samples ex vivo. Coagulation was assessed by several coagulation assays. All coagulation parameters were altered after dabigatran infusion (plasma level: 442 ± 138 ng/ml). Both three- and four-factor PCCs mostly or completely reversed the effects of dabigatran on thromboelastometry variables and PT but not on aPTT. Idarucizumab neutralised plasma concentrations of dabigatran, and reversed the effects of the drug on coagulation variables. Thrombin generation showed dose-dependent over-correction following the addition of PCC, implying that elevated levels of thrombin are required to overcome dabigatran-induced coagulopathy. In contrast, treatment with idarucizumab returned thrombin generation to baseline levels. Following trauma, therapy with tranexamic acid plus fibrinogen improved correction of coagulation parameters by PCC, and thromboelastometry parameters by idarucizumab. All investigated PCCs improved dabigatran- and trauma-induced coagulopathy to a similar degree. In conclusion, this study shows that three- and four-factor PCCs are similarly effective for dabigatran reversal. Idarucizumab also reversed the effects of dabigatran and, unlike PCCs, was not associated with over-correction of thrombin generation.

[PMID: 27317414]
Idarucizumab is an antibody fragment that specifically reverses dabigatran-mediated anticoagulation. Safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of idarucizumab were investigated in dabigatran-treated, middle-aged, elderly and renally impaired volunteers with characteristics similar to patients receiving anticoagulant therapy. In this randomized, double-blind, crossover study, 46 subjects (12 middle-aged, 45-64 years; 16 elderly, 65-80 years; and 18 with mild or moderate renal impairment) received dabigatran etexilate (DE; 220 or 150 mg twice daily) for 4 days. Idarucizumab doses of 1, 2.5 and 5 g or 2 × 2.5 g 1 h apart, or placebo, were administered as a rapid (5 min) infusion ~2 h after DE at steady state. Dabigatran-prolonged diluted thrombin time, ecarin clotting time and activated partial thromboplastin time were reversed to baseline immediately after idarucizumab infusion in all groups. Reversal was sustained with doses ≥2.5 g. Idarucizumab was well tolerated under all conditions. No impact of age on idarucizumab pharmacokinetics was observed; however, subjects with mild or moderate renal impairment demonstrated increased exposure (up to 84 %), decreased clearance and prolonged (by up to 49 %) initial half-life of idarucizumab compared with healthy middle-aged subjects. Impaired renal function was associated with increased exposure and decreased clearance of idarucizumab. Idarucizumab resulted in immediate, complete and sustained reversal of dabigatran anticoagulant activity, and was safe and well tolerated in middle-aged, elderly and renally impaired volunteers. The results support the clinical use of a 5 g dose of idarucizumab. http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . Unique identifier: NCT01955720.

[PMID: 25789661]
Idarucizumab, a monoclonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran with high affinity, is in development as a specific antidote for dabigatran. In this first-in-human, single-rising-dose study, we investigated the pharmacokinetics, safety and tolerability of idarucizumab. Healthy male volunteers aged 18-45 years received between 20 mg and 8 g idarucizumab as a 1-hour intravenous infusion in 10 sequential dose groups, or 1, 2 or 4 g idarucizumab as a 5-minute infusion. Subjects within each dose group were randomised 3:1 to idarucizumab or placebo. A total of 110 randomised subjects received study drug (27 placebo, 83 idarucizumab). Peak and total exposure to idarucizumab increased proportionally with dose. Maximum plasma concentrations were achieved near the end of infusion, followed by a rapid decline, with an initial idarucizumab half-life of ~45 minutes. For the 5-minute infusions, this resulted in a reduction of plasma concentrations to less than 5 % of peak within 4 hours. Idarucizumab (in the absence of dabigatran) had no effect on coagulation parameters or endogenous thrombin potential. Overall adverse event (AE) frequency was similar for idarucizumab and placebo, and no relationship with idarucizumab dose was observed. Drug-related AEs (primary endpoint) were rare (occurring in 2 placebo and 3 idarucizumab subjects) and were mostly of mild intensity; none of them resulted in study discontinuation. In conclusion, the pharmacokinetic profile of idarucizumab meets the requirement for rapid peak exposure and rapid elimination, with no effect on pharmacodynamic parameters. Idarucizumab was safe and well tolerated in healthy males.

[PMID: 27575900]
Idarucizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody fragment for reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran. This drug can be used for patients who need emergency surgery or invasive procedures, as well as those with life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding.

[PMID: 26095746]
Specific reversal agents for non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants are lacking. Idarucizumab, an antibody fragment, was developed to reverse the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran. We undertook this prospective cohort study to determine the safety of 5 g of intravenous idarucizumab and its capacity to reverse the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in patients who had serious bleeding (group A) or required an urgent procedure (group B). The primary end point was the maximum percentage reversal of the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran within 4 hours after the administration of idarucizumab, on the basis of the determination at a central laboratory of the dilute thrombin time or ecarin clotting time. A key secondary end point was the restoration of hemostasis. This interim analysis included 90 patients who received idarucizumab (51 patients in group A and 39 in group B). Among 68 patients with an elevated dilute thrombin time and 81 with an elevated ecarin clotting time at baseline, the median maximum percentage reversal was 100% (95% confidence interval, 100 to 100). Idarucizumab normalized the test results in 88 to 98% of the patients, an effect that was evident within minutes. Concentrations of unbound dabigatran remained below 20 ng per milliliter at 24 hours in 79% of the patients. Among 35 patients in group A who could be assessed, hemostasis, as determined by local investigators, was restored at a median of 11.4 hours. Among 36 patients in group B who underwent a procedure, normal intraoperative hemostasis was reported in 33, and mildly or moderately abnormal hemostasis was reported in 2 patients and 1 patient, respectively. One thrombotic event occurred within 72 hours after idarucizumab administration in a patient in whom anticoagulants had not been reinitiated. Idarucizumab completely reversed the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran within minutes. (Funded by Boehringer Ingelheim; RE-VERSE AD ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02104947.).

[PMID: 27175894]
The approval of the oral direct thrombin inhibitor, dabigatran etexilate, gave patients an alternative to oral anticoagulation with warfarin. Like all anticoagulants, the primary adverse event (AE) associated with dabigatran is bleeding. Until the FDA approval of idarucizumab, there had been no reversal agent for dabigatran-induced anticoagulation in patients with life-threatening or uncontrollable bleeding, or those requiring emergent procedures. The primary purpose of this review is to summarize the safety and efficacy of idarucizumab, a monoclonal antibody fragment, and its use as a reversal agent for dabigatran. A literature search was conducted through MEDLINE (1946 to November week 1 2015) and Embase (1980-2015 week 46) using the search term idarucizumab. Clinicaltrials.gov was consulted for a comprehensive list of ongoing and completed studies. Additional studies were identified through bibliographical citations. Clinical trials in animals and humans published in English evaluating the safety and efficacy of idarucizumab for reversal of anticoagulant treatment with dabigatran were included for review. Idarucizumab has been shown to significantly reverse the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in both healthy volunteers and patients requiring a reversal agent because of either overt bleeding or an emergency surgery or invasive procedure. The most common AEs were headache, nasopharyngitis, back pain, skin irritation, hypokalemia, delirium, constipation, pyrexia, and pneumonia. Deaths reported in idarucizumab studies were attributed to either the index event or a preexisting comorbidity. Most adverse effects were minor, but 21 serious AEs have been reported in the published data including thrombotic events. Given the increased use of direct oral anticoagulants, such as dabigatran, a need for specific reversal agents exists. Idarucizumab has been shown to be safe and effective in the reversal of dabigatran-induced anticoagulation in patients requiring emergent or urgent surgery or in patients with severe bleeding.

[PMID: 27697436]
Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody fragment specifically targeted to dabigatran. It has demonstrated prompt and durable reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran in animal studies and phase 1 studies of young, elderly, and renally impaired volunteers. Although elective invasive procedures and most bleeding complications in dabigatran-treated patients can be managed by temporarily stopping dabigatran therapy and using supportive measures, there are rare clinical situations that require urgent reversal of the anticoagulant effect of dabigatran. The effectiveness and safety of 5 g of intravenous idarucizumab is being investigated in a prospective, open-label, single-cohort study in patients with serious bleeding or in those requiring an urgent procedure. In an interim analysis of the first 90 participants, idarucizumab rapidly and completely reversed the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran in 88%-98% of participants, and there were no safety concerns, with no deaths or serious adverse events being attributable to idarucizumab. Supported by these interim results, idarucizumab has been approved in the United States and the European Union for use when reversal of the anticoagulant effects of dabigatran is needed for emergency surgery/urgent procedures or in patients with life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding. Clinical use of idarucizumab should follow the same processes as patient enrollment in this study, which is projected to be completed in 2016. The outcomes achieved with this specific reversal agent are likely to be of continued interest to treating physicians.