[PMID: 15626743]
Proteasome inhibitors, a novel class of chemotherapeutic agents, enhance the antitumor efficacy of anthracyclines in vitro and in vivo. We therefore sought to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and dose-limiting toxicities of bortezomib and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PegLD). Bortezomib was given on days 1, 4, 8, and 11 from 0.90 to 1.50 mg/m2 and PegLD on day 4 at 30 mg/m2 to 42 patients with advanced hematologic malignancies. Grade 3 or 4 toxicities in at least 10% of patients included thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, neutropenia, fatigue, pneumonia, peripheral neuropathy, febrile neutropenia, and diarrhea. The MTD based on cycle 1 was 1.50 and 30 mg/m2 of bortezomib and PegLD, respectively. However, due to frequent dose reductions and delays at this level, 1.30 and 30 mg/m2 are recommended for further study. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies did not find significant drug interactions between these agents. Antitumor activity was seen against multiple myeloma, with 8 of 22 evaluable patients having a complete response (CR) or near-CR, including several with anthracycline-refractory disease, and another 8 having partial responses (PRs). One patient with relapsed/refractory T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) achieved a CR, whereas 2 patients each with acute myeloid leukemia and B-cell NHL had PRs. Bortezomib/PegLD was safely administered in this study with promising antitumor activity, supporting further testing of this regimen.

[PMID: 21751810]
A novel cell-targeting, pH-sensitive polymeric carrier was employed in this study for delivery of the anticancer drug bortezomib (BTZ) to cancer cells. Our strategy is based on facile conjugation of BTZ to catechol-containing polymeric carriers that are designed to be taken up selectively by cancer cells through cell surface receptor-mediated mechanisms. The polymer used as a building block in this study was poly(ethylene glycol), which was chosen for its ability to reduce nonspecific interactions with proteins and cells. The catechol moiety was exploited for its ability to bind and release borate-containing therapeutics such as BTZ in a pH-dependent manner. In acidic environments, such as in cancer tissue or the subcellular endosome, BTZ dissociates from the polymer-bound catechol groups to liberate the free drug, which inhibits proteasome function. A cancer-cell-targeting ligand, biotin, was presented on the polymer carriers to facilitate targeted entry of drug-loaded polymer carriers into cancer cells. Our study demonstrated that the cancer-targeting drug-polymer conjugates dramatically enhanced cellular uptake, proteasome inhibition, and cytotoxicity toward breast carcinoma cells in comparison with nontargeting drug-polymer conjugates. The pH-sensitive catechol-boronate binding mechanism provides a chemoselective approach for controlling the release of BTZ in targeted cancer cells, establishing a concept that may be applied in the future toward other boronic acid-containing therapeutics to treat a broad range of diseases.

[PMID: 22381702]
Thalidomide and lenalidomide, in combination with dexamethasone, provide response rates ranging from 63%-79% after 4 cycles of therapy. Because of toxicities such as neuropathy and myelosuppression for thalidomide and lenalidomide, respectively, dose escalation has not been pursued. We evaluated a syncopated regimen of alternating weeks of thalidomide and lenalidomide to determine if a modified schedule allows for fewer dose reductions and, subsequently, superior efficacy. Although well tolerated, this phase II trial did not show superior efficacy compared with conventional dosing and scheduling of these agents. Over the past decade, the novel agents thalidomide, lenalidomide, and bortezomib have emerged as effective treatment in patients with multiple myeloma (MM). Initially used in the relapse setting, these agents have been incorporated into frontline treatment algorithms. They have been combined in doublets with corticosteroids, in triplets with alkylators, or with each other. Because thalidomide and lenalidomide have different clinical activity and toxicity profiles, we designed a trial to evaluate a syncopated schedule of thalidomide and lenalidomide with weekly dexamethasone in patients with newly diagnosed MM to determine response and toxicity. Twenty-two patients with newly diagnosed MM were treated with syncopated thalidomide (200 mg on days 1-7 and 15-21), lenalidomide (25 mg on days 8-14 and 22-28 for the first cycle and 50 mg on the same schedule for subsequent cycles) with weekly dexamethasone (40 mg). Each cycle lasted 28 days. MM parameters were assessed at the end of each cycle. It was intended that the patients proceed to stem cell mobilization and autologous transplantation after 4 cycles of therapy. The median number of cycles administered was 3.5. The overall response was 68%. The regimen was well tolerated by the majority of the patients; only patient discontinued treatment because of toxicity. We conclude that a syncopated schedule of thalidomide and lenalidomide with weekly dexamethasone was tolerated well, with no unexpected toxicities. However the response rate, even using lenalidomide at 50 mg, was not superior to standard dosing of thalidomide or lenalidomide plus dexamethasone.

[PMID: 23176720]
Many patients with multiple myeloma (MM) are elderly (aged >65 years) or unfit, and therefore ineligible for stem-cell transplantation. The novel agents thalidomide, bortezomib, and lenalidomide have shown improved outcomes in these patients. This article discusses the role of continuous therapy in improving patient outcomes and how novel agents with better tolerability profiles could lead to a change in the treatment paradigm. According to the proposed concept, treatment of transplant-ineligible patients with MM should include achievement of high-quality responses with effective induction combination regimens, as well as maintenance of the response with long-term therapy for optimal sustained efficacy.

[PMID: 20079210]
To evaluate the effects and safety of the regimen of bortezomib combined with dexamethasone (VD) in the treatment of primary systemic (AL) amyloidosis. Five newly diagnosed AL amyloidosis patients confirmed by renal biopsy with a median of 3 organs involved (3 to 5 organs) were treated by VD regimen for 3 (1-4) cycles. Among 3 evaluable patients, 1 was in stable condition and 2 had hematologic response (partial remission and complete remission) and organ function improvement. Hematologic responses were rapid (median 1.5 cycles) and median time to organ response was 2 cycles. Three cases were survived and the periods of follow up were 5, 4 and 4 months respectively. The other 2 died 2 and 14 months after diagnosis. The side effects were asthenia, diarrhea, constipation, edema aggravation and fever, all of which were in I grade. No treatment associating death was found. VD regimen might be an efficient, rapid effective and safe regimen in the treatment of AL amyloidosis.

[PMID: 21223249]
Cell cycle regulators, such as cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), are appealing targets for multiple myeloma (MM) therapy given the increased proliferative rates of tumour cells in advanced versus early stages of MM. We hypothesized that a multi-targeted CDK inhibitor with a different spectrum of activity compared to existing CDK inhibitors could trigger distinct molecular sequelae with therapeutic implications for MM. We therefore studied the small molecule heterocyclic compound NVP-LCQ195/AT9311 (LCQ195), which inhibits CDK1, CDK2 and CDK5, as well as CDK3 and CDK9. LCQ195 induced cell cycle arrest and eventual apoptotic cell death of MM cells, even at sub-μmol/l concentrations, spared non-malignant cells, and overcame the protection conferred to MM cells by stroma or cytokines of the bone marrow milieu. In MM cells, LCQ195 triggered decreased amplitude of transcriptional signatures associated with oncogenesis, drug resistance and stem cell renewal, including signatures of activation of key transcription factors for MM cells e.g. myc, HIF-1α, IRF4. Bortezomib-treated MM patients whose tumours had high baseline expression of genes suppressed by LCQ195 had significantly shorter progression-free and overall survival than those with low levels of these transcripts in their MM cells. These observations provide insight into the biological relevance of multi-targeted CDK inhibition in MM.

[PMID: 15985470]
The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ), used in antineoplastic chemotherapy, must be diluted in NaCl 0.9% for injection and stored for no more than 3 hours in a syringe or 8 hours in a vial. Better information on its stability could improve storage. To assess the stability of BTZ solution (1 mg/mL) in syringes and vials. BTZ 1-mg/mL solutions were prepared by adding sterile NaCl 0.9% to Velcade vials containing 3.5 mg of lyophilized BTZ. Syringes were filled with 1 mL of solution and stored in the dark at 5 degrees C or 60 degrees C; others were not protected from light and stored at 22 degrees C. Velcade vials containing 1 mL of solution were stored at 5 degrees C in the dark. Samples were taken at various times over 23 days and assayed in duplicate. An HPLC method for assaying the stability of BTZ was validated. Appearance and pH were recorded. There was no color change or precipitation in the samples, and the pH was stable. Oxidation, light, and storage temperature all affected the chemical stability of BTZ. The mean concentrations of BTZ in syringes stored for 2, 3, and 5 days at 60, 22, and 5 degrees C were >95% of the initial concentration. The mean concentration of BTZ in vials stored for 5 days at 5 degrees C was >95% of the initial concentration. BTZ stored refrigerated in vials or syringes and protected from light is chemically stable for 5 days after reconstitution.

[PMID: 22353937]
Bortezomib is well-known for inducing cell death in cancer cells, specifically through the mechanism of proteasome inhibition. Thiostrepton, a thiazole antibiotic, has also been described for its proteasome inhibitory action, although differing slightly to bortezomib in the proteasomal site to which it is active. Previously we had shown the synergic effect of bortezomib and thiostrepton in breast cancer cells in vitro, where sub-apoptotic concentrations of both proteasome inhibitors resulted in synergic increase in cell death when combined as a treatment. Here, we administered such a combination to MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors in vivo, and found that the effect of complementary proteasome inhibitors reduced tumor growth rates more efficiently than compared with when administered alone. Increased induction of apoptotic activity in tumors was found be associated with the growth inhibitory activity of combination treatment. Further examination additionally revealed that combination-treated tumors exhibited reduced proteasome activity, compared with non-treated and single drug-treated tumors. These data suggest that this drug combination may be useful as a therapy for solid tumors.

[PMID: 21634429]
Bortezomib, a dipeptidyl boronic acid and potent inhibitor of the 26S proteasome, is remarkably effective against multiple myeloma (MM) but not against solid tumors. Dose-limiting adverse effects from "on target" inhibition of the proteasome in normal cells and tissues appear to be a key obstacle. Achieving efficacy against solid tumors therefore is likely to require making the inhibitor more selective for tumor tissue over normal tissues. The simplest strategy that might provide such tissue specificity would be to employ a tumor specific protease to release an inhibitor from a larger, noninhibitory structure. However, such release would necessarily generate an inhibitor with a free N-terminal amino group, raising a key question: Can short peptide boronic acids with N-terminal amino groups have the requisite properties to serve as warheads in prodrugs? Here we show that dipeptides of boroLeu, the smallest plausible candidates for the task, can indeed be sufficiently potent, cell-penetrating, cytotoxic, and stable to degradation by cellular peptidases to serve in this capacity.

[PMID: 20685499]
Data from the literature have suggested that bortezomib is the only effective agent in the treatment of plasma cell leukemia (PCL), a type of plasma cell dyscrasia characterized by poor prognosis despite conventional chemotherapy including autologous and allogeneic transplantation. This case series examined the antineoplastic activity of the bortezomib-based regimens in a small cohort of patients with PCL. We describe a retrospective review of the 3 cases of PCL diagnosed at Antonio Perrino Hospital, Brindisi, Italy, between July 2004 and October 2006 (2 women and 1 man, all white, ages 71, 64, and 42 years; 2 with primary PCL and 1 with secondary PCL). These patients were treated with bortezomib variously combined with other drugs outside of clinical trials. Patients 1 and 2 received bortezomib-based regimens (bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 i.v. once daily on days 1, 4, 8, and 11; dexamethasone 20 mg i.v. once daily on days 1-4 and 8-11; oral cyclophosphamide 50 mg once daily on days 1-21, every 28 days) after 2 previous chemotherapeutic treatments. Patient 3 received a bortezomib-based regimen (bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 i.v. once daily on days 1, 4, 8, and 11; doxorubicin 9 mg/m2 i.v. once daily on days 1-4; and dexamethasone 40 mg i.v. once daily on days 1-4, 8-11, and 15-18 during cycle 1 and days 1-4 during subsequent cycles) after one previous chemotherapeutic regimen. In all 3 patients, circulating plasma cells persisted. Patients 1 and 2 were not considered candidates for autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) because of their nonresponse to the bortezomib-based regimens and severe deterioration of their clinical conditions (kidney and liver failure) due to disease progression. The overall survivals after administration of the bortezomib- based regimens were 4 months in patient 1 and 1 month in patient 2. After further treatment according to the modified protocol for patients with acute lymphatic leukemia (cyclophosphamide 800 mg/m2 i.v. on day 1 and 200 mg/m2 i.v. on days 2-5; vincristine 1.5 mg/m2 i.v. once daily on days 1, 8, and 15; doxorubicin 40 mg/m2 i.v. on day 1; methotrexate 1200 mg/m2/h i.v. + 240 mg/m2/h i.v. for 23 hours [modified CODOX-M protocol]) due to the unavailability of a human leukocyte antigen-identical donor, patient 3 received high-dose (200 mg/m2) melphalan with autologous PBSCT, obtaining partial remission lasting 9 months. The patient died 5 months later because of disease progression. These 3 patients with primary or secondary PCL who received a bortezomib-based regimen as rescue medication did not respond to treatment.

[PMID: 19190249]
The anticancer potency of green tea and its individual components is being intensely investigated, and some cancer patients already self-medicate with this "miracle herb" in hopes of augmenting the anticancer outcome of their chemotherapy. Bortezomib (BZM) is a proteasome inhibitor in clinical use for multiple myeloma. Here, we investigated whether the combination of these compounds would yield increased antitumor efficacy in multiple myeloma and glioblastoma cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Unexpectedly, we discovered that various green tea constituents, in particular (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) and other polyphenols with 1,2-benzenediol moieties, effectively prevented tumor cell death induced by BZM in vitro and in vivo. This pronounced antagonistic function of EGCG was evident only with boronic acid-based proteasome inhibitors (BZM, MG-262, PS-IX), but not with several non-boronic acid proteasome inhibitors (MG-132, PS-I, nelfinavir). EGCG directly reacted with BZM and blocked its proteasome inhibitory function; as a consequence, BZM could not trigger endoplasmic reticulum stress or caspase-7 activation, and did not induce tumor cell death. Taken together, our results indicate that green tea polyphenols may have the potential to negate the therapeutic efficacy of BZM and suggest that consumption of green tea products may be contraindicated during cancer therapy with BZM.

[PMID: 16470606]
Bortezomib, a first-in-class proteasome inhibitor, has shown clinical activity in relapsed, refractory multiple myeloma in a pivotal Phase II trial, SUMMIT. Patients received bortezomib 1.3 mg/m(2) on Days 1, 4, 8, and 11 followed by a 10-day rest period for up to 8 cycles. Dexamethasone 20 mg on the day of and the day after bortezomib was permitted for suboptimal response. Extended treatment beyond 8 cycles was offered to patients whose physicians felt they would benefit from additional therapy. Follow-up was conducted in all patients for a median of 23 months, an additional 13 months from the original report. Of 202 patients enrolled in SUMMIT, 193 were evaluable for response. Seven (4%) patients achieved a complete response, 12 (6%) achieved a nearly complete response, 34 (18%) achieved a partial response, and 14 (7%) had a minimal response while on bortezomib. The updated median duration of response to bortezomib alone was 12.7 months. The median overall time to progression for all SUMMIT patients was 7 months. For responding patients, the median time to progression was 13.9 months, whereas for those with progressive disease (PD) or who were not evaluable, the median time to progression was 1.3 months. The median overall survival (OS) for all SUMMIT patients was 17.0 months. Whereas the median OS for patients with PD or who were not evaluable was 8 months, the median OS for responding patients was not reached at 23 months of follow-up. These data demonstrate that treatment with bortezomib results in meaningful long-term benefit for patients with relapsed and refractory myeloma.

[PMID: 18410447]
Relapsed/refractory myeloma has a poor outcome because of multi-drug resistance, patient low-performance status and toxicity of conventional chemotherapy. To improve results, standard chemotherapeutics and drugs targeting the microenvironment are applied at the same time. Bortezomib, by inhibiting proteasome function, may enhance chemosensitivity to other drugs and overcome drug-resistance. Notably, doxorubicin and bortezomib may reciprocally increase their efficacy. Thus, to improve outcome whilst minimizing therapy-related toxicity, liposomal doxorubicin was added to a bortezomib-based combination. From January 2004, relapsed/refractory myeloma patients referred to our Institution received bortezomib 1.0 mg/m(2) i.v. twice weekly for 2 weeks in a 28-d cycle for up to six cycles, oral dexamethasone 24 mg with the standard scheduling and thalidomide 100 mg continuously (VTD). From January 2005, liposomal doxorubicin, 50 mg/m(2) (30 mg/m(2) for patients older than 75 years), was added on day 4 of each cycle [VTD plus Myocet (MyVTD)]. In total, 70 patients were treated: 28 received VTD and 42 MyVTD. Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics were similar between the two groups. Toxicity was manageable although more pronounced with MyVTD. The overall response rate (81% vs. 50%, P = 0.009), time to progression (19 vs. 11 months, P = 0.01) and progression-free survival (15 vs. 8 months, P = 0.001) were significantly higher with MyVTD regimen, suggesting an improved quality of response.

[PMID: 22028144]
The ascertainment of serum free light chain (sFLC) levels has been shown to be valuable in screening for the presence of plasma cell dyscrasia as well as for baseline prognosis in newly diagnosed patients. For patients with amyloidosis and those with oligo-secretory or non-secretory multiple myeloma (MM), serial measurement of sFLC has also been shown to be valuable in monitoring disease status. However, in patients with a measureable, intact monoclonal protein by immunofixation (M protein), the serial measurement of sFLC remains undefined and is currently not recommended in professional guidelines. Herein, we provide data comparing sFLC with M protein as biomarkers of response in newly diagnosed patients with MM undergoing induction therapy with the novel agents thalidomide, lenalidomide and/or bortezomib. We show that although M protein appears to outperform sFLC comparatively over the course of induction therapy, the addition of FLC to M protein further informs the characterization of residual disease status post-induction. Moreover, sFLC at the time of stem cell mobilization appears to hold prognostic power for survival endpoints following high-dose chemotherapy/autologous stem cell transplant (HDC/SCT). These findings suggest potentially novel roles for sFLC in patients with MM with an intact M protein receiving novel agent-based induction strategies followed by HDC/SCT.

[PMID: 18381602]
The proteasome plays a pivotal role in the turnover of regulatory transduction proteins induced by activated cell membrane growth factor receptors. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway is crucial in the development and progression of human epithelial cancers. Proteasome inhibition may sensitize human cancer cell lines to EGFR inhibitors. We investigated the growth inhibitory and pro-apoptotic effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in combination with anti-EGFR drugs, such as gefitinib, vandetanib, and cetuximab in EGFR-expressing human cancer cell lines. Bortezomib determined dose-dependent growth inhibition in a nine cancer cell line panel (IC(50) values, range 6-42 nM). A significant synergistic growth inhibitory effect was observed with the combination of bortezomib and each EGFR inhibitor in all cell lines (combination index, CI, range 0.10-0.55), which was accompanied by a significant induction in apoptosis by the combined treatment with bortezomib, cetuximab and vandetanib. In HCT-116 colon cancer and A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells, bortezomib plus EGFR inhibitor treatment induced a more effective inhibition of EGFR-activated down-stream signals, including a marked suppression in activated, phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt). In contrast, overexpression of a constitutively active P-Akt protected A549 cells by cell growth inhibition and apoptosis following treatment with bortezomib and EGFR inhibitors. The combined treatment with bortezomib and EGFR inhibitors has a synergistic growth inhibitory and pro-apoptotic activity in different human cancer cells which possess a functional EGFR-dependent autocrine growth pathway through to a more efficient and sustained inhibition of Akt.

[PMID: 21501555]
We studied the efficacy and safety of bortezomib (BOR) for treatment of multiple myeloma in comparison with thalidomide (THAL) by reference to adverse events, and searched for laboratory markers that could be used for prognostication of patients. Biochemical data of patients receiving BOR and THAL for treatment of multiple myeloma at the Japanese Red Cross Narita Hospital were investigated retrospectively, after obtaining Institutional Review Board approval. Judgment of curative effects complied with the effects criteria of the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG). BOR showed a higher rate of effectiveness than THAL for refractory multiple myeloma, and its effects were rapid. BOR treatment prolonged the survival time of THAL-resistant patients. The efficacy of BOR was unrelated to patient age, the number of previous therapeutic regimens, or the disease period. After medication with BOR, patients in whom it had been effective tended to show an increase of the serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level. Thrombocytopenia (86.2%) and leucopenia (69.0%) were observed at high frequencies, but no previously unreported adverse events or fatalities were associated with BOR therapy. It is suggested that BOR has therapeutic efficacy for multiple myeloma as a first-line medical treatment and/or for patients with THAL resistance, and can improve prognosis and survival. Since serum ALP elevation was observed in many patients for whom BOR was effective, this may be a predictor of BOR efficacy.

[PMID: 17133426]
Bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, has been used for patients with refractory and relapsed multiple myeloma, lymphoma and leukemia. We used bortezomib in ten refractory or relapsed patients (seven of multiple myeloma, two of lymphoma and one of acute myeloblastic leukemia). Six out of ten (60%) patients developed varicella herpes zoster after the complete of one cycle of bortezomib. The incidence of varicella herpes zoster was higher than reported in the literature. It may be due to immunosuppression caused by the combination of high-dose dexamethasone or other drugs. We considered that prophylactic antiviral medication could be used in predisposed patients to reduce the incidence of varicella herpes zoster.

[PMID: 21839906]
Single-size vials of drugs may be a source of waste and increase in treatment costs. Bortezomib, indicated for multiple myeloma (MM) treatment, is available in 3.5-mg vials, a quantity higher than the average dose commonly prescribed. This analysis aimed to demonstrate, through real-world data, which would be the optimal vial presentation for bortezomib in Brazil and quantify the reduction in medication waste related to this option. From November 2007 to October 2009 all patients with MM treated with bortezomib were identified via the Evidências database. Analysis of prescribed, dispensed, and wasted doses, their costs and projections of the ideal vial size were performed. Thirty-five patients (mean body surface area of 1.73 m(2)) received 509 infusions in 131 cycles of treatment (average of 3.77 cycles per patient). The average dose prescribed was 2.1 mg per infusion (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.97-2.26) with average waste of 39.5% of the vial content (95% CI 35.35-43.76). The mean waste per patient per day was 1.38 mg (95% CI 1.24-1.52). If a 3-mg vial were available, the average drug waste per patient per day would be 0.88 mg (95% CI 0.74-1.03) or 36.2% less. With a 2.5-mg vial the waste would be 1.05 mg (95% CI 0.81-1.29) or 23.9% less. If two presentations were available (2.5 mg and 0.5 mg), the waste would be 0.52 mg (95% CI 0.4-0.63) or 62.5% less. Considering the price of the different vials to be proportional to the original 3.5-mg vial, the cost would be also reduced by the same rates described above. A simple adjustment in vial size may reduce the waste of bortezomib by 36% to 62% and can also reduce the cost of treatment.

[PMID: 22699304]
Bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor drug very effective against multiple myeloma, may induce the so-called bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy (BIPN), hardly manageable with common analgesic drugs. This study assessed the effectiveness of controlled-release (CR) oral oxycodone in controlling pain and its interference on daily functions of patients with hematologic malignancies affected by BIPN. Forty-six patients (median age, 62 years) affected by myeloma and lymphoma, complaining of BIPN-related pain of moderate-to-severe intensity and unresponsive to previous analgesic treatments, were treated with CR oxycodone. The intensity of continuous and brief pain (BP) along with interference of pain with the common daily dimensions of feeling and function were evaluated by using an 11-point numerical rating scale (NRS); a global patient evaluation of efficacy was also performed. The daily average dose of CR oxycodone administered was 28.46 mg (range, 20-80 mg). The pain intensity decreased from a mean NRS value of 7.6 at baseline to 1.3 on day 14. The frequency of BP was reduced from 61 to 47% of patients and its intensity from 7.4 to 3.1 NRS score. A similar trend to decreasing values was observed for all the daily life functions. Slight- or mild-intensity side effects were observed in 23 patients (51%). At the end of the study, 75% of patients found the treatment effective or very effective. CR oxycodone for relief of BIPN-related pain was effective and well tolerated. The pain control significantly improved also the quality of the daily life functions, which are usually compromised in these suffering patients.

[PMID: 22189222]
Thalidomide was approved in Japan for multiple myeloma treatment in October 2008. A program called the Thalidomide Education and Risk Management System (TERMS®) was established to help ensure that every effort is made to use the drug safely. We report the use of thalidomide to treat multiple myeloma, and describe problems arising in the Thaled® outpatient department. Multiple myeloma patients treated with thalidomide at Hitachi General Hospital. Monitoring of the efficacy and safety of thalidomide, and a questionnaire survey conducted at the Thaled® outpatient department. The thalidomide response rate was 41. 7%. In 5 cases, all patients received steroids along with thalidomide. After auto-PBSCT, 1 of 2 cases demonstrated a good response (PR 1). After treatment with bortezomib, 1 of 2 cases demonstrated a good response (MR 1). After auto-PBSCT and treatment with bortezomib, 1 of 4 cases demonstrated a good response (PR 1). In a case demonstrating hematotoxicity Grade 3 (in addition to neutropenia), administration was discontinued. Regarding problems in the Thaled® outpatient department, the medical staff indicated that TERMS® is a very complicated program, while the patients requested prolongation of the prescription days and reduction of the economic burden of medication costs. Thalidomide showed some success in treating multiple myeloma either after auto-PBSCT or following treatment with bortezomib. In the case demonstrating hematotoxicity Grade 3 (in addition to neutropenia), grave complications could have very easily developed, thus underscoring the importance of careful monitoring. Based on a questionnaire survey conducted in the Thaled® outpatient department, the medical staff made comments and patients raised issues that should be examined in the future.

[PMID: 18327587]
Pre-clinical studies combining the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib with anthracyclines have shown enhanced anti-tumor activity. We conducted a phase I trial of bortezomib and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) in patients with refractory solid tumors. Patients received bortezomib, 0.9-1.5 mg/m(2), on days 1, 4, 8, and 11 of every 21-day cycle, along with PLD, 30 mg/m(2), on day 4. The goals were to determine the dose limiting toxicity (DLT) and maximum tolerated dose (MTD), and to investigate pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions of the combination. A total of 37 patients with four median prior therapies were treated. Frequent grade 1-2 toxicities included fatigue, nausea, thrombocytopenia, anemia, neutropenia, constipation, myalgias, and peripheral neuropathy. DLTs included grade 3 nausea and vomiting in 1 of 6 patients receiving bortezomib at 1.2 mg/m(2), and grade 3 nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea in 1 of 6 patients receiving bortezomib at 1.5 mg/m(2). Grade 3 toxicities in later cycles included hand-foot syndrome, thrombocytopenia, anemia, neutropenia, nausea, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Because of frequent dose-delays, dose-reductions, and gastrointestinal toxicity at the 1.4 and 1.5 mg/m(2) levels, bortezomib at 1.3 mg/m(2) and PLD at 30 mg/m(2) are recommended for further testing. Among 19 patients with breast cancer, four had evidence of a clinical benefit. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies did not show any significant interactions between the two drugs. A regimen of bortezomib, 1.3 mg/m(2) on days 1, 4, 8, and 11 with PLD, 30 mg/m(2), on day 4 of a 21-day cycle, was safe in this study, and merits further investigation.

[PMID: 22087865]
Bortezomib, an antineoplastic agent with proteasome inhibitory activity, is extensively metabolized by the hepatic microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP2C19. Drugs that affect these enzymes may therefore have an impact on the pharmacological profile of bortezomib. This study evaluated the effects of co-administration of a potent CYP3A4 inducer (rifampicin [rifampin]) and a weak CYP3A4 inducer (dexamethasone) on the pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and safety profiles of bortezomib. Patients aged ≥18 years with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma received intravenous bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2, administered on days 1, 4, 8 and 11 of a 21-day cycle, for 3 cycles. In stage 1, patients were randomized (1 : 1) to receive bortezomib alone or in combination with oral rifampicin 600 mg once daily on days 4-10 during cycle 3 only. If the mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of bortezomib was reduced by ≥30% during rifampicin co-administration, then stage 2 was initiated, in which patients received bortezomib with dexamethasone 40 mg once daily on days 1-4 and days 9-12 during cycle 3 only. Blood samples were collected on days 11 through 14 of cycles 2 and 3 before and after bortezomib administration, at prespecified time points, for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (proteasome inhibition) assessments. Twelve patients in the bortezomib-alone arm, six patients in the bortezomib plus rifampicin arm and seven patients in the bortezomib plus dexamethasone arm were included in the pharmacokinetics-evaluable set. Rifampicin reduced the mean AUC from 0 to 72 hours (AUC(72h)) of bortezomib by approximately 45% (223 ng · h/mL in cycle 2 vs 123 ng · h/mL in cycle 3), while dexamethasone had no effect (mean AUC(72h): 179 ng · h/mL in cycle 2 vs 170 ng · h/mL in cycle 3). Proteasome inhibition parameters in peripheral blood were unaffected by rifampicin or dexamethasone. Safety profiles were similar across the treatment arms and consistent with previous experience of bortezomib. In patients with multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, co-administration of rifampicin decreased the exposure to bortezomib but did not affect the proteasome inhibition or safety profiles; co-administration of dexamethasone did not affect the exposure to bortezomib, proteasome inhibition or safety profiles. Concomitant administration of bortezomib with strong CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampicin is not recommended, as it may result in a reduction of the clinical effect, whereas concomitant administration of weak CYP3A4 inducers such as dexamethasone does not affect the pharmacological profile of bortezomib.