[PMID: 25993131]
Huntington disease (HD; OMIM 143100), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, is caused by an expanded trinucleotide CAG (polyQ) motif in the HTT gene. Cardiovascular symptoms, often present in early stage HD patients, are, in general, ascribed to dysautonomia. However, cardio-specific expression of polyQ peptides caused pathological response in murine models, suggesting the presence of a nervous system-independent heart phenotype in HD patients. A positive correlation between the CAG repeat size and severity of symptoms observed in HD patients has also been observed in in vitro HD cellular models. Here, we test the suitability of human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines carrying HD-specific mutation as in vitro models for understanding molecular mechanisms of cardiac pathology seen in HD patients. We have differentiated three HD-hESC lines into cardiomyocytes and investigated CAG stability up to 60 days after starting differentiation. To assess CAG stability in other tissues, the lines were also subjected to in vivo differentiation into teratomas for 10 weeks. Neither directed differentiation into cardiomyocytes in vitro nor in vivo differentiation into teratomas, rich in immature neuronal tissue, led to an increase in the number of CAG repeats. Although the CAG stability might be cell line-dependent, induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with larger numbers of CAG repeats could have an advantage as a research tool for understanding cardiac symptoms of HD patients.

[PMID: 1839672]
Huntingtons disease (HD) is a hereditary disorder involving the central nervous system. Its effects are devastating, to the affected person as well as his family. The Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics at Indiana University (IU) plays an integral part in Huntingtons research by providing computerized repositories of HD family information for researchers and families. The National Huntingtons Disease Research Roster, founded in 1979 at IU, and the Huntingtons Disease in Venezuela Project database contain information that has proven to be invaluable in the worldwide field of HD research. This paper addresses the types of information stored in each database, the pedigree database program (MEGADATS) used to manage the data, and significant findings that have resulted from access to the data.

[PMID: 25254119]
Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder. The causative mutation is an expansion of more than 36 CAG repeats in the first exon of IT15 gene. Many studies have shown that the IT15 interacts with several modifier genes to regulate the age at onset (AO) of HD. Our study aims to investigate the implication of CAG expansion and 9 modifiers in the age at onset variance of 15 HD Tunisian patients and to establish the correlation between these modifiers genes and the AO of this disease. Despite the small number of studied patients, this report consists of the first North African study in Huntington disease patients. Our results approve a specific effect of modifiers genes in each population.

[PMID: 26863614]
Mutations of the huntingtin protein (HTT) gene underlie both adult-onset and juvenile forms of Huntington's disease (HD). HTT modulates mitotic spindle orientation and cell fate in mouse cortical progenitors from the ventricular zone. Using human embryonic stem cells (hESC) characterized as carrying mutations associated with adult-onset disease during pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, we investigated the influence of human HTT and of an adult-onset HD mutation on mitotic spindle orientation in human neural stem cells (NSCs) derived from hESCs. The RNAi-mediated silencing of both HTT alleles in neural stem cells derived from hESCs disrupted spindle orientation and led to the mislocalization of dynein, the p150Glued subunit of dynactin and the large nuclear mitotic apparatus (NuMA) protein. We also investigated the effect of the adult-onset HD mutation on the role of HTT during spindle orientation in NSCs derived from HD-hESCs. By combining SNP-targeting allele-specific silencing and gain-of-function approaches, we showed that a 46-glutamine expansion in human HTT was sufficient for a dominant-negative effect on spindle orientation and changes in the distribution within the spindle pole and the cell cortex of dynein, p150Glued and NuMA in neural cells. Thus, neural derivatives of disease-specific human pluripotent stem cells constitute a relevant biological resource for exploring the impact of adult-onset HD mutations of the HTT gene on the division of neural progenitors, with potential applications in HD drug discovery targeting HTT-dynein-p150Glued complex interactions.

[PMID: 18651325]
The aim of this study was to perform DNA analysis in patients with clinical diagnosis of Huntington's disease (HD) after molecular exclusion of HD and further molecular examinations for other neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington's disease-like 2 (HDL-2; gene JPH3), dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA; gene ATN1) and spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17; gene TBP). The material comprised 224 DNA samples isolated from peripheral blood from patients suspected of HD and 100 DNA samples from unaffected controls. The control group was used to determine the normal range of the number of CAG/CTG repeats in genes JPH3, ATN1 and TBP in the Polish population. Molecular analysis was carried out by PCR reaction, embracing microsatellite repeats in genes JPH3, ATN1 and TBP with specific, fluorescently labelled primers. PCR products were separated in polyacrylamide gels. The normal ranges of the number of repeats established for the control group in genes JPH3, ATN1 and TBP were 7-19, 9-27 and 29-45, respectively. Molecular analysis of DNA from 224 individuals suspected of HD (117 women and 107 men) revealed one case of dynamic mutation - 55 CAG repeats - in the TBP locus (SCA17). No cases of DRPLA or HDL-2 were detected. The range of CAG/CTG repeats for the JPH3 gene in the patient group was 11-19, with the most common alleles containing 14 and 16 repeats. For the ATN1 gene in patients the range of 8-27 repeats was established and the most frequent allele with 16 triplets was present. The study on 244 patients referred with the clinical diagnosis of HD and without mutation of the IT15 gene revealed one case of SCA17 but did not disclose the presence of two other diseases with a similar clinical manifestation: DRPLA and HDL2.

[PMID: 19059613]
We report a cluster of patients from a Karaite Jew community with a movement disorder suggestive of Huntington disease (HD), in some cases associated with repeat lengths below the edge of 36 CAG repeats. The study describes the clinical and genetic features of four patients who were followed over several years. Patients belonged to an inbred family in whom progressive chorea, manifesting predominantly with dystonia and cerebellar features, developed during middle age. Although severe psychiatric symptoms ultimately developed in two of the four patients, cognitive function remained reasonably well preserved in all of them even after several disease years. Moderate cognitive deficits were limited to the visuomotor organization and abstract thinking subtests in three of the four patients. Qualitative brain imaging showed atrophy of brain predominantly involving cortex and cerebellum. Genetic testing revealed a variable mutation penetrance among family members, some affected members showing an upper allele size ranging from 34 to 49, whereas others remained unaffected despite the presence of the full mutation beyond 40 CAG repeats. Co-morbidity with recessive hereditary inclusion body myopathy was found in two subjects from one family. Although the main diagnosis of HD remains to be confirmed by further neuropathological studies, these cases may suggest that HD could manifest with as few as 34 CAG repeats, in some geographic areas, the disease phenotype most probably being influenced by additional, as yet unidentified, genes.

[PMID: 26160070]
Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited, neurodegenerative disorder caused by a single-gene mutation: a CAG expansion in the huntingtin (HTT) gene that results in production of a mutated protein, mutant HTT, with a polyglutamine tail (polyQ-HTT). Although the molecular pathways of polyQ-HTT toxicity are not fully understood, because protein misfolding and aggregation are central features of HD, it has long been suspected that cellular housekeeping processes such as autophagy might be important to disease pathology. Indeed, multiple lines of research have identified abnormal autophagy in HD, characterized generally by increased autophagic induction and inefficient clearance of substrates. To date, the origin of autophagic dysfunction in HD remains unclear and the search for actors involved continues. To that end, recent studies have suggested a bidirectional relationship between autophagy and primary cilia, signaling organelles of most mammalian cells. Interestingly, primary cilia structure is defective in HD, suggesting a potential link between autophagic dysfunction, primary cilia and HD pathogenesis. In addition, because polyQ-HTT also accumulates in primary cilia, the possibility exists that primary cilia might play additional roles in HD: perhaps by disrupting signaling pathways or acting as a reservoir for secretion and propagation of toxic, misfolded polyQ-HTT fragments. Here, we review recent research suggesting potential links between autophagy, primary cilia and HD and speculate on possible pathogenic mechanisms and future directions for the field.

[PMID: 16109169]
Huntingtin, the HD gene encoded protein mutated by polyglutamine expansion in Huntington's disease, is required in extraembryonic tissues for proper gastrulation, implicating its activities in nutrition or patterning of the developing embryo. To test these possibilities, we have used whole mount in situ hybridization to examine embryonic patterning and morphogenesis in homozygous Hdh(ex4/5) huntingtin deficient embryos. In the absence of huntingtin, expression of nutritive genes appears normal but E7.0-7.5 embryos exhibit a unique combination of patterning defects. Notable are a shortened primitive streak, absence of a proper node and diminished production of anterior streak derivatives. Reduced Wnt3a, Tbx6 and Dll1 expression signify decreased paraxial mesoderm and reduced Otx2 expression and lack of headfolds denote a failure of head development. In addition, genes initially broadly expressed are not properly restricted to the posterior, as evidenced by the ectopic expression of Nodal, Fgf8 and Gsc in the epiblast and T (Brachyury) and Evx1 in proximal mesoderm derivatives. Despite impaired posterior restriction and anterior streak deficits, overall anterior/posterior polarity is established. A single primitive streak forms and marker expression shows that the anterior epiblast and anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are specified. Huntingtin is essential in the early patterning of the embryo for formation of the anterior region of the primitive streak, and for down-regulation of a subset of dynamic growth and transcription factor genes. These findings provide fundamental starting points for identifying the novel cellular and molecular activities of huntingtin in the extraembryonic tissues that govern normal anterior streak development. This knowledge may prove to be important for understanding the mechanism by which the dominant polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin determines the loss of neurons in Huntington's disease.

[PMID: 15651335]
Understanding molecular genetical background of hereditary chorea has recently been progressed so far. Triplet repeat expansion diseases including, Huntington disease, in which CAG expansion has been identified in the IT-15 or Huntingtin gene, and Huntington disease like-2, in which CTG expansion in junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene occurs, causes selective degeneration of striatum in the brain. Octapeptide repeat expansion in the prion gene in Huntington disease like-1 has been also identified. Neuroacanthocytosis syndromes including McLeod syndrome and chorea-acanthocytosis cause acanthocytosis in the red blood cells and chorea due to the degeneration of caudate nucleus in the brain. The XK gene on the X chromosome is mutated to lose its function in McLeod syndrome. CHAC gene coding chorein is mutated to lead loss of function in chorea-acanthocytosis. Selective degeneration in the striatum, especially in the caudate nucleus might be associated with the molecular cascade of expanded polyglutamine or polyleucine or octapeptide and the loss of function of the XK protein and of chorein protein.

[PMID: 11723754]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a late onset, incurable, autosomal dominantly-inherited, progressive neuropsychiatric disease, characterised by chorea, changes in personality, mood and behaviour, and dementia. Huntington's disease is a clinical diagnosis. The advent of DNA diagnosis has made predictive, prenatal and preimplantation testing possible for at-risk persons or asymptomatic carriers. The prevalence is estimated to be 3-10/100,000 among individuals of European descent; HD is less common in other ethnic groups. Huntington's disease is caused by an expanded trinucleotide CAG repeat in the HD gene on chromosome 4. The gene encodes for the protein huntingtin, with an as yet unknown function. The mutated huntingtin has an elongated stretch of glutamines which leads to a gain of function such as overactivity, excitotoxicity, or to interactions with other proteins.

[PMID: 19816846]
Huntington's disease is a neurodegenerative, autosomal dominant disease that mainly affects the basal ganglia. The disorder is caused by mutation in the gene encoding the huntingtin protein (Htt), producing intracellular aggregates. The adult form (chorea with dementia) is the most frequent. It is characterized by unpredictable, spasmodic, involuntary and constant movements, mostly associated with psychiatric and cognitive alterations. The main characteristics of Huntington's disease are: neuronal loss, glyosis, and accumulations of mutated Htt, all associated with different underlying channels in the pathogenesis of the disease, such as: excitotoxicity, energy deficit (ATP depletion), reduction in the synthesis and release of neurotrophic factors (BDNF and GDNF), and oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases, including Huntington's disease, and numerous studies have shown the existence of oxidative damage in the plasma and tissue of patients suffering from this disease. Oxidative stress in patients with Huntington's disease may be used as an evolutionary-prognostic marker of both the disease and therapeutic effectiveness, as well as an interesting field of research for the development of new therapeutic strategies.

[PMID: 26079385]
Huntington disease (HD) is a progressive autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by abnormal movements, cognitive decline, and psychiatric symptoms, caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the huntingtin (HTT) gene on chromosome 4p. A CAG/CTG repeat expansion in the junctophilin-3 (JPH3) gene on chromosome 16q24.2 causes a Huntington disease-like phenotype (HDL2). All patients to date with HDL2 have some African ancestry. The present study aimed to characterize the genetic basis of the Huntington disease phenotype in South Africans and to investigate the possible origin of the JPH3 mutation. In a sample of unrelated South African individuals referred for diagnostic HD testing, 62% (106/171) of white patients compared to only 36% (47/130) of black patients had an expansion in HTT. However, 15% (20/130) of black South African patients and no white patients (0/171) had an expansion in JPH3, confirming the diagnosis of Huntington disease like 2 (HDL2). Individuals with HDL2 share many clinical features with individuals with HD and are clinically indistinguishable in many cases, although the average age of onset and diagnosis in HDL2 is 5 years later than HD and individual clinical features may be more prominent. HDL2 mutations contribute significantly to the HD phenotype in South Africans with African ancestry. JPH3 haplotype studies in 31 families, mainly from South Africa and North America, provide evidence for a founder mutation and support a common African origin for all HDL2 patients. Molecular testing in individuals with an HD phenotype and African ancestry should include testing routinely for JPH3 mutations.

[PMID: 12805114]
We report a group of 252 patients with a Huntington's disease-like (HDL) phenotype, including 60 with typical Huntington's disease, who had tested negative for pathological expansions in the IT15 gene, the major mutation in Huntington's disease. They were screened for repeat expansions in two other genes involved in HDL phenotypes: those encoding the junctophilin-3 (JPH3/HDL2) and prion (PRNP/HDL1) proteins. In addition, because of the clinical overlap between patients with HDL disease and autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia or dentatorubral and pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), we investigated trinucleotide repeat expansions in genes encoding the TATA-binding protein (TBP/SCA17) and atrophin-1 (DRPLA). Two patients carried 43 and 50 uninterrupted CTG repeats in the JPH3 gene. Two other patients had 44 and 46 CAA/CAG repeats in the TBP gene. Patients with expansions in the TBP or JPH3 genes had HDL phenotypes indistinguishable from Huntington's disease. Taking into account patients with typical Huntington's disease, their frequencies were evaluated as 3% each in our series of typical HDL patients. Interestingly, incomplete penetrance of the 46 CAA/CAG repeat in the TBP gene was observed in a 59-year-old transmitting, but healthy, parent. Furthermore, we report a new configuration of the expanded TBP allele, with 11 repeats on the first polymorphic stretch of CAGs. Expansions in the DRPLA gene and insertions in the PRNP gene were not found in our group of patients. Further genetic heterogeneity of the HDL phenotype therefore exists.

[PMID: 9392570]
Huntington's disease is an inherited disorder caused by expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in the IT15 gene, which leads to expansion of a polyglutamine tract within the protein called huntingtin. Despite the characterization of the IT15 gene and the mutation involved in the disease, the normal function of huntingtin and the effects of the mutation on its function and on its neuronal location remain unknown. To study whether mutated huntingtin has the same neuronal distribution and intracellular location as normal huntingtin, we analyzed immunohistochemically both forms of this protein in the brain of 5 controls and 5 patients with Huntington's disease. We show that the distribution of mutated huntingtin is, like that of the normal form, heterogeneous throughout the brain, but is not limited to vulnerable neurons in Huntington's disease, supporting the hypothesis that the presence of the mutated huntingtin in a neuron is not in itself sufficient to lead to neuronal death. Moreover, whereas normal huntingtin is detected in some neuronal perikarya, nerve fibers, and nerve endings, the mutated form is observed in some neuronal perikarya and proximal nerve processes but is not detectable in nerve endings. Our results suggest that the expression or processing of the mutated huntingtin in perikarya and nerve endings differs quantitatively or qualitatively from the expression of the normal form in the same neuronal compartments.

[PMID: 25931812]
Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by a genetic mutation that results in polyglutamine expansion in the N-terminal regions of huntingtin. As a result, this polyQ expansion leads to the misfolding and aggregation of mutant huntingtin as well as age-dependent neurodegeneration. The genetic mutation in HD allows for generating a variety of animal models that express different forms of mutant huntingtin and show differential pathology. Studies of these animal models have provided an important insight into the pathogenesis of HD. Mouse models of HD include transgenic mice, which express N-terminal or full-length mutant huntingtin ubiquitously or selectively in different cell types, and knock-in mice that express full-length mutant Htt at the endogenous level. Large animals, such as pig, sheep, and monkeys, have also been used to generate animal HD models. This review focuses on the different features of commonly used transgenic HD mouse models as well as transgenic large animal models of HD, and also discusses how to use them to identify potential therapeutics. Since HD shares many pathological features with other neurodegenerative diseases, identification of therapies for HD would also help to develop effective treatment for different neurodegenerative diseases that are also caused by protein misfolding and occur in an age-dependent manner.

[PMID: 12523115]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurological condition of progressive course that results from abnormally increased number of CAG repeats within IT-15 gene, coding for huntington. The main symptoms consist of choraetic movements, dementia, and characteropathy. The aim of the present study was to search for possible correlation between the age of the onset of HD, time from the onset, clinical status of the patients, and CAG repeats number. Ten patients were studied altogether. Modified UHDRS (MUHDRS) was applied for the estimation of patients' clinical status. The number of CAG repeats in examination of the IT-15 gene was determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and separation of radioisotope labelled PCR product against DNA size marker in polyacrylamide gel. A negative significant correlation was found between the CAG repeats number and the disease onset age (r = -0.67; p < 0.05) and MUHDRS score (r = 0.75; p < 0.05), as well. Negative significant correlation between time from the onset and MUHDRS score (r = -0.95; p < 0.05) and negative correlation between summarised: time from the onset and CAG number on the one site and MUHDRS on the other (p = -0.91) were found, as well. Our findings indicate an interdependence between CAG repeats number within the IT-15 gene, the course of the disease and the clinical status of HD patients.

[PMID: 16847693]
The expansion of a polymorphic CAG repeat in the HD gene encoding huntingtin has been identified as the major cause of Huntington's disease (HD) and determines 42-73% of the variance in the age-at-onset of the disease. Polymorphisms in huntingtin interacting or associated genes are thought to modify the course of the disease. To identify genetic modifiers influencing the age at disease onset, we searched for polymorphic markers in the GRIK2, TBP, BDNF, HIP1 and ZDHHC17 genes and analysed seven of them by association studies in 980 independent European HD patients. Screening for unknown sequence variations we found besides several silent variations three polymorphisms in the ZDHHC17 gene. These and polymorphisms in the GRIK2, TBP and BDNF genes were analysed with respect to their association with the HD age-at-onset. Although some of the factors have been defined as genetic modifier factors in previous studies, none of the genes encoding GRIK2, TBP, BDNF and ZDHHC17 could be identified as a genetic modifier for HD.

[PMID: 17941857]
Huntington disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder due to an excessive number of CAG repeats in the IT15 gene on chromosome 4. Studies of cognitive function in asymptomatic gene carriers have yielded contradictory results. This study compared cognitive performance in 44 subjects with the HD mutation (group of carriers) who had no clinical signs of HD and 39 at-risk individuals without HD mutation (group of non-carriers). Neuropsychological evaluation focused on global cognitive efficiency, psychomotor speed, attentional, executive and memory functions. Significant differences, with lower performances in the group of gene carriers, were detected for some measures of psychomotor speed, attention and executive functioning (all P < 0.01). More differences between groups were observed for memory measures, in particular on the California Verbal Memory Test. Complementing these observations, cognitive scores were correlated with age in the group of gene carriers, but not in the group of non-carriers. This suggests that the cognitive changes precede the appearance of the motor and psychiatric symptoms in HD and that tests proved to be sensitive to early HD deficiencies are better suited than global cognitive efficiency scales to observe them.

[PMID: 27400454]
Huntington disease (HD), a prototypic monogenic disease, is caused by an expanded CAG repeat in the HTT gene exceeding 35 units. However, not all patients with an HD phenotype carry the pathological expansion in HTT, and the positive diagnosis rate is poor. To examine patients with HD phenotypes to determine the frequency of HD phenocopies with typical features of HD but without pathological CAG repeat expansions in HTT in an attempt to improve the positive diagnosis rate. Between January 1, 2004, and April 18, 2011, a total of 226 consecutive index patients with an HD phenotype were referred to specialized clinics of the French National Huntington Disease Reference Centre for Rare Diseases. They underwent detailed clinical examination and follow-up, as well as neuropsychological, biological, imaging, and genetic examinations. Nucleotide expansions in JPH3, ATN1, TBP, and C9ORF72 and mutations in PRNP, as well as acquired conditions commonly causing HD phenocopies, were first screened. The diagnostic rate of HD phenocopies and frequency of other etiologies using deep clinical phenotyping and next generation sequencing. Our goal was to improve the genetic diagnosis of HD phenocopies and to identify new HD related genes. One hundred ninety-eight patients carried a pathological CAG repeat expansion in HTT, whereas 28 patients (12 women and 16 men) did not. Huntington disease phenocopies accounted for 12.4%, and their mean (SD) age at onset was similar to those of the HD-HTT group (47.3 [12.7] years vs 50.3 [16.4] years, P = .29). We first identified 3 patients with abnormal CTG expansions in JPH3, a fourth patient with an antiphospholipid syndrome, and a fifth patient with B12 avitaminosis. A custom-made 63-gene panel was generated based on clinical evolution and exome sequencing. It contained genes responsible for HD phenocopies and other neurodegenerative conditions, as well as candidate genes from exome sequencing in 3 index cases with imaging features of brain iron accumulation. We identified mutations in genes associated with neurodegeneration, including CACNA1A (n = 2), VPS13A (n = 1), UBQLN2 (n = 1), and VCP (n = 1). Huntington disease phenocopies without CAG repeat expansions in HTT are not rare, occurring in 12.4% (28 of 226) herein, and should be considered in genetic counseling. We used next-generation sequencing combined with clinical data and disease evolution to explore multiple etiologies simultaneously. Our combined clinical and genetic exploration of 28 HD phenocopies identified the underlying cause in 35.7% (10 of 28). In conclusion, the etiologies of HD phenocopies are heterogeneous, and clinical evolution should be taken into account when searching for a genetic cause. The panel of candidate genes to be examined is larger than expected but can be guided by specific imaging and clinical features. Other neurodegenerative diseases with late onset in which variant segregation cannot be verified could be productively explored with the combined approach illustrated herein.

[PMID: 26466780]
Huntington's disease is a genetic neurodegenerative disorder with symptoms that are linked to the progressive dysfunction and neuronal death in corticostriatal circuits. The causative gene (mutated HTT) is widely expressed outside the CNS and several peripheral signs of disease, including weight loss and increased proinflammatory signalling, are often seen; however, their importance in the pathophysiology of Huntington's disease is not clear. Studies in animals have shown that features of the disease involving the CNS, including synapse loss and behavioural alterations, are susceptible to modulation by treatments that target tissues and organs outside the CNS. Links between peripheral biology and neurodegeneration have also been shown in other chronic neurodegenerative diseases, suggesting that modulation of these peripheral targets can offer new approaches to therapeutic development. Treatments targeted to tissues and organs outside the CNS might therefore substantially improve the quality of life of patients with Huntington's disease, even in the absence of disease-modifying effects.

[PMID: 8985734]
The deletion of 3bp at codon positions 2642-2645 (delta 2642) of the gene mutated in Huntington's disease (HD) was analysed on the normal (N) and HD chromosomes of 79 French families affected with HD, and previously typed for the (CAG)n repeats. delta 2642 Polymorphism has been found over-represented on HD chromosomes, the relative risk of HD with the deletion being at a value of 8.26. In this study, the presence of the deleted allele on HD chromosomes increases the (CAG)n number (47.93 +/- 1.80 versus 43.50 +/- 2.78) and decreases the age of onset (41.34 +/- 2.09 versus 36.90 +/- 2.41) in the patients with versus without delta 2642; so the deletion may add to the severity of the disease. Our studies of delta 2642 on N chromosomes confirm that the deletion event occurs on N chromosomes with a (CAG)n allele length at the upper end of the normal size range.

[PMID: 24196395]
Huntington disease is a monogenic, autosomal dominant, progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by a trinucleotide CAG repeat expansion in exon 1 of the huntingtin (HTT) gene; age of onset of clinical symptoms inversely correlates with expanded CAG repeat length. HD leads to extensive degeneration of the basal ganglia, hypothalamic nuclei, and selected cortical areas, and a wide range of molecular mechanisms have been implicated in disease pathology in animal or cellular models expressing mutated HTT (mHTT) proteins, either full-length or amino-terminal fragments. However, HD cellular models that recapitulate the slow progression of the disease have not been available due to the toxicity of overexpressed exogenous mHTT or to limitations with using primary cells for long-term studies. Most investigations of the effects of mHTT relied on cytotoxicity or aggregation end points in heterologous systems or in primary embryonic neuroglial cultures derived from HD mouse models. More innovative approaches are currently under active investigation, including screening using electrophysiological endpoints, as well as the recent use of primary blood mononuclear cells and of human embryonic stem cells derived from a variety of HD research participants. Here we describe how these cellular systems are being used to investigate HD biology as well as to identify mechanisms with therapeutic potential.

[PMID: 11494364]
Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the expansion of CAG repeats in exon 1 of the HD gene. To clarify the instability of expanded CAG repeats in HD patients, an HD model mouse has been generated by gene replacement with human exon 1 of the HD gene with expansion to 77 CAG repeats. Chimeric proteins composed of human mutated exon 1 and mouse huntingtin are expressed ubiquitously in brain and peripheral tissues. One or two CAG repeat expansion was found in litters from paternal transmission, whereas contraction of CAG repeat in litters was observed through maternal transmission. Elderly mice show greater CAG repeat instability than younger mice, and a unique case was observed of an expanded 97 CAG repeat mouse. Somatic CAG repeat instability is particularly pronounced in the liver, kidney, stomach, and brain but not in the cerebellum of 100-week-old mice. The same results of expanded CAG repeat instability as observed in this HD model mouse were confirmed in the human brain of HD patients. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive cells have been found to be increased in the substantia nigra (SN), globus pallidus (GP), and striatum (St) in the brains of 40-week-old affected mice, although without neuronal cell death. The CAG repeat instability and increase in GFAP-positive cells in this mouse model appear to mirror the abnormalities in HD patients. The HD model mouse may therefore have advantages for investigations of molecular mechanisms underlying instability of CAG repeats.