[PMID: 22622836]
A novel extracellular exoinulinase was purified and characterized from a new yeast strain KRF1(T), and the gene encoding the enzyme was successfully cloned. The enzyme was stable at low pH between 3.0 and 6.5. The K (m) and V (max) values of the purified enzyme for inulin were 2.3 mg/mL and 4.8 mg/min, respectively. The optimum temperature of the inulinase was 50 °C, and the enzyme remained 78 % of activity at 60 °C for 2 h. The inulinase showed an amino acid sequence identity of 58 % to its closest homolog in Meyerozyma (Pichia) guilliermondii. In the secondary structure, the domain G (VMEVH) of the enzyme contained three unique residues (V, M, and H). Compared with previously reported inulinases, the enzyme from strain KRF1(T) displayed strong acid resistance, notable thermostability, and high affinity for the substrate of inulin. Based on sequence analysis of the 26S rDNA D1/D2 domain and phenotypic characterization, the yeast strain KRF1(T) was found to represent a novel anamorphic, ascomycetous yeast species. A complete description of the species is given and the name Candida kutaonensis sp. nov (type strain = KRF1(T) = AS 2.4027(T) = CBS 11388(T)) is proposed.

[PMID: 18592410]
A study was carried out to select the conditions for cultivation of Kluyveromyces marxianus CDBBL 278 in solid-state culture (SSC) using polyurethane foam (PUF) as an inert support. PUF was impregnated with culture media containing lactose (50 g/L) as the carbon and energy source. Evaluation of culture parameters during different growth phases was carried out by respirometry. The effect of inoculum level, buffer capacity of the medium, and nitrogen source upon the yield of biomass on lactose (Yx/s) and production of lactase and inulinase was investigated. The highest lactase titre was achieved with an inoculum level of 1 x 10(7) cells per gram of wet matter (gwm) and 20% of the total nitrogen source provided as urea. The best biomass yield (0.37) was obtained when less than 40% of the total nitrogen was provided as urea. Using potassium phosphate allowed 90% substrate consumption in 30 h. In the best conditions, intracellular lactase and extracellular inulinase activities of 1147.7 IU/gX and 241.6 IU/gX were obtained, respectively, with a lag phase of 13.8 h and a rate of respiratory activity (microCO2) of 0.23 +/- 0.01 h(-1). To our knowledge, this is the first report on lactase production by K. marxianus CDBBL 278 in SSC. This study gives basic information about biomass yield and enzyme production using lactose as the sole carbon source in SSC on an inert support.

[PMID: 22286980]
An inulinase-producing Microbulbifer sp. strain, JAM-3301, was isolated from a deep-sea sediment. An inulin operon that contained three open reading frames was cloned and sequenced. Two of the three genes were expressed. One product was an endo-inulinase, and the other was a β-fructofuranosidase. Both enzymes worked together to effectively degrade inulin.

[PMID: 23419675]
Inulin is a carbohydrate composed of linear chains of β-2,1-linked D-fructofuranose molecules terminated by a glucose residue through a sucrose-type linkage at the reducing end. Jerusalem artichoke (JA) is one of the most interesting materials among unconventional and renewable raw materials, with levels of inulin reaching 50-80% of dry matter. Inulin or inulin-rich materials can be actively hydrolyzed by microbial inulinases to produce glucose and fructose syrups that can be used in bioprocesses. In this study, several microbial strains were isolated and their ability to inulinase biosynthesis was evaluated. The novel yeast strain Talf1, identified as Zygosaccharomyces bailii, was the best inulinase producer, attaining 8.67 U/ml of inulinase activity when JA juice was used as the inducer substrate. Z. bailii strain Talf1 and/or its enzymatic crude extract were further applied for bioethanol production and biodesulfurization (BDS) processes, using inulin and JA juice as carbon source. In a consolidated bioprocessing for ethanol production from 200 g/l inulin, Z. bailii strain Talf1 was able to produce 67 g/l of ethanol. This ethanol yield was improved in a simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF) process, with the ethanologenic yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae CCMI 885 and the Talf1 inulinases, achieving a production of 78 g/l ethanol. However, the highest ethanol yield (∼48%) was obtained in a SSF process from JA juice (∼130 g/l fermentable sugars), where the S. cerevisiae produced 63 g/l ethanol. Relatively to the dibenzothiophene BDS tests, the Gordonia alkanivorans strain 1B achieved a desulfurization rate of 4.8 μM/h within a SSF process using Talf1 inulinases and JA juice, highlighting the potential of JA as a less expensive alternative carbon source. These results showed the high potential of Z. bailii strain Talf1 inulinases as a versatile tool for bioprocesses using inulin-rich materials.

[PMID: 23997327]
Inulin is emerging as an extremely rare source of sugar, it is having more sweetening capacity than table sugar, has beneficial effect in diabetic patient. Inulinases mainly produced by the microorganism and it degrades inulin into fructose which is a digestible form. There are more than 58 strains of microorganisms which are involved in the production of inulinases. The present report investigates about the selectivity of inulin by inulinase and its action to produce fructose through molecular docking. We have investigated exo-inulinase and endo-inulinases from Penicillium sp. TN-88(BAC16218) and Penicillium sp. TN-88(BAA19132), respectively with different arrangement of amino acids in the active site which detect the substrate. The protein sequences described above were processed to homology modeling by Swiss model and further they were docked with 1-ketose and fructose-6-phosphate as substrate by DOCK6 software package (dock.compbio.ucsf.edu). The results of the present studies represented that fructose-6-phosphate ((2R,3R,4S) fructose-6-phosphate) was having better interaction with exo-inulinase showing grid score of -40.288094 and the conserved amino acid Asp-22, Asp 128, Asp 179 and Ser 84 of exo-inulinase are involved in the bonding. In addition to this it was also seen that 1-ketose ((3S,4R)-ketose 1-phosphate) did not shown any interaction with the conserved part of the endo-inulinase.

[PMID: 17659392]
This work was aimed at producing inulinase by solid-state fermentation of sugarcane bagasse, using factorial design to identify the effect of corn steep liquor (CSL) and soybean bran concentration, particle size of bagasse and size of inoculum. Maximum inulinase activity achieved was 250 U per g of dry substrate (gds) at 20% (w/w) of CSL, 5% (w/w) of soybean bran, 1 x 10(10) cells mL(-1) and particle size of bagasse in the range 9/32 mesh. The use of soybean bran decreased the time to reach maximum activity from 96 to 24 h and the maximum productivity achieved was 8.87 U gds(-1) h(-1). The maximum activity was obtained at pH 5.0 and 55.0 degrees C. Within the investigated range, the enzyme extract was more thermostable at 50.0 degrees C, showing a D-value of 123.1 h and deactivation energy of 343.9 kJ gmol(-1). The extract showed highest stability from pH 4.5 to 4.8. Apparent K(m) and V(max) are 7.1 mM and 17.79 M min(-1), respectively.

[PMID: 18065000]
Penicillium janczewskii, isolated from the rhizosphere of Vernonia herbacea, grows rapidly on media containing either sucrose or inulin, although inulin more than sucrose induced the production of inulinases. Three different extracellular beta-fructofuranosidases (two inulinases and one invertase) were purified from fungal cultures grown on sucrose or inulin, through precipitation with ammonium sulfate, and anion-exchange, hydrophobic interaction and gel filtration chromatographies. The optimum temperature of the three enzymes was approximately 60 C, optimum pH 4-5.5 and apparent molecular mass of 80 kDa. K(m) and V(max) values determined for invertase on sucrose were respectively 3.7 10(-4) M and 7.9 10(-2) micromol/min/mL, and on inulin 6.3 10(-2) M and 2.09 10(-2) micromol/min/mL. The values of k(m) for the two inulinases were 8.11 10(-4) and 2.62 10(-3) M, being lower for inulin when compared to those obtained for sucrose. The inulinases did not produce oligofructans from inulin, indicating they are primarily exoinulinases. The differences found in inulinase induction patterns when inulin or sucrose was used seem to be related to modifications on the enzyme properties, mainly concerning substrate affinity.

[PMID: 17005986]
As a soil fungus, Aspergillus niger can metabolize a wide variety of carbon sources, employing sets of enzymes able to degrade plant-derived polysaccharides. In this study the genome sequence of A. niger strain CBS 513.88 was surveyed, to analyse the gene/enzyme network involved in utilization of the plant storage polymer inulin, and of sucrose, the substrate for inulin synthesis in plants. In addition to three known activities, encoded by the genes suc1 (invertase activity; designated sucA), inuE (exo-inulinase activity) and inuA/inuB (endo-inulinase activity), two new putative invertase-like proteins were identified. These two putative proteins lack N-terminal signal sequences and therefore are expected to be intracellular enzymes. One of these two genes, designated sucB, is expressed at a low level, and its expression is up-regulated when A. niger is grown on sucrose- or inulin-containing media. Transcriptional analysis of the genes encoding the sucrose- (sucA) and inulin-hydrolysing enzymes (inuA and inuE) indicated that they are similarly regulated and all strongly induced on sucrose and inulin. Analysis of a DeltacreA mutant strain of A. niger revealed that expression of the extracellular inulinolytic enzymes is under control of the catabolite repressor CreA. Expression of the inulinolytic enzymes was not induced by fructose, not even in the DeltacreA background, indicating that fructose did not act as an inducer. Evidence is provided that sucrose, or a sucrose-derived intermediate, but not fructose, acts as an inducer for the expression of inulinolytic genes in A. niger.

[PMID: 23265469]
This work is focused on the synthesis of the fructooligosaccharides (FOS) from sucrose and inulin, using free, immobilized and pre-treated immobilized inulinase from Kluyveromyces marxianus NRRL Y 7571 and Aspergillus niger in an aqueous-organic system. Initially, the influence of pre-treatment using four different gases, propane, n-butane, CO(2) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), was investigated towards FOS production and best results were found when both enzymes were previously treated with LPG. The best reaction yields were obtained when the immobilized enzymes were treated with LPG. Considering FOS synthesis using the enzyme from A. niger, yields of 26.62% of GF2 (kestose), 30.62% of GF3 (nystose) and 8.47% of GF4 (fructosyl nystose) were achieved using sucrose as substrate. Using inulinases from K. marxianus NRRL Y 7571, 11.89% of GF2 and 20.83% of GF3 were obtained, using inulin as substrate. However, promising results were achieved using the free form of inulinase from A. niger (77.19% of GF2; 14.03% of GF3 and 0.07% of GF4) using inulin as substrate.

[PMID: 19256341]
A unique one-step ethanol fermentation process was developed with the inulinase-producing strain Kluyveromyces marxianus YX01. Firstly, the impact of temperature on ethanol fermentation was investigated through flask fermentation, and the temperature of 35 degrees C was observed to be the optimum to coordinate inulinase production, inulin saccharification and ethanol fermentation. And then, the impact of aeration and substrate concentration was studied through batch fermentation in the 2.5 L fermentor, and the experimental data indicated that the average ethanol fermentation time was decreased at the aeration rates of 50 mL/min and 100 mL/min, but higher ethanol yield was obtained under non-aeration conditions with more substrate directed to ethanol production. The ethanol concentration of 92.2 g/L was achieved with the substrate containing 235 g/L inulin, and the ethanol yield was calculated to be 0.436, equivalent to 85.5% of its theoretical value. Finally, Jerusalem artichoke grown in salina and irrigated with seawater was fermented without sterilization treatment, 84.0 g/L ethanol was obtained with the substrate containing 280 g/L dry Jerusalem artichoke meal, and the ethanol yield was calculated to be 0.405, indicating the Jerusalem artichoke could be an alternative feedstock for grain-based fuel ethanol production.

[PMID: 23271628]
Commercial inulinase from Aspergillus niger was immobilized in montmorillonite and then treated in pressurized propane and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Firstly, the effects of system pressure, exposure time, and depressurization rate, using propane and LPG, on enzymatic activity were evaluated through central composite design 2³. Residual activities of 145.1 and 148.5% were observed for LPG (30 bar, 6 h, and depressurization rate of 20 bar min⁻¹) and propane (270 bar, 1 h, and depressurization rate of 100 bar min⁻¹), respectively. The catalysts treated at these conditions in both fluids were then used for the production of fructooligosaccharides (FOS) using sucrose and inulin as substrates in aqueous and organic systems. The main objective of this step was to evaluate the yield and productivity in FOS, using alternatives for enhancing enzyme activity by means of pressurized fluids and also using low-cost supports for enzyme immobilization, aiming at obtaining a stable biocatalyst to be used for synthesis reactions. Yields of 18% were achieved using sucrose as substrate in aqueous medium, showing the potential of this procedure, hence suggesting a further optimization step to increase the process yield.

[PMID: 18663416]
A new thermophilic inulinase-producing strain, which grows optimally at 60 degrees C, was isolated from soil samples with medium containing inulin as a sole carbon source. It was identified as a Bacillus smithii by analysis of 16s rDNA. Maximum inulinase yield of 135.2 IU/ml was achieved with medium pH7.0, containing inulin 2.0%, (NH(4))H(2)PO(4) 0.5%, yeast extract 0.5%, at 50 degrees C 200 rpm shaker for 72-h incubation. The purified inulinase from the extracellular extract of B. smithii T7 shows endoinulinolytic activity. The optimum pH for this endoinulinase is 4.5 and stable at pH range of 4.0-8.0. The optimum temperature for enzyme activity was 70 degrees C, the half life of the endoinulinase is 9 h and 2.5 h at 70 degrees C and 80 degrees C respectively. Comparatively lower Michaelis-Menten constant (4.17 mM) and higher maximum reaction velocity (833 IU/mg protein) demonstrate the endoinulinase's greater affinity for inulin substrate. These findings are significant for its potential industrial application.

[PMID: 24031675]
Thirty fungal species grown on Cichorium intybus L. root extract as a sole carbon source, were screened for the production of exo-inulinase activities. The thermophile Thielavia terrestris NRRL 8126 and mesophile Aspergillus foetidus NRRL 337 gave the highest production levels of inulinases I & II at 50 and 24 ºC respectively. Yeast extract and peptone were the best nitrogen sources for highest production of inulinases I & II at five and seven days of incubation respectively. The two inulinases I & II were purified to homogeneity by gel-filtration and ion-exchange chromatography with 66.0 and 42.0 fold of purification respectively. The optimum temperatures of purified inulinases I & II were 75 and 50 ºC respectively. Inulinase I was more thermostable than the other one. The optimum pH for activity was found to be 4.5 and 5.5 for inulinases I & II respectively. A comparatively lower Michaelis-Menten constant (2.15 mg/ml) and higher maximum initial velocity (115 µmol/min/mg of protein) for inulinase I on inulin demonstrated the exoinulinase's greater affinity for inulin substrate. These findings are significant for its potential industrial application. The molecular mass of the inulinases I & II were estimated to be 72 & 78 kDa respectively by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

[PMID: 18427804]
Strains belonging to the yeast species Kluyveromyces marxianus have been isolated from a great variety of habitats, which results in a high metabolic diversity and a substantial degree of intraspecific polymorphism. As a consequence, several different biotechnological applications have been investigated with this yeast: production of enzymes (beta-galactosidase, beta-glucosidase, inulinase, and polygalacturonases, among others), of single-cell protein, of aroma compounds, and of ethanol (including high-temperature and simultaneous saccharification-fermentation processes); reduction of lactose content in food products; production of bioingredients from cheese-whey; bioremediation; as an anticholesterolemic agent; and as a host for heterologous protein production. Compared to its congener and model organism, Kluyveromyces lactis, the accumulated knowledge on K. marxianus is much smaller and spread over a number of different strains. Although there is no publicly available genome sequence for this species, 20% of the CBS 712 strain genome was randomly sequenced (Llorente et al. in FEBS Lett 487:71-75, 2000). In spite of these facts, K. marxianus can envisage a great biotechnological future because of some of its qualities, such as a broad substrate spectrum, thermotolerance, high growth rates, and less tendency to ferment when exposed to sugar excess, when compared to K. lactis. To increase our knowledge on the biology of this species and to enable the potential applications to be converted into industrial practice, a more systematic approach, including the careful choice of (a) reference strain(s) by the scientific community, would certainly be of great value.

[PMID: 24031804]
Various carbon sources were evaluated for production of inulinase by yeast, Kluyveromyces marxianus MTCC 3995. Highest inulinase activity was observed with Dahlia extract (25.3 nkat mL(-1)) as carbon source. The enzyme activity was 1.4 folds higher than that observed in media containing pure chicory inulin (17.8 nkat mL(-1)). The yeast showed good growth on a simple medium containing dahlia extract (20% w/v) and yeast extract (2%w/v) as carbon and nitrogen source respectively, in 96 h. at 28°C and 120 rpm. Lowest inulinase yield (4.8 nkat mL(-1)) was seen in the medium containing glucose as C-source. Although varied inulinase levels were noticed on different C- sources, Inulinase: Sucrase (I/S) ratios were noticed to be similar. Among various protein sources tested, yeast extract was found to be the best source followed by beef extract (17.9 nkat mL(-1)) and peptone (13.8 nkat mL(-1)). The enzyme was optimally active at pH (4.0) and 50°C. TLC analysis of end product revealed that inulinase hydrolyzed inulin exclusively into fructose. Results suggest that the dahlia extract induced exoinulinase synthesis in Kluyveromyces marxianus and can be utilized as a potential substrate for inulinase production.

[PMID: 19107534]
In order to isolate inulinase overproducers of the marine yeast Pichia guilliermondii, strain 1, cells were mutated by using UV light and LiCl(2). One mutant (M-30) with enhanced inulinase production was obtained. Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to optimize the medium compositions and cultivation conditions for inulinase production by the mutant in solid-state fermentation. The initial moisture, inoculum, the amount ratio of wheat bran to rice bran, temperature, pH for the maximum inulinase production by the mutant M-30 were found to be 60.5%, 2.5%, 0.42, 30 degrees C and 6.50, respectively. Under the optimized conditions, 455.9 U/grams of dry substrate (gds) of inulinase activity was reached in the solid state fermentation culture of the mutant M-30 whereas the predicted maximum inulinase activity of 459.2 U/gds was derived from RSM regression. Under the same conditions, its parent strain only produced 291.0 U/gds of inulinase activity. This is the highest inulinase activity produced by the yeast strains reported so far.

[PMID: 18449567]
The production of inulinase employing agroindustrial residues as the substrate is a good alternative to reduce production costs and to minimize the environmental impact of disposing these residues in the environment. This study focused on the use of a phenomenological model and an artificial neural network (ANN) to simulate the inulinase production during the batch cultivation of the yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus NRRL Y-7571, employing a medium containing agroindustrial residues such as molasses, corn steep liquor and yeast extract. It was concluded that due to the complexity of the medium composition it was rather difficult to use a phenomenological model with sufficient accuracy. For this reason, an alternative and more cost-effective methodology based on ANN was adopted. The predictive capacity of the ANN was superior to that of the phenomenological model, indicating that the neural network approach could be used as an alternative in the predictive modeling of complex batch cultivations.

[PMID: 18833660]
Approximately 1 million tons of Agave tequilana plants are processed annually by the Mexican Tequila industry generating vast amounts of agricultural waste. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential use of Agave tequilana waste as substrate for the production of commercially important enzymes. Two strains of Aspergillus niger (CH-A-2010 and CH-A-2016), isolated from agave fields, were found to grow and propagate in submerged cultures using Agave tequilana waste as substrate. Isolates showed simultaneous extracellular inulinase, xylanase, pectinase, and cellulase activities. Aspergillus CH-A-2010 showed the highest production of inulinase activity (1.48 U/ml), whereas Aspergillus niger CH-A-2016 produced the highest xylanase (1.52 U/ml) and endo-pectinase (2.7U/ml) activities. In both cases production of enzyme activities was significantly higher on Agave tequilana waste than that observed on lemon peel and specific polymeric carbohydrates. Enzymatic hydrolysis of raw A. tequilana stems and leaves, by enzymes secreted by the isolates yielded maximum concentrations of reducing sugars of 28.2 g/l, and 9.9 g/l respectively. In conclusion, Agave tequilana waste can be utilized as substrate for the production of important biotechnological enzymes.

[PMID: 18726619]
The optimization of process parameters for high inulinase production by the marine yeast strain Cryptococcus aureus G7a in solid-state fermentation (SSF) was carried out using central composite design (CCD), one of the response surface methodologies (RSMs). We found that moisture, inoculation size, the amount ratio of wheat bran to rice husk, temperature and pH had great influence on inulinase production by strain G7a. Therefore, the CCD was used to evaluate the influence of the five factors on the inulinase production by strain G7a. Then, five levels of the five factors above were further optimized using the CCD. Finally, the optimal parameters obtained with the RSM were the initial moisture 61.5%, inoculum 2.75%, the amount ratio of wheat bran to rice husk 0.42, temperature 29 degrees C, pH 5.5. Under the optimized conditions, 420.9 U g(-1) of dry substrate of inulinase activity was reached in the solid-state fermentation culture of strain G7a within 120 h whereas the predicted maximum inulinase activity of 436.2 U g(-1) of inulinase activity of 436.2 U g(-1) of dry weight was derived from the RSM regression. This is the highest inulinase activity produced by the yeast strain reported so far. A large amount of monosaccharides and oligosaccharides were detected after inulin hydrolysis by the crude inulinase.

[PMID: 20597549]
Exoinulinase (beta-d-fructan fructohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.80) secreted by Aspergillus terreus CCT4083 was obtained using sugar cane bagasse, an agroindustrial residue, as a carbon source. It was further purified from the supernatant culture in a rapid procedure. The enzyme presented 57 kDa on SDS-PAGE and 56 kDa on gel filtration chromatography. Inulin was hydrolyzed by the purified enzyme, yielding d-fructose as the main product. This enzyme showed maximum activity at pH 4.0 and 60 degrees C and maintained more than 90 and 75% of its original activity at 40 and 50 degrees C, respectively, after 3.5 h of preincubation. The K(M) values for inulin, sucrose, and raffinose were 11, 4.20, and 27.89 mM, respectively, and d-fructose was a competitive inhibitor (K(i) = 47.55 mM). The activation energies for sucrose, raffinose, and inulin were 10.4, 5.61, and 4.44 kcal/mol, respectively. The characteristics of A. terreus exoinulinase were compared to those of inulinases isolated from other organisms. The exoinulinase traits presented especially good thermostability and the ability to produce pure d-fructose, suggesting its application to the production of high-fructose syrup.

[PMID: 19514896]
This article highlights the research work carried out in the production of inulinases from various inulin substrates using strains of bacteria, yeast and fungi. Inulin is one of the numerous polysaccharides of plant origin that contains glucose or fructose. It is used as a substrate in industrial fermentation processes and in food industries due to its relatively cheap and abundant source for the microbiological production of high-fructose syrups, ethanol and acetone-butanol. The various oligosaccharides derived from inulin also find their application in the medical and dietary sector. The inulinase acts on the beta-(2,1)-D-fructoside links in inulin releasing D-fructose. Hence, this article illustrates the capability of various microbes in hydrolyzing the carbon at its optimum nutrient concentration and operating condition towards inulinase production.

[PMID: 22629216]
Fructans were extracted from Agave salmiana juice, characterized and subjected to hydrolysis process using a commercial inulinase preparation acting freely. To compare the performance of the enzymatic preparation, a batch of experiments were also conducted with chicory inulin (reference). Hydrolysis was performed for 6 h at two temperatures (50, 60 °C) and two substrate concentrations (40, 60 mg/ml). Hydrolysis process was monitored by measuring the sugars released and residual substrate by HPLC. A mathematical model which describes the kinetics of substrate degradation as well as fructose production was proposed to analyze the hydrolysis assessment. It was found that kinetics were significantly influenced by temperature, substrate concentration, and type of substrate (P < 0.01). The extent of substrate hydrolysis varied from 82 to 99%. Hydrolysis product was mainly constituted of fructose, obtaining from 77 to 96.4% of total reducing sugars.

[PMID: 18051293]
An extracellular exoinulinase (2,1-beta-D fructan fructanohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.7), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of inulin into fructose and glucose, was purified 23.5-fold by ethanol precipitation, followed by Sephadex G-100 gel permeation from a cell-free extract of Kluyveromyces marxianus YS-1. The partially purified enzyme exhibited considerable activity between pH 5 to 6, with an optimum pH of 5.5, while it remained stable (100%) for 3 h at the optimum temperature of 50 degrees C. Mn2+ and Ca2+ produced a 2.4-fold and 1.2-fold enhancement in enzyme activity, whereas Hg2+ and Ag2+ completely inhibited the inulinase. A preparation of the partially purified enzyme effectively hydrolyzed inulin, sucrose, and raffinose, yet no activity was found with starch, lactose, and maltose. The enzyme preparation was then successfully used to hydrolyze pure inulin and raw inulin from Asparagus racemosus for the preparation of a high-fructose syrup. In a batch system, the exoinulinase hydrolyzed 84.8% of the pure inulin and 86.7% of the raw Asparagus racemosus inulin, where fructose represented 43.6 mg/ml and 41.3 mg/ml, respectively.