[PMID: 18467377]
Whilst maternal age is an established risk factor for Patau syndrome (trisomy 13), Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) and Down syndrome (trisomy 21), the aetiology and contribution of genetic and environmental factors remains unclear. We analysed for space-time clustering using high quality fully population-based data from a geographically defined region. The study included all cases of Patau, Edwards and Down syndrome, delivered during 1985-2003 and resident in the former Northern Region of England, including terminations of pregnancy for fetal anomaly. We applied the K-function test for space-time clustering with fixed thresholds of close in space and time using residential addresses at time of delivery. The Knox test was used to indicate the range over which the clustering effect occurred. Tests were repeated using nearest neighbour (NN) thresholds to adjust for variable population density. The study analysed 116 cases of Patau syndrome, 240 cases of Edwards syndrome and 1084 cases of Down syndrome. There was evidence of space-time clustering for Down syndrome (fixed threshold of close in space: P = 0.01, NN threshold: P = 0.02), but little or no clustering for Patau (P = 0.57, P = 0.19) or Edwards (P = 0.37, P = 0.06) syndromes. Clustering of Down syndrome was associated with cases from more densely populated areas and evidence of clustering persisted when cases were restricted to maternal age <40 years. The highly novel space-time clustering for Down syndrome suggests an aetiological role for transient environmental factors, such as infections.

[PMID: 23613355]
Trisomy 13 or Patau syndrome (PS) is a chromosomal disorder characterized by a well known presentation of multiple congenital anomalies. Our objective was to determine the clinical features and prognosis observed in a sample of patients with PS. The series was composed of patients with diagnosis of PS consecutively evaluated by a Clinical Genetics Service from a reference hospital of southern Brazil, in the period between 1975 and 2012. Statistical analysis was performed using PEPI program (version 4.0), with two-tailed Fisher's exact test for comparison of frequencies (P<0.05). The sample consisted of 30 patients, 60% male, median age at first evaluation of 9 days. Full trisomy of chromosome 13 was the main cytogenetic alteration (73%). The major clinical findings included: cryptorchidism (78%), abnormal auricles (77%), congenital heart defects (76%), polydactyly (63%), microphthalmia (60%) and micrognathia (50%). Four patients (13%) simultaneously had micro/anophthalmia, oral clefts and polydactyly. Some findings were only observed in our sample and included, among others, preauricular tags (10%), duplication of the hallux (3%) and spots following the lines of Blaschko (3%). Mosaicism (20% of cases) had a statistically significant association only with absence of cryptorchidism. The median of survival was 26 days. Patients with and without mosaicism had similar median of survival. Our findings, in agreement with the literature, show that the anomalies in patients with PS can be quite variable, sometimes even atypical. There is no pathognomonic finding, which may make the early identification of these patients challenging.

[PMID: 17603803]
Patau syndrome (trisomy 13) is very rare in live-born babies. Individuals with this chromosomal syndrome have a short lifespan and are rarely seen beyond infancy. This study is aimed at the clinical spectrum, natural history, and survival of patients with trisomy 13. We reviewed the detailed data of 13 Patau syndrome live-born babies. Among them two individuals were delivered from continuation of pregnancy even after prenatal diagnosis. The remaining 11 patients were born to younger mothers who did not undergo amniocentesis because no major anomalies except for cleft lip/palate were found on prenatal sonograms. The common features of Patau syndrome including the clinical triad (microphthalmia, cleft lip/palate, and polydactyly) and non-cyanotic heart defects were always found in our series. However, certain serious central defects (holoprosencephaly, omphalocele, and single umbilical artery), which are easily recognized from prenatal sonogram, occurred less frequently than those stated in the literature. The median survival time was 95 days and was longer than that previously reported. There were two infants with trisomic mosaicism with different outcomes in both clinical spectrum and survival. Otherwise, we also found the increased recurrence risks of aneuploidy in two individuals, and the longest survivor (84 months) of non-mosaic trisomy 13 in Taiwan. We thus suggest that long-term survival in our series is strongly correlated with different expressivity after prenatal selection, in addition to cytogenetic mosaicism. Less associated anomalies such as polyhydramnios, oligohydramnios, intrauterine growth retardation, single umbilical artery, eye defects, holoprosencephaly, omphalocele, and polycystic kidney may contribute to their clinical courses.

[PMID: 14506431]
We describe the management of the eyelid anomaly associated with Patau syndrome. Trisomy 13 is the genotype of the syndrome's phenotype. The eyelid anomaly was a tarsal kink, a congenital malformation of the tarsus that causes entropion. A 2-month-old white girl presented with unilateral upper eyelid entropion and central corneal ulceration. To correct this condition, two 6-0 polyglactin sutures were passed through the gray line of the upper and lower eyelids and tied. Correction of the entropion and improvement in the corneal condition were achieved after surgery. No recurrence of the entropion or corneal ulceration was noted after 2 months of follow-up. This simple technique, which corrected the eyelid malposition, providing an excellent cosmetic result without incision of the tarsus, has been previously reported in other cases of tarsal kink but not in a patient with Patau syndrome.

[PMID: 6458983]
The authors examined the soluble proteins of the brain frontal lobes in the newborn with trisomias of the 13th, 18th, and 21st chromosomes (Down's, Patau's, and Edwards' syndromes). The examinations were carried out on autopsy material (the post-mortem period not exceeding 24 hours) by the method of disc electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gel. The brain tissue was taken from 17 newborn infants with Down's syndrome; 9 infants with Patau's syndrome; and 7 infants with Edwards' syndrome. For the control the brain of 21 newborn infants without defects of the CNS development (the death cause being analogous) was taken. In all the syndromes studied diversely directed but relatively specific shifts were revealed on the proteinograms. It was the albumin section which appeared to be the most sensitive to the chromosomal pathology: in cases of Down's and Patau's syndromes the protein content in it was reduced, whereas in cases of Edwards' syndrome it was increased. In the latter syndrome the relative amount of neuronines S-5 and S-6, and in Patau's syndrome the amount of neuronine S-6 were lowered, this lowering being statistically significantly. In all the trisomias a tendency to a diminution of the zone of the acidic neurospecific cerebral proteins was noted. This is, possibly, due to the lower level of the CNS functional activity in chromosomal pathologies.

[PMID: 24340511]
Patau syndrome has an incidence of 1/10.000-20.000, the clinical diagnosis being suggested by the triad cleft lip and palate, microphthalmia/anophthalmia and postaxial polydactyly. Most frequent cytogenetic abnormality is free and homogeneous trisomy 13 (80.0%), rarely being detected trisomy mosaics or Robertsonian translocations. The objective of the study was to identify phenotypic features of trisomy 13. The retrospective study was conducted on a trial group of 14 cases diagnosed cytogenetically with trisomy 13 between January 2000 and December 2012 at lasi Medical Genetics Centre. Of the 14 cases, 3 were evaluated pathologically (two aborted foetuses and one stillborn), 8 cases were detected in the neonatal period, and 3 in infancy. Clinical diagnosis was supported by the identification of a model of abnormal development, mainly characterized by: maxillary cleft (lip and palate--5 cases; lip--1 case), ocular abnormalities (microphthalmia/anophthalmia--7 cases; cyclopia--1 case), postaxial polydactyly (7 cases), scalp defects (6 cases), congenital heart anomalies (10 cases, 6 patients with atrial septal defect), complete holoprosencephaly (4 cases), ear abnormalities (11 cases), broad nasal root (10 cases). An important issue in confirming the phenotypic variability of Patau syndrome is that the classic clinical triad was identified only in one case. Patau syndrome is a disease with variable expression and is characterized by a pattern of abnormal prenatal development characterized by facial dysmorphia, polydactyly and severe birth defects (heart, brain) that generate an increased in utero and perinatal mortality.

[PMID: 12762245]
Known as D trisomy, Patau syndrome is the third chromosomopathy according to frequency. One of the 5000 newborn carries the trisomy 13. In over 80% cases there is fresh mutation with non separation in myeosis of older mother. The mosaic or translocation forms are not rare. The mail newborn with Patau syndrome is shown in this article. We notice: microcephalia, dolihocephalia, microphthalmia, cheilognatopalatoshisis, polydactilia, and found ultrasound changes at the brain, hearth and genitourinary system. Cytogenetic finding show: mail cariotype with aberrations 47, XY + 13, Sy Patau.

[PMID: 24993362]
Pregnancies with Edwards or Patau syndrome are often detected through screening for Down's syndrome. We aimed to evaluate the impact of screening for Down's syndrome on the prevalence of live births and antenatal diagnoses of Edwards and Patau syndrome. England and Wales, 2005 to 2012. Data from the National Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register, which contains information on nearly all ante- or postnatally diagnosed cases of Edwards or Patau syndrome in which a karyotype was confirmed, were analysed. From 2005 to 2012, 3,941 diagnoses of Edwards syndrome and 1,567 diagnoses of Patau syndrome were recorded (prevalence of 7.0 and 2.8 per 10,000 births respectively). Only 11% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 10-12) of diagnoses of Edwards syndrome and 13% (95% CI: 11-14) of Patau syndrome were live births, resulting in live birth prevalences of 0.8 (95% CI: 0.7-0.8) and 0.4 (95% CI: 0.3-0.4) per 10,000 live births respectively. About 90% of pregnancies with Edwards or Patau syndrome were diagnosed antenatally, and this proportion remained constant over time. The proportion of diagnoses detected before 15 weeks increased from 50% in 2005 to 53% in 2012 for Edwards syndrome, and from 41% in 2005 to 63% in 2012 for Patau syndrome. Almost 700 women per year had a pregnancy with Edwards or Patau syndrome. Over 90% of these pregnancies were detected antenatally, with the increased use of first trimester screening for Down's syndrome resulting in the reduction in the mean gestational age at diagnosis of these syndromes.

[PMID: 18253026]
Among full autosomal trisomies, only trisomies of chromosome 21 (Down syndrome), 18 (Edwards syndrome) and 13 (Patau syndrome) are compatible with postnatal survival. But the mechanisms, how a supernumerary chromosome disrupts the normal development and causes specific phenotypes, are still not fully explained. As an alternative to gene dosage effect due to the trisomic chromosome a genome-wide transcriptional dysregulation has been postulated. The aim of this study was to define the transcriptional changes in trisomy 13, 18, and 21 during early fetal development in order to obtain more insights into the molecular etiopathology of aneuploidy. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we analyzed whole genome expression profiles in cultured amniocytes (AC) and chorionic villus cells (CV) from pregnancies with a normal karyotype and with trisomies of human chromosomes 13, 18 and 21. We observed a low to moderate up-regulation for a subset of genes of the trisomic chromosomes. Transcriptional levels of most of the genes on the supernumerary chromosome appeared similar to the respective chromosomal pair in normal karyotypes. A subset of chromosome 21 genes including the DSCR1 gene involved in fetal heart development was consistently up-regulated in different prenatal tissues (AC, CV) of trisomy 21 fetuses whereas only minor changes were found for genes of all other chromosomes. In contrast, in trisomy 18 vigorous downstream transcriptional changes were found. Global transcriptome analysis for autosomal trisomies 13, 18, and 21 supported a combination of the two major hypotheses.

[PMID: 12393964]
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) and Patau syndrome are two of the most severe conditions resulting from chromosome abnormalities. WHS is caused by a deletion of 4p16, while Patau syndrome is caused by trisomy for some or all regions of chromosome 13. Though the etiologies of these syndromes differ, they share several features including pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, cleft lip and palate, and cardiac anomalies. We present here a female fetus with deletion of 4p16 --> pter and duplication of 13q32 --> qter due to unbalanced segregation of t(4;13)(p16;q32) in the father. She displayed overlapping features of both of these syndromes on ultrasound. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a fetus with both partial trisomy 13 and deletion of 4p16, the critical region for WHS.

[PMID: 20537076]
Patau syndrome is a chromosomal disorder associated with multiple malformations caused by inheritance of an extra chromosome (trisomy 13). Some skin defects have been reported in patients with Patau syndrome, such as scalp defects, glabellar stains, deep palmar creases, rocker-bottom feet, convex soles, hyperconvextity of the nails, and multiple hemangiomas. To our knowledge, widespread comedonal and cystic acne have not been previously reported in Patau syndrome.

[PMID: 19408854]
An analysis of prenatal diagnostics efficiency of selected types of chromosomal aberrations in the Czech Republic in 2007. Update of 1994-2007 data according to particular selected diagnoses. Retrospective epidemiological analysis of pre- and postnatal chromosomal aberrations diagnostics and its efficiency. Data on pre- and postnatally diagnosed birth defects in the Czech Republic during 1994-2007 were used. Data on prenatally diagnosed birth defects (and for terminated pregnancies) were collected from particular departments of prenatal diagnostics, medical genetics and ultrasound diagnostics in the Czech Republic, data on birth defects in births from the National Birth Defects Register (Institute for Health Information and Statistics). Total numbers over the period under the study, mean incidences of selected types of chromosomal aberrations and mean prenatal diagnostics efficiencies were analyzed. Following chromosomal aberrations were studied: Down, Edwards, Patau, Turner and Klinefelter syndromes and syndromes 47,XXX and 47,XYY. A relative proportion of Down, Edwards and Patau syndromes as well as other autosomal and gonosomal aberration is presented in figures. Recently, trisomies 13, 18 and 21 present around 70% of all chromosomal aberrations in selectively aborted fetuses, in other pregnancies, "other chromosomal aberrations" category (mostly balanced reciprocal translocations and inversions) present more than 2/3 of all diagnoses. During the period under the study, following total numbers, mean relative incidences (per 10,000 live births, in brackets) and mean prenatal diagnostics efficiency (in %) were found in following chromosomal syndromes: Down syndrome 2,244 (16.58) and 63.37%, Edwards syndrome 521 (3.85) and 79.93%, Patau syndrome 201 (1.49) and 68.87%, Turner syndrome 380 (2.81) and 79.89%, 47,XXX syndrome 61 (0.45) and 59.74%, Klinefelter syndrome 163 (1.20) and 73.65% and 47,XYY syndrome 22 (0.16) and 54.76%. The study gives updated results of incidences analysis of both pre- and postnatally diagnosed chromosomal birth defects in the Czech Republic during the 1994-2007 period. Incidences found in our study correspond (in case of trisomies 13, 18 and 21) with those published widely in literature as well as with those found in large-scale international studies (ICBDSR, EUROCAT). In case of gonosomal aberrations, incidences found in this study are lower that those published, most probably due to a later registration (over 15 years of age of the child) of these diagnoses.

[PMID: 2325123]
Survival of cases of trisomy 13 (Patau's syndrome) into adulthood is a rare phenomenon. The purpose of this paper is to report one such survivor who has had the typical clinical features of trisomy 13 confirmed by chromosome analysis of both blood and skin, and to speculate on some of the factors that may have contributed to his unusually long survival.

[PMID: 20641042]
Syndromes caused by chromosomal aneuploidies are widely recognized genetic disorders in humans and often lead to spontaneous miscarriage. Preimplantation genetic screening is used to detect chromosomal aneuploidies in early embryos. Our aim was to derive aneuploid human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines that may serve as models for human syndromes caused by aneuploidies. We have established 25 hESC lines from blastocysts diagnosed as aneuploid on day 3 of their in vitro development. The hESC lines exhibited morphology and expressed markers typical of hESCs. They demonstrated long-term proliferation capacity and pluripotent differentiation. Karyotype analysis revealed that two-third of the cell lines carry a normal euploid karyotype, while one-third remained aneuploid throughout the derivation, resulting in eight hESC lines carrying either trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), 16, 17, 21 (Down syndrome), X (Triple X syndrome), or monosomy X (Turner syndrome). On the basis of the level of single nucleotide polymorphism heterozygosity in the aneuploid chromosomes, we determined whether the aneuploidy originated from meiotic or mitotic chromosomal nondisjunction. Gene expression profiles of the trisomic cell lines suggested that all three chromosomes are actively transcribed. Our analysis allowed us to determine which tissues are most affected by the presence of a third copy of either chromosome 13, 16, 17 or 21 and highlighted the effects of trisomies on embryonic development. The results presented here suggest that aneuploid embryos can serve as an alternative source for either normal euploid or aneuploid hESC lines, which represent an invaluable tool to study developmental aspects of chromosomal abnormalities in humans.

[PMID: 23949924]
The aim of this study is to determine the survival of live births with trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 and their variants. Information on live births with trisomy 18 or trisomy 13 recorded in the National Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register (NDSCR) was linked by the NHS Information Centre to obtain information about survival. Survival was known for 326 (88%) of live births with trisomy 18 and 142 (82%) of live births with trisomy 13 born in England and Wales between 2004 and 2011. The median survival time for live births with full trisomy 18 was 14 days and with full trisomy 13 was 10 days, the 3-month survival was 20% and 18%, respectively, and the 1-year survival for both syndromes was 8%. The 1-year survival for live births with trisomy 18 mosaicism (n = 17) was 70%, for those with trisomy 13 mosaicism (n = 5) was 80% and for those with partial trisomy 13 (Robertsonian translocations) (n = 17) was 29%. This study is based on the largest data set on survival for live births with trisomy 18 and trisomy 13. Although median survival for these children is 2 weeks or less, about one in five survive for 3 months or more and about 1 in 12 survive for 1 year or more. We suggest that these survival rates are used in counselling as well as the median survival time.

[PMID: 26034714]
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) occurs in 5-10% associated with chromosomal abnormalities like, Pallister Killian syndrome, Trisomy 18, and certain deletions.. Association of CDH with trisomy 13 (Patau syndromes) is very rare. Here, we report such an unusual association, where surgical repair was done, but eventually the case succumbed as a result of multiple fatal co-morbidities.

[PMID: 24564826]
Human aneuploidy is the leading cause of early pregnancy loss, mental retardation, and multiple congenital anomalies. Due to the high mortality associated with aneuploidy, the pathophysiological mechanisms of aneuploidy syndrome remain largely unknown. Previous studies focused mostly on whether dosage compensation occurs, and the next generation transcriptomics sequencing technology RNA-seq is expected to eventually uncover the mechanisms of gene expression regulation and the related pathological phenotypes in human aneuploidy. Using next generation transcriptomics sequencing technology RNA-seq, we profiled the transcriptomes of four human aneuploid induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines generated from monosomy × (Turner syndrome), trisomy 8 (Warkany syndrome 2), trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), and partial trisomy 11:22 (Emanuel syndrome) as well as two umbilical cord matrix iPSC lines as euploid controls to examine how phenotypic abnormalities develop with aberrant karyotype. A total of 466 M (50-bp) reads were obtained from the six iPSC lines, and over 13,000 mRNAs were identified by gene annotation. Global analysis of gene expression profiles and functional analysis of differentially expressed (DE) genes were implemented. Over 5000 DE genes are determined between aneuploidy and euploid iPSCs respectively while 9 KEGG pathways are overlapped enriched in four aneuploidy samples. Our results demonstrate that the extra or missing chromosome has extensive effects on the whole transcriptome. Functional analysis of differentially expressed genes reveals that the genes most affected in aneuploid individuals are related to central nervous system development and tumorigenesis.

[PMID: 23622175]
This chapter describes the physical characteristics, medical complications, and cognitive and psychological profiles that are associated with chromosomal aneuploidy conditions, a group of conditions in which individuals are born with one or more additional chromosome. Overall, chromosomal aneuploidy conditions occur in approximately 1 in 250 children. Information regarding autosomal disorders including trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), and trisomy 18 (Edward syndrome) are presented. Sex chromosome aneuploidy conditions such as Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY), XYY, trisomy X, and Turner syndrome (45,X), in addition to less frequently occurring tetrasomy and pentasomy conditions are also covered. Treatment recommendations and suggestions for future research directions are discussed.

[PMID: 20584846]
To determine whether older paternal age increases the risk of fathering a pregnancy with Patau (trisomy 13), Edwards (trisomy 18), Klinefelter (XXY) or XYY syndrome. Case-control: cases with each of these syndromes were matched to four controls with Down syndrome from within the same congenital anomaly register and with maternal age within 6 months. Data from 22 EUROCAT congenital anomaly registers in 12 European countries. Diagnoses with observed or (for terminations) predicted year of birth from 1980 to 2005, comprising live births, fetal deaths with gestational age ≥ 20 weeks and terminations after prenatal diagnosis of the anomaly. Data include 374 cases of Patau syndrome, 929 of Edwards syndrome, 295 of Klinefelter syndrome, 28 of XYY syndrome and 5627 controls with Down syndrome. Odds ratio (OR) associated with a 10-year increase in paternal age for each anomaly was estimated using conditional logistic regression. Results were adjusted to take account of the estimated association of paternal age with Down syndrome (1.11; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.23). The OR for Patau syndrome was 1.10 (95% CI 0.83 to 1.45); for Edwards syndrome, 1.15 (0.96 to 1.38); for Klinefelter syndrome, 1.35 (1.02 to 1.79); and for XYY syndrome, 1.99 (0.75 to 5.26). There was a statistically significant increase in the odds of Klinefelter syndrome with increasing paternal age. The larger positive associations of Klinefelter and XYY syndromes with paternal age compared with Patau and Edwards syndromes are consistent with the greater percentage of these sex chromosome anomalies being of paternal origin.

[PMID: 25459971]
Patau syndrome, trisomy 13, is the third commonest autosomal trisomy. It is associated with a 25-50% prevalence of epilepsy, but detailed electroclinical descriptions are rare. The occurrence of early-onset photosensitivity has recently been reported in single patients. We collected electroclinical data on 8 infants (age range from 2 months to 3 years and 9 months, median: 17 months) with Patau syndrome referred for an EEG in our Clinical Neurophysiology Department between 1991 and 2011. All EEGs, case-notes, cytogenetic diagnosis and neuroimaging when available were reviewed; data on the occurrence of seizures, epileptiform discharges, photoparoxysmal response and their characteristics in terms of positive frequencies, latencies, grade and duration were noted and analysed. Two patients had been previously diagnosed with epilepsy (one with tonic spasms and one with multiple seizure types). We found 3 patients with photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy (37.5%), and one with non-photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy. We also recorded non-epileptic myoclonic jerks in one patient known to suffer from epileptic spasms. Among photosensitive patients we found self-limited, Waltz's grade 2-4, spike-wave/polyspike-wave discharges in low, medium and high frequency ranges in two patients and in the high frequency range in the third patient, with latencies and duration from less than 1s to a maximum of 9s. In our cohort of Patau syndrome patients, we found a high prevalence of spasms and photic-induced myoclonic jerks. Photosensitivity shows an unusual early age of onset.

[PMID: 11885075]
Autosomal trisomies are associated with major congenital malformations that may result in prolonged hospitalization of the newborn. Knowledge about these chromosomal abnormalities is important for nurses in neonatal practice. This article identifies the causes and manifestations of most of these trisomies: trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome), and trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). More detailed description of the manifestations, associated abnormalities, and outcomes of the most common of these, trisomy 21, is provided.

[PMID: 21344634]
Trisomy 13, or Patau syndrome is a rare chromosomal disorder characterized by a triad of cleft lip and palate, postaxial polydactyly and microcephaly. Complete, partial, or mosaic forms of the disorder can occur. Mosaic trisomy 13 is very rare, it occurs in only 5% of all patients with trisomy 13 phenotype. Metopic synostosis (MS) is premature fusion of the metopic suture, which is part of the frontal suture. It results in a V-shaped abnormality at the front of the skull. MS may occur in a syndromic or nonsyndromic form. We report on a 24-day-old girl with hypotonia, MS, trigonocephaly, capillary hemangioma, hypotelorism, upward slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, small nose with anteverted nares, high palate, ankyloglossia, long philtrum, low-set ears, short neck, postaxial polydactyly of both hands and feet and congenital heart defect. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated trisomy 13 mosaicism; 46,XX[58]/47,XX,+13[42]. Although MS has been previously reported in complete and partial forms of trisomy 13, it has not been reported in mosaic form of trisomy 13. Our report supports the evidence that trisomy 13 causes MS. It also emphasizes the need for cytogenetic investigations in patients presenting with MS and multiple congenital anomalies for providing accurate diagnosis, genetic counseling, and prenatal diagnosis.

[PMID: 2348978]
The ocular pathology in eight patients with trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome) is discussed and compared with the undisturbed development of the eye.