[PMID: 24696509]
To identify neuronal networks underlying generalized spike and wave discharges (GSW) in myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE). Simultaneous EEG-fMRI recordings were performed in 13 children with MAE. Individual GSW-associated blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal changes were analyzed in every patient. A group analysis was performed to determine common syndrome-specific hemodynamic changes across all patients. GSW were recorded in 11 patients, all showing GSW-associated BOLD signal changes. Activation was detected in the thalamus (all patients), premotor cortex (6 patients), and putamen (6 patients). Deactivation was found in the default mode areas (7 patients). The group analysis confirmed activations in the thalamus, premotor cortex, putamen, and cerebellum and deactivations in the default mode network. In addition to the thalamocortical network, which is commonly found in idiopathic generalized epilepsies, GSW in patients with MAE are characterized by BOLD signal changes in brain structures associated with motor function. The results are in line with animal studies demonstrating that somatosensory cortex, putamen, and cerebellum are involved in the generation of myoclonic seizures. The involvement of these structures might predispose to the typical seizure semiology of myoclonic jerks observed in MAE.

[PMID: 22266062]
We evaluated the long-term efficacy and tolerability of the orphan drug rufinamide (RUF) in children with pharmacoresistant myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (MAE, Doose syndrome). This was a retrospective European multicenter study on eight patients who had started an intention-to-treat trial of RUF between July 2007 and June 2010. Clinical information was collected via questionnaire. Responder rate was defined as reduction of seizure frequency ≥50% in comparison to four weeks before starting RUF. Maximum follow-up was eighteen months. Responder rates were 7/8 patients after 3 months, 6/8 patients after 6 months and 5/8 patients after 12 months. RUF seemed particularly effective in the prevention of myoclonic-astatic seizures (comparable with drop attacks in Lennox-Gastaut-Syndrome, for which RUF is particularly effective). Some loss of efficacy was noticed in the long-term observation. Side-effects occurred in two patients. Seizure aggravation was not observed. RUF seems to be a promising therapeutic option in children with MAE. Further studies are warranted to confirm these first observations.

[PMID: 18990309]
The ketogenic diet is well established as therapy for intractable epilepsy. It should be considered first-line therapy in glucose transporter type 1 and pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency. It should be considered early in the treatment of Dravet syndrome and myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (Doose syndrome). Initial studies indicate that the ketogenic diet appears effective in other metabolic conditions, including phosphofructokinase deficiency and glycogenosis type V (McArdle disease). It appears to function in these disorders by providing an alternative fuel source. A growing body of literature suggests the ketogenic diet may be beneficial in certain neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In these disorders, the ketogenic diet appears to be neuroprotective, promoting enhanced mitochondrial function and rescuing adenosine triphosphate production. Dietary therapy is a promising intervention for cancer, given that it may target the relative inefficiency of tumors in using ketone bodies as an alternative fuel source. The ketogenic diet also may have a role in improving outcomes in trauma and hypoxic injuries.

[PMID: 12073789]
Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE) belongs to the epilepsies with generalized seizures. MAE occurs in 1-2% of all childhood epilepsies up to age 9. This disease is characterized by various clinical and EEG criteria. The course of this epileptic syndrome is variable but influenced by an early diagnosis and by a specific treatment.

[PMID: 21396429]
Mutations in SCN1A gene, encoding the voltage-gated sodium channel α1-subunit, are found to be associated with severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy or Dravet syndrome (DS), but only rarely with the myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE, or Doose syndrome). We report on two patients with SCN1A mutations and severe epilepsy within the spectrum of generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus syndrome (GEFS+), the phenotypes being consistent with DS and MAE, respectively. Analysis of SCN1A revealed a heterozygous de novo frameshift mutation (c.4205_4208delGAAA) in the patient with DS, and a recurrent missense mutation (c.3521C>G) in that suffering from MAE. The missense mutation has been reported in patients with neurological diseases of various manifestations, which suggests that this variability is likely to result from the modifying effects of other genetic or environmental factors. DS phenotype has been mainly found associated with truncation mutations, while predominantly missense mutations and very few prematurely terminating substitutions have been reported in GEFS+ patients.

[PMID: 23159713]
Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE, Doose syndrome) is a difficult to treat idiopathic generalized epilepsy of early childhood. MAE frequently shows the course of an epileptic encephalopathy and may result in permanent cognitive impairment. Systematic analyses on clinical effects of different AED combinations are still needed. The purpose of our study was to analyze the therapeutic effect of adjunctive lamotrigine (LTG) in pharmacoresistant MAE patients. In an exploratory, retrospective study, 10 pharmacoresistant MAE patients were included who had been admitted to the Northern German Epilepsy Center between 07/2007 and 12/2010 and had been treated with LTG. Documentation was performed with the electronic seizure diary Epivista. A total observation period of 32 weeks was defined: 8-week 'pre LTG treatment phase' (before starting with LTG), 16-week 'titration phase' (starting with very low LTG doses), 8-week 'follow-up phase'. Seizure frequency, medication and adverse events were extracted from the electronic diary and evaluated in each particular patient. The individual reduction of seizure frequency per day was defined as primary outcome variable. Additionally, a dose-effect-relationship was analyzed for each patient. Six out of ten patients were seizure free during the follow-up phase. Statistical analysis indicated a significant seizure reduction in seven patients at follow-up compared to the pre LTG treatment phase. Seizure frequency did not significantly decrease in two patients and increased in one patient. A significant relationship between seizure frequency per day and LTG dosage during titration and follow-up phase could be demonstrated in nine patients. Group statistics using the exact Wilcoxon test revealed a significant reduction in seizure frequency (p = 0.049, two-sided). Our data provide evidence that adjunctive LTG is an eligible therapeutic option for the treatment of pharmacoresistant MAE and encourage further prospective studies to verify this observation.

[PMID: 1396420]
We studied 36 drop seizures in 5 patients with myoclonic astatic epilepsy of early childhood (MAEE) with simultaneous split-screen video recording and polygraph. Sixteen were falling attacks and 20 were either less severe attacks exhibiting only deep head nodding or seizures equivalent to drop attacks in terms of ictal pattern but recorded in the supine position. All seizures except those that occurred in patients in the supine position showed sudden momentary head dropping or collapse of the whole body downward. Recovery to the preictal position was observed in 0.3-1 s. As a result of carefully repeated observations, the 36 seizures were classified as myoclonic flexor type in 9, myoclonic atonic type in 2, and atonic type, with and without transient preceding symptoms in the remaining 25. The MF seizure was characterized by sudden forward flexion of the head and trunk as well as both arms, which caused the patient to fall. In the myoclonic atonic seizure, patients showed brief myoclonic flexor spasms, immediately followed by atonic falling. The AT seizure showed abrupt atonic falling, with and without transient preceding facial expression change and/or twitching of extremities. The ictal EEGs of all 36 seizures exhibited generalized bilaterally synchronous single or multiple spike(s) and wave discharges. Atonic drop attacks appear to be a common cause of ictal epileptic falling in MAEE.

[PMID: 19049588]
The ketogenic diet (KD) has been used successfully in a variety of epilepsy syndromes. This includes syndromes with multiple etiologies, including Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and infantile spasms; developmental syndromes of unknown etiology, such as Landau-Kleffner syndrome; and idiopathic epilepsies, such as myoclonic-astatic (Doose) epilepsy. It also includes syndromes where genetics play a major role, such as Dravet syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome. Study of the KD in humans and animals harboring various genetic mutations may yield insights into the diet's mechanisms. Comparison of the diet's effectiveness with other treatments in specific syndromes may be another useful tool for mechanistic studies. The diet's utility in epilepsy syndromes of various etiologies and in some neurodegenerative disorders suggests it may have multiple mechanisms of action.

[PMID: 20722665]
Doose syndrome, otherwise traditionally known as myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, was first described as a unique epilepsy syndrome by Dr Hermann Doose in 1970. In 1989, the International League Against Epilepsy classified it formally as a symptomatic generalized epilepsy, and 20 years later it was renamed 'epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures'. In this review, we discuss the components of this unique disorder including its incidence, clinical features, and electroencephalographic findings. Recent evidence has suggested possible genetic links to the GEFS+ (generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus) family, and, additionally, some children with structural brain lesions can mimic the Doose syndrome phenotype. Treatment strategies such as corticosteroids, ethosuximide, and valproate have been described as only partially effective, but newer anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam and zonisamide, may provide additional seizure control. The most effective treatment reported to date appears to be the ketogenic diet. Prognosis is quite varied in this disorder; however, many children can have a remarkably normal neurodevelopmental outcome.

[PMID: 17105462]
The purpose of this article is to present a short review of the natural history of myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE; Doose syndrome) and the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS). In the 1989 classification of the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE, 1989), MAE and LGS were initially included in group 2.2: "Cryptogenic or symptomatic generalized epilepsies and syndromes." The subsequent classification of the Proposed Diagnostic Scheme for People with Epileptic Seizures and with Epilepsy (see Ref. 8) placed MAE in axis 3 in the "generalized epilepsy" group and LGS, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI or Dravet syndrome) and atypical benign partial epilepsy/pseudo-Lennox syndrome (ABPE/PLS) in the "epileptic encephalopathy" group. The semiology of MAE and LGS and their differential diagnosis from SMEI and ABPE/PLS are described. Before the onset of SMEI, MAE, and ABPE/PLS, the development of the child is usually normal. In contrast, in LGS, development is frequently retarded at the onset, depending on the etiopathogenesis of the underlying brain disease. The course of MAE is highly variable with regard to seizure outcome (complete remission in some cases, persistent epilepsy in others) and cognitive development (normal or delayed). The course of LGS and SMEI is generally poor, both with regard to the epilepsy and to the cognitive development whereas the course and seizure outcome of ABPE/PLS is favorable; the patients will be seizure-free at puberty. However, the neuropsychological outcome is less favorable; most patients remain mentally retarded.

[PMID: 20472190]
The antiepileptic drug felbamate has demonstrated efficacy against a variety of seizure types in the pediatric population, particularly seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Postmarketing experience, however, revealed serious idiosyncratic adverse effects not observed during clinical trials, including aplastic anemia and liver failure. As a result, many physicians have been hesitant to prescribe felbamate. This retrospective study evaluated the efficacy of felbamate in a pediatric population with intractable epilepsy. Of 38 patients, 22 had Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (58%); 6 had myoclonic-astatic epilepsy of Doose (16%); 5 had symptomatic generalized epilepsy, not otherwise specified (13%); and 5 had symptomatic localization-related epilepsy (13%). Most patients had multiple seizure types and had been tried on a variety of antiepileptic medications. With felbamate treatment, 6 patients (16%) became seizure free, including 4 of the 6 patients with myoclonic-astatic epilepsy of Doose; 24 patients (63%) had a greater than 50% reduction in seizure frequency. In this population felbamate appeared to be safe, with minimal adverse effects. The study is limited by the small number of patients and by its retrospective nature, but nonetheless adds to the evidence that felbamate is an important antiepileptic drug for medically refractory epilepsy in children and is well tolerated with few adverse effects.

[PMID: 8214350]
A study of epileptic drop attacks (EDA) by simultaneous video-polygraphic recordings was carried out in one epileptic patient with myoclonic astatic seizures (Doose syndrome). EDA was shown to correspond to a burst of generalized bilaterally synchronous spike and wave complexes (GBSSW) at 3 Hz. Absence seizures were also observed with a burst of GBSSW with similar characteristics. The amplitudes of the corresponding slow wave component of GBSSW among the three intensities of atonia, i.e. complete atonia, minor atonia and no discernible atonia (control), was compared. A high amplitude was demonstrated to correspond with more pronounced atonia and a lower amplitude with reduced or absent atonia. These findings suggest that EDA corresponding to GBSSW have a neurophysiological mechanism in common with absence seizures, and that if the GBSSW is intense, it may be sufficient to cause immediate loss of global muscle tone.

[PMID: 8243377]
One of the most challenging areas in nosology is in the field of severe generalized epilepsy of early childhood. This is certainly true in the case of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), an age-related epileptogenic encephalopathy which comprises several types of generalized seizures including tonic seizures, atypical absence seizures and frequent status epilepticus. EEG shows generalized slow spike waves, and as the disease progresses, cognitive functions deteriorate. LGS is listed in the 1989 classification of the International League Against Epilepsy alongside epilepsy with myoclonic astatic seizures and West's syndrome. A number of variants or atypical forms have been proposed. As a result, differential diagnosis presents a major challenge and includes specific generalized epilepsies, i.e., metabolic or inflammatory; secondarily generalized epilepsies, i.e., those arising from the frontal lobe; and severe forms of idiopathic generalized epilepsy, i.e., Doose syndrome. Antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment of LGS has been disappointing. Results obtained from anterior callosotomy have been promising, but only a small number of patients have been evaluated. Although the syndrome is rare, the severe nature and intractability of LGS emphasizes the need for the development of specific AEDs which would completely modify the quality of life for these patients.

[PMID: 22780699]
Herman Doose first described the generalized childhood epilepsy syndrome of myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE) in 1970, attributing a genetic cause from this first description. However, although the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) defined criteria for MAE in 1989, the diagnostic boundaries of the syndrome continue to be debated. Moreover, 40 years since Doose's first description of MAE, although a genetic predisposition is acknowledged and many studies have demonstrated familial aggregation of seizures within MAE families, the actual genetic determinants of MAE still remain unknown. Although initially thought to be within the same spectrum as severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy, the exclusion of SCN1A mutations in non-generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) MAE cases has confirmed the genetic distinction of MAE. In this critical review, we shall trace the historical evolution of concepts around MAE and its distinction from Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, review the described phenotypic features of MAE from updated studies that will allow its distinction from other overlap epilepsy syndromes, review the evidence of genetic influences and clues for genetic heterogeneity, and discuss strategies that may be helpful in elucidating the etiology of MAE in light of current genetic techniques.

[PMID: 9184597]
Before 1986, the spectrum of childhood epilepsies, including Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) and Doose syndrome (DS), known collectively as "epilepsia myoclonica astatica," was believed to represent a single disease. More recently, some investigators have considered these syndromes to be parts of a continuum. To clarify these theories, neurobiologic factors of the syndromes were studied to determine which qualities were shared and which were unique. A retrospective (1975-1985), community-based (Helsinki metropolitan area and the province of Uusimaa) study was designed to seek children with features of LGS and DS. It was assumed that recall bias and the selection of documented history would be similar throughout the group. Ranks of increasing pathology were assigned to different seizure types, EEG results, and drug treatments. A similar procedure was applied to epidemiologic data. Spearman rank-order correlations were calculated to determine which features correlated with LGS and which correlated with less severe epilepsy. The survey comprised 75 patients with broadly defined LGS. The annual incidence was 2 in 100,000 children aged 0 to 14 years. Prenatal or perinatal abnormalities did not correlate with severity of epilepsy. As compared with the relatively favorable ranks, the severe epilepsy ranks were more often associated with an early onset of epilepsy, an infectious disease at the onset, delayed development before epilepsy, abnormalities in neurologic or neuroradiologic examinations, and a deteriorating course of the condition. Patients with LGS are more likely than patients with less severe epilepsy to have a younger age at onset of epilepsy, an infection or both, and a deteriorating course of the condition.

[PMID: 10768159]
One of the most important achievement of contemporary epileptology has been a concept of epileptic syndromes. According to the Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy there are many epileptic syndromes which differ from each other not only by prognosis but also by reaction to pharmacotherapy. Nevertheless the differentation between the some of epileptic syndromes may be difficult in spite of quite precise clinical and electrophysiological criteria. Good example of this problem may be the course of disease of the boy who is now eleven years old. His refractory epilepsy which started 7 years ago shares symptoms and signs of both epilepsy with myoclonic-astatic seizures (Doose Syndrome) and Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome. Felbamate therapy was consider to be the turning-point in both therapeutic and diagnostic meaning.

[PMID: 8891396]
Mendelian forms of benign myoclonic epilepsies where a chromosomal locus has been defined include (1) the autosomal dominant (AD) juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) in chr. 6p11, (2) the autosomal dominant childhood absence epilepsy which evolves to JME in chr. 1p, (3) familial adult myoclonic epilepsy of Yasuda and Inazuki, and (4) possibly JME within the idiopathic generalized epilepsy susceptibility gene in chr. 8 reported by Zara et al (1995). Other myoclonic epilepsy syndromes with onset in the first year of life (Aicardi's Neonatal (Early) Myoclonic Encephalopathy, West's Syndrome, Dravet's Severe Myoclonic Epilepsy, and Dravet's Benign Myoclonic Epilepsy of Infancy), in early childhood (Lennox-Gastaut-Dravet Syndrome, Myoclonic Variant of Lennox Gastaut Dravet Syndrome, Myoclonic-Astatic Epilepsy of Doose, Benign Myoclonic Epilepsies (BME), or even in late childhood (Childhood Absence Epilepsy with myoclonias, vs. Myoclonic Absence Epilepsy) are probably genetically complex diseases. Amongst the progressive myoclonus epilepsy syndromes, specific mutations have already been defined in Unverricht Lundborg disease, ceroid lipofuscinoses 3 or Spielmayer Voight syndrome within Battens disease, sialidosis, dentadorubropallidoluysian atrophy and the mitochondrial syndrome MERRF. Most recently our laboratories established the locus for Lafora's disease in chr. 6q and results are speedily moving towards the definition of its mutation.

[PMID: 22322415]
Despite myriad anticonvulsants available and in various stages of development, there are thousands of children and adults with epilepsy worldwide still refractory to treatment and not candidates for epilepsy surgery. Many of these patients will now turn to dietary therapies such as the ketogenic diet, medium-chain triglyceride diet, modified Atkins diet, and low glycemic index treatment. In the past several years, neurologists are finding new indications to use these dietary treatments, perhaps even as first-line therapy, including infantile spasms, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (Doose syndrome), Dravet syndrome, and status epilepticus (including FIRES syndrome). Adults are also one of the most rapidly growing populations being treated nowadays; this group of patients previously was not typically offered these treatments. In 2009, two controlled trials of the ketogenic diet were published, as well as an International Expert Consensus Statement on dietary treatment of epilepsy. Ketogenic diets are also now being increasingly studied for neurological conditions other than epilepsy, including Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Insights from basic science research have helped elucidate the mechanisms by which metabolism-based therapy may be helpful, in terms of both an anticonvulsant and possibly a neuroprotective effect. Dietary therapy for epilepsy continues to grow in popularity worldwide, with expanding use for adults and conditions other than epilepsy.

[PMID: 21351810]
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is an epilepsy syndrome that begins in childhood (between 1 and 8 years of age), worsens during latency and persists frequently into adulthood, is refractory to antiepileptic medications, and results in cognitive decline and behavioral problems in affected individuals. Seizure types consist primarily of axial tonic, atonic, and atypical absence; nocturnal tonic seizures are the most common seizure pattern in this population, but often are not one of the initial seizure patterns. Some patients also have myoclonic seizures; this seizure pattern is less frequent than the three preceding types. Although there are some cases that are cryptogenic, most are symptomatic, arising during prenatal and perinatal periods from intrauterine infections, and vascular insults to the brain. Examples of causes of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome include migrational abnormalities of the brain, late effects of CNS infections, certain genetic disorders such as tuberous sclerosis, and inherited metabolic disorders. The difficulty early in the course of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is distinguishing this diagnosis from severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome) or from myoclonic-astatic epilepsy (Doose syndrome), as the seizure patterns in these three syndromes may overlap at the onset. EEG is a helpful diagnostic tool in the diagnosis of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, usually demonstrating high voltage, bifrontal 1.5-2.5 Hz spike and wave complexes interictally, and attenuation with paroxysmal fast activity (10-13 Hz) during the ictal phase. Treatment options for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome have been less than optimal. In recent years, several drugs have been tested and approved for the treatment of this syndrome; these include felbamate, lamotrigine, topiramate, and rufinamide. The long-term outcome does not appear to be any better with the newer antiepileptic drugs than when using earlier prescribed antiepileptic drugs or polytherapy. Treatment options other than antiepileptic drugs include a ketogenic diet, vagus nerve stimulation, and corpus callosotomy. Long-term outcome of these patients relative to seizure control and cognition is poor. Most develop moderate intellectual disability within a few years of onset of the syndrome. Many develop behavioral problems with inattention, hyperactivity, and aggression.

[PMID: 8753132]
We reported a 7-year-old girl with myoclonic-astatic epilepsy of early childhood (Doose syndrome). She had minor seizures (i. e. absence, atonic and myoclonic seizures) refractory to treatment with many kinds of anti-epileptic drugs as well as thyrotropin releasing hormone. Though she had suffered from long-lasting clusters of minor seizures, the treatment with continuous intravenous lidocaine successfully brought a case of prolonged remission of both clinical seizures and EEG abnormalities. It has been reported that lidocaine is effective mainly for partial seizures. The efficacy of lidocaine for generalize seizures, however, has been reported only in a few papers. We considered that the treatment with continuous intravenous lidocaine is indicated in patients with Doose syndrome presenting with a cluster of refractory minor seizures.

[PMID: 23941843]
To investigate the effect of ketogenic diet (KD) on the clinical and electroencephalogram features in children with pharmacoresistant epileptic encephalopathy. Thirty-one children (19 boys, 12 girls) aged 7 months to 7 years (mean 2 years 5 month) with epilepsy refractory to conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) were included in this study. In addition to their original AED treatment, the children were assigned to different ketogenic diets based on their age. The prospective electro-clinical assessment was performed prior to the KD and then one week, one month and again 3 months after the initiation of therapy, respectively. The reduction of seizure frequency in 52%, 68% and 71% of all patients exceeded 50% one week, one month and three months after KD treatment respectively. KD is particularly effective in myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE; Doose Syndrome) and West syndrome with 100% and 81.25% of the patients having a greater than 50% seizure reduction, respectively. After 3 months of KD treatment, more than 2/3 patients experienced a reduction in interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) and improvement in EEG background. The clinical and electroencephalographic improvement confirms that KD is beneficial in children with refractory epilepsy.

[PMID: 2115971]
Among 62 children with myoclonic epilepsy who had first seizures between 1 and 10 years, without clinical or radiological evidence of brain lesion, we selected the 16 patients who had exhibited several types of fits and had stopped having seizures for over two years. First seizures occurred between 18 months and 4 years, and they were generalized clonic, tonic-clonic or tonic. After a mean 3 months' period, patients started also to have absence and myoclonic fits. During the period with various types of seizures, that lasted a mean 10 months, patients were ataxic and hyperkinetic, and 11 of them suffered myoclonic absence status for several hours or days. The EEG showed a high voltage rhythmic slow-wave activity with spikes, differing from the slow spike wave tracing of the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, and there was no photosensitivity. The mean duration of the epilepsy was 1 year and 4 months and the last seizures were convulsive, occurring mainly during sleep. The clinical and EEG pattern, the high familial incidence are shared by the Doose syndrome, of which the present series seems to be a subgroup, as are other well-defined syndromes: benign and severe myoclonic epilepsies of infancy.