[PMID: 19467292]
Selenocysteine (Sec) is co-translationally incorporated into selenoproteins at a reprogrammed UGA codon. In mammals, this requires a dedicated machinery comprising a stem-loop structure in the 3' UTR RNA (the SECIS element) and the specific SECIS Binding Protein 2. In this report, disorder-prediction methods and several biophysical techniques showed that ca. 70% of the SBP2 sequence is disordered, whereas the RNA binding domain appears to be folded and functional. These results are consistent with a recent report on the role of the Hsp90 chaperone for the folding of SBP2 and other functionally unrelated proteins bearing an RNA binding domain homologous to SBP2.

[PMID: 11092556]
In mammals, most of the selenium contained in the body is present as an unusual amino acid, selenocysteine (Sec), whose codon is UGA. Because the UGA codon is typically recognized as a translation stop signal, it is intriguing how a cell recognizes and distinguishes a UGA Sec codon from a UGA stop codon. For eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs, it has been proposed that a conserved stem-loop structure designated the Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) in the 3'-untranslated (3'-UTR) region is required for recognition of UGA as a Sec codon. Some proteins which bind to SECIS (SBP) have been reported. However, it is not clear how the SECIS element in the 3'-UTR can mediate Sec insertion far at the in-frame UGA Sec codons. The idea that there must be a signal near the UGA Sec codon is still considered. Therefore, we searched for a protein which binds to an RNA sequence surrounding the UGA Sec codon on human glutathione peroxidase (GPx) mRNA. We found a protein which strongly bound to the RNA fragment upstream of the UGA Sec codon. However, this protein did not bind to the RNA sequence downstream of the UGA codon. This protein also bound to the SECIS sequence in the 3'-UTR of human GPx, and this binding to SECIS was competed with the RNA fragment upstream of the UGA Sec codon. Comparison of the RNA fragment with the SECIS fragment identified the conserved regions, which appeared in the region upstream of the in-frame UGA Sec codon of Se-protein mRNAs. Thus, this study proposes a novel model to understand the mechanisms of Sec incorporation at the UGA Sec codon, especially the regions upstream of the UGA codon of mRNAs of mammalian selenoproteins. This model explains that the stem-loop structure covering the UGA codon is recognized by SBP and how the UGA Sec codon escapes from attack by eRF of the peptide releasing factor.

[PMID: 17470795]
Selenoproteins are an elite group of proteins containing a rare amino acid, selenocysteine (Sec), encoded by the codon, UGA. In eukaryotes, incorporation of Sec requires a Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) element, a stem-loop structure located in the 3'-untranslated regions of selenoprotein mRNAs. Here we report identification of a noncanonical form of SECIS element in Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora canine, single-celled apicomplexan parasites of humans and domestic animals. This SECIS has a GGGA sequence in the SBP2-binding site in place of AUGA previously considered invariant. Using a combination of computational and molecular techniques, we show that Toxoplasma and Neospora possess both canonical and noncanonical SECIS elements. The GGGA-type SECIS element supported Sec insertion in mammalian HEK 293 and NIH 3T3 cells and did so more efficiently than the natural mammalian SECIS elements tested. In addition, mammalian type I and type II SECIS elements mutated into the GGGA forms were functional but manifested decreased Sec insertion efficiency. We carried out computational searches for both AUGA and GGGA forms of SECIS elements in Toxoplasma and detected five selenoprotein genes, including one coding for a previously undescribed selenoprotein, designated SelQ, and two containing the GGGA form of the SECIS element. In contrast, the GGGA-type SECIS elements were not detected in mammals and nematodes. As a practical outcome of the study, we developed pSelExpress1, a vector for convenient expression of selenoproteins in mammalian cells. It contains an SBP2 gene and the most efficient tested SECIS element: an AUGA mutant of the GGGA-type Toxoplasma SelT structure.

[PMID: 8344267]
We investigated the requirements for selenocysteine insertion at single or multiple UGA codons in eukaryotic selenoproteins. Two functional SECIS elements were identified in the 3' untranslated region of the rat selenoprotein P mRNA, with predicted stem-loops and critical nucleotides similar to those in the SECIS elements in the type I iodothyronine 5' deiodinase (5'DI) and glutathione peroxidase selenoprotein mRNAs. Site-directed mutational analyses of three SECIS elements confirmed that conserved nucleotides in the loop and in unpaired regions of the stem are critical for activity. This indicates that multiple contact sites are required for SECIS function. Stop codon function at any of five out-of-context UGA codons in the 5'DI mRNA was suppressed by SECIS elements from the 5'DI or selenoprotein P genes linked downstream. Thus, the presence of SECIS elements in eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs permits complete flexibility in UGA codon position.

[PMID: 24251578]
Selenium (Se) is an essential trace element for several organisms and is present in proteins as selenocysteine (Sec or U), an amino acid that is chemically distinct from serine and cysteine by a single atom (Se instead of O or S, respectively). Sec is incorporated into selenoproteins at an in-frame UGA codon specified by an mRNA stem-loop structure called the selenocysteine incorporating sequence (SECIS) presented in selenoprotein mRNA and specific selenocysteine synthesis and incorporation machinery. Selenoproteins are presented in all domains but are not found in all organisms. Although several functions have been attributed to this class, the majority of the proteins are involved in oxidative stress defense. Here, we discuss the kinetoplastid selenocysteine pathway and how selenium supplementation is able to alter the infection course of trypanosomatids in detail. These organisms possess the canonical elements required for selenoprotein production such as phosphoseryl tRNA kinase (PSTK), selenocysteine synthase (SepSecS), selenophosphase synthase (SelD or SPS), and elongation factor EFSec (SelB), whereas other important factors presented in mammal cells, such as SECIS binding protein 2 (SBP) and SecP 43, are absent. The selenoproteome of trypanosomatids is small, as is the selenoproteome of others parasites, which is in contrast to the large number of selenoproteins found in bacteria, aquatic organisms and higher eukaryotes. Trypanosoma and Leishmania are sensitive to auranofin, a potent selenoprotein inhibitor; however, the probable drug mechanism is not related to selenoproteins in kinetoplastids. Selenium supplementation decreases the parasitemia of various Trypanosome infections and reduces important parameters associated with diseases such as anemia and parasite-induced organ damage. New experiments are necessary to determine how selenium acts, but evidence suggests that immune response modulation and increased host defense against oxidative stress contribute to control of the parasite infection.

[PMID: 8601283]
SECIS elements are stem-loop structures located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs that are required for directing cotranslational selenocysteine incorporation at UGA codons. In prokaryotes, stem-loops mediating selenocysteine incorporation are located immediately downstream of the UGA selenocysteine codon, in the coding region. Previous characterization studies of the mammalian SECIS elements of type 1 deiodinase, glutathione peroxidase, and selenoprotein P showed that conserved nucleotides in the loops and unpaired bulges, and base pairing in the stems are required for SECIS function. These initial studies utilized approximately 175-230-nt segments of the 3'UTRs of the selenoprotein mRNAs. Here we define the minimal functional rat type 1 deiodinase SECIS element, a 45-nt segment, the 5' boundary of which corresponds precisely to the 5'-most critical conserved nucleotide identified previously. We also define base pairing requirements in the stem of this element. In view of the presence of SECIS elements in the open reading frames (ORFs) of bacterial selenoproteins, we examine the effects in the type 1 deiodinase of extending the ORF into the SECIS element, and find that this dramatically inhibits SECIS function. Finally, we define a minimal spacing requirement of 51-111 nt between a eukaryotic UGA selenocysteine codon and SECIS element.

[PMID: 23788723]
The amino acid selenocysteine is encoded by UGA, usually a stop codon, thus requiring a specialized machinery to enable its incorporation into selenoproteins. The machinery comprises the tRNA(Sec), a 3'-UTR mRNA stem-loop termed SElenoCysteine Insertion Sequence (SECIS), which is mandatory for recoding UGA as a Sec codon, the SECIS Binding Protein 2 (SBP2), and other proteins. Little is known about the molecular mechanism and, in particular, when, where, and how the SECIS and SBP2 contact the ribosome. Previous work by others used the isolated SECIS RNA to address this question. Here, we developed a novel approach using instead engineered minimal selenoprotein mRNAs containing SECIS elements derivatized with photoreactive groups. By cross-linking experiments in rabbit reticulocyte lysate, new information could be gained about the SBP2 and SECIS contacts with components of the translation machinery at various translation steps. In particular, we found that SBP2 was bound only to the SECIS in 48S pre-initiation and 80S pretranslocation complexes. In the complex where the Sec-tRNA(Sec) was accommodated to the A site but transpeptidation was blocked, SBP2 bound the ribosome and possibly the SECIS element as well, and the SECIS had flexible contacts with the 60S ribosomal subunit involving several ribosomal proteins. Altogether, our findings led to broadening our understanding about the unique mechanism of selenocysteine incorporation in mammals.

[PMID: 8955902]
Selenocysteine, a selenium-containing analog of cysteine, is found in the prokaryotic and eukaryotic kingdoms in active sites of enzymes involved in oxidation-reduction reactions. Its biosynthesis and cotranslational insertion into selenoproteins is performed by an outstanding mechanism, implying the participation of several gene products. The tRNA(Sec) is one of these. In eukaryotes, its transcription mode by RNA polymerase III differs from that of classical tRNA genes, both at the level of the promoter elements and transcription factors involved. In addition, enhanced transcription is afforded by a newly characterized zinc finger activator. Not only transcription of the gene, but also the tRNA(Sec) itself is atypical since its 2D and 3D structures exhibit features which set it apart from classical tRNAs. Decoding of eukaryotic selenocysteine UGA codons requires a stem-loop structure in the 3'UTR of mRNAs, the selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) element. Structure probing and sequence comparisons led us to propose a 2D structure model for the SECIS element, containing a novel RNA motif composed of four consecutive non-Watson-Crick base-pairs. A 3D model, rationalizing the accessibility data, was elaborated by computer modeling. It yields indicative or suggestive evidence for the role that could play some conserved residues and/or structural features in SECIS function. These might act as signals for interaction with SBP, the SECIS binding protein that we have characterized.

[PMID: 11839807]
Selenocysteine (Sec), the 21st amino acid in protein, is encoded by UGA. The Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) element, which is the stem-loop structure present in 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of eukaryotic selenoprotein-encoding genes, is essential for recognition of UGA as a codon for Sec rather than as a stop signal. We now report the identification of a new eukaryotic selenoprotein, designated selenoprotein M (SelM). The 3-kb human SelM-encoding gene has five exons and is located on chromosome 22 but has not been correctly identified by either Celera or the public Human Genome Project. We characterized human and mouse SelM cDNA sequences and expressed the selenoprotein in various mammalian cell lines. The 3" UTR of the human, mouse, and rat SelM-encoding genes lacks a canonical SECIS element. Instead, Sec is incorporated in response to a conserved mRNA structure, in which cytidines are present in place of the adenosines previously considered invariant. Substitution of adenosines for cytidines did not alter Sec incorporation; however, other mutant structures did not support selenoprotein synthesis, demonstrating that this new form of SECIS element is functional. SelM is expressed in a variety of tissues, with increased levels in the brain. It is localized to the perinuclear structures, and its N-terminal signal peptide is necessary for protein translocation.

[PMID: 17715293]
Selenocysteine (Sec, U) insertion into proteins is directed by translational recoding of specific UGA codons located upstream of a stem-loop structure known as Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) element. Selenoproteins with known functions are oxidoreductases containing a single redox-active Sec in their active sites. In this work, we identified a family of selenoproteins, designated SelL, containing two Sec separated by two other residues to form a UxxU motif. SelL proteins show an unusual occurrence, being present in diverse aquatic organisms, including fish, invertebrates, and marine bacteria. Both eukaryotic and bacterial SelL genes use single SECIS elements for insertion of two Sec. In eukaryotes, the SECIS is located in the 3' UTR, whereas the bacterial SelL SECIS is within a coding region and positioned at a distance that supports the insertion of either of the two Sec or both of these residues. SelL proteins possess a thioredoxin-like fold wherein the UxxU motif corresponds to the catalytic CxxC motif in thioredoxins, suggesting a redox function of SelL proteins. Distantly related SelL-like proteins were also identified in a variety of organisms that had either one or both Sec replaced with Cys. Danio rerio SelL, transiently expressed in mammalian cells, incorporated two Sec and localized to the cytosol. In these cells, it occurred in an oxidized form and was not reducible by DTT. In a bacterial expression system, we directly demonstrated the formation of a diselenide bond between the two Sec, establishing it as the first diselenide bond found in a natural protein.

[PMID: 23603359]
Selenium (Se) is an essential trace element primarily found in selenoproteins as the 21st amino acid (selenocysteine, Sec, or U). Selenoproteins play an important role in growth and proliferation and are typically involved in cellular redox balance. Selenocysteine is encoded by an in-frame UGA codon specified by a stem-loop structure, the Sec insertion sequence element (SECIS), which, in eukaryotes, is located in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR). The availability of the Naegleria gruberi (ATCC 30224) genome sequence and the use of this organism as a model system for the pathogenic amoeba N. fowleri allowed us to investigate the Sec incorporation pathway in this primitive eukaryote. Using bioinformatics tools, we identified gene sequences encoding PSTK (O-phosphoseryl-tRNA(Sec) kinase), SepSecS (O-phosphoseryl-tRNA:selenocysteinyl-tRNA synthase), SelD/SPS2 (selenophosphate synthetase), EFSec (selenocysteine-specific elongation factor) and SBP (SECIS binding protein). These findings were confirmed by RT-PCR and by sequencing. A potential tRNA(Ser)Sec (SelC) gene and a putative selenoprotein with sequence similarity to a mitochondrial thioredoxin reductase (TR3) were also identified. Our results show that the selenocysteine incorporation machinery is indeed present in N. gruberi. Interestingly, the SelD/SPS2 gene is 2214 bp in length and contains two distinct domains. The N-terminal region shows sequence similarity to predicted methyltransferase proteins, and the C-terminal region is homologous to prokaryotic SelD/SPS2. Our results suggest the possibility of novel selenoproteins.

[PMID: 23783574]
Selenoproteins are proteins containing an uncommon amino acid selenocysteine (Sec). Sec is inserted by a specific translational machinery that recognizes a stem-loop structure, the SECIS element, at the 3' UTR of selenoprotein genes and recodes a UGA codon within the coding sequence. As UGA is normally a translational stop signal, selenoproteins are generally misannotated and designated tools have to be developed for this class of proteins. Here, we present two new computational methods for selenoprotein identification and analysis, which we provide publicly through the web servers at http://gladyshevlab.org/SelenoproteinPredictionServer or http://seblastian.crg.es. SECISearch3 replaces its predecessor SECISearch as a tool for prediction of eukaryotic SECIS elements. Seblastian is a new method for selenoprotein gene detection that uses SECISearch3 and then predicts selenoprotein sequences encoded upstream of SECIS elements. Seblastian is able to both identify known selenoproteins and predict new selenoproteins. By applying these tools to diverse eukaryotic genomes, we provide a ranked list of newly predicted selenoproteins together with their annotated cysteine-containing homologues. An analysis of a representative candidate belonging to the AhpC family shows how the use of Sec in this protein evolved in bacterial and eukaryotic lineages.

[PMID: 10334333]
Translation of UGA as selenocysteine requires specific RNA secondary structures in the mRNAs of selenoproteins. These elements differ in sequence, structure, and location in the mRNA, that is, coding versus 3' untranslated region, in prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and archaea. Analyses of eukaryotic selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) elements via computer folding programs, mutagenesis studies, and chemical and enzymatic probing has led to the derivation of a predicted consensus structural model for these elements. This model consists of a stem-loop or hairpin, with conserved nucleotides in the loop and in a non-Watson-Crick motif at the base of the stem. However, the sequences of a number of SECIS elements predict that they would diverge from the consensus structure in the loop region. Using site-directed mutagenesis to introduce mutations predicted to either disrupt or restore structure, or to manipulate loop size or stem length, we show that eukaryotic SECIS elements fall into two distinct classes, termed forms 1 and 2. Form 2 elements have additional secondary structures not present in form 1 elements. By either insertion or deletion of the sequences and structures distinguishing the two classes of elements while maintaining appropriate loop size, conversion of a form 1 element to a functional form 2-like element and of a form 2 to a functional form 1-like element was achieved. These results suggest commonality of function of the two classes. The information obtained regarding the existence of two classes of SECIS elements and the tolerances for manipulations of stem length and loop size should facilitate designing RNA molecules for obtaining high-resolution structural information about these elements.

[PMID: 9256076]
SECIS elements form stem-loop structures in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of eukaryotic mRNAs that encode selenoproteins. These elements direct incorporation of selenocysteine at UGA codons, provided the SECIS element lies a sufficient distance from the UGA. The cDNAs encoding skeletal muscle selenoprotein W from human, rhesus monkey, sheep, rat, and mouse contained highly similar SECIS elements that retained important features common to all known SECIS elements. Comparative analysis of these SECIS elements showed that in some regions both predicted secondary structure and nucleotide sequences were conserved, in other areas secondary structure was maintained using different primary sequence, and in still other portions, base pairing was not conserved. The rodent and sheep selenoprotein W mRNAs used UGA as a stop codon and as a selenocysteine codon. Thus, UGA specified both selenocysteine incorporation and termination in a single mRNA. The selenoprotein W SECIS elements contained an additional highly conserved base-paired stem that may prevent inappropriate selenocysteine incorporation at the UGA stop codons.

[PMID: 15791204]
Incorporation of the 21st amino acid, selenocysteine, into proteins is specified in all three domains of life by dynamic translational redefinition of UGA codons. In eukarya and archaea, selenocysteine insertion requires a cis-acting selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) usually located in the 3'UTR of selenoprotein mRNAs. Here we present comparative sequence analysis and experimental data supporting the presence of a second stop codon redefinition element located adjacent to a selenocysteine-encoding UGA codon in the eukaryal gene, SEPN1. This element is sufficient to stimulate high-level (6%) translational redefinition of the SEPN1 UGA codon in human cells. Readthrough levels further increased to 12% when tested in the presence of the SEPN1 3'UTR SECIS. Directed mutagenesis and phylogeny of the sequence context strongly supports the importance of a stem loop starting six nucleotides 3' of the UGA codon. Sequences capable of forming strong RNA structures were also identified 3' adjacent to, or near, selenocysteine-encoding UGA codons in the Sps2, SelH, SelO, and SelT selenoprotein genes.

[PMID: 22209284]
The mechanisms regulating the differential selenium (Se)-dependent stability of selenoprotein mRNAs are partially characterized. To further study the Se-dependent regulation of selenoproteins, we developed a novel chemiluminescent reporter to monitor the steady-state mRNA level of an artificial selenoprotein. Our reporter is a fusion of the Renilla luciferase gene and of the β-globin gene, but contains features required for incorporation of selenocysteine (SEC), namely, a UGA-SEC codon and a 3' untranslated region RNA stem loop called a SEC incorporation sequence (SECIS). At various levels of Se, the activity of reporters containing GPX1 or GPX4 SECIS elements is proportional to the steady-state mRNA level of the reporter construct and reflects the level of the corresponding endogenous mRNA. In a reporter containing a UGA codon and a functional GPX1 SECIS, Se-dependent nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) occurred in the cytoplasm, as opposed to the more typical nuclear location. To validate the reporter system, we used genetic and pharmacologic approaches to inhibit or promote NMD. Modulation of UPF1 by siRNA, overexpression, or by inhibition of SMG1 altered NMD in this system. Our reporter is derived from a Renilla luciferase reporter gene fused to an intron containing B-globin gene and is subject to degradation by NMD when a stop codon is inserted before the second intron.

[PMID: 17901054]
The expression of selenoproteins requires the translational recoding of the UGA stop codon to selenocysteine. In eukaryotes, this requires an RNA stem loop structure in the 3'-untranslated region, termed a selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS), and SECIS-binding protein 2 (SBP2). This study implicates SBP2 in dictating the hierarchy of selenoprotein expression, because it is the first to show that SBP2 distinguishes between SECIS elements in vitro. Using RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that a naturally occurring mutation in SBP2, which correlates with abnormal thyroid hormone function in humans, lies within a novel, bipartite RNA-binding domain. This mutation alters the RNA binding affinity of SBP2 such that it no longer stably interacts with a subset of SECIS elements. Assays performed under competitive conditions to mimic intracellular conditions suggest that the differential affinity of SBP2 for various SECIS elements will determine the expression pattern of the selenoproteome. We hypothesize that the selective loss of a subset of selenoproteins, including some involved in thyroid hormone homeostasis, is responsible for the abnormal thyroid hormone metabolism previously observed in the affected individuals.

[PMID: 8602359]
Several gene products are involved in co-translational insertion of selenocysteine by the tRNA(Sec). In addition, a stem-loop structure in the mRNAs coding for selenoproteins is essential to mediate the selection of the proper selenocysteine UGA codon. Interestingly, in eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs, this stem-loop structure, the selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) element, resides in the 3'-untranslated region, far downstream of the UGA codon. In view of unravelling the underlying complex mechanism, we have attempted to detect RNA-binding proteins with specificity for the SECIS element. Using mobility shift assays, we could show that a protein, present in different types of mammalian cell extracts, possesses the capacity of binding the SECIS element of the selenoprotein glutathione peroxidase (GPx) mRNA. We have termed this protein SBP, for Secis Binding Protein. Competition experiments attested that the binding is highly specific and UV cross-linking indicated that the protein has an apparent molecular weight in the range of 60-65 kDa. Finally, some data suggest that the SECIS elements in the mRNAs of GPx and another selenoprotein, type I iodothyronine 5' deiodinase, recognize the same SBP protein. This constitutes the first report of the existence of a 3' UTR binding protein possibly involved in the eukaryotic selenocysteine insertion mechanism.

[PMID: 23614019]
Selenoprotein S (SelS) is a 189 amino acid trans-membrane protein that plays an important yet undefined role in the unfolded protein response. It has been proposed that SelS may function as a reductase, with the penultimate selenocysteine (Sec(188)) residue participating in a selenosulfide bond with cysteine (Cys(174)). Cotranslational incorporation of Sec into SelS depends on the recoding of the UGA codon, which requires a Selenocysteine Insertion Sequence (SECIS) element in the 3'UTR of the transcript. Here we identify multiple mechanisms that regulate the expression of SelS. The human SelS gene encodes two transcripts (variants 1 and 2), which differ in their 3'UTR sequences due to an alternative splicing event that removes the SECIS element from the variant 1 transcript. Both transcripts are widely expressed in human cell lines, with the SECIS-containing variant 2 mRNA being more abundant. In vitro experiments demonstrate that the variant 1 3'UTR does not allow readthrough of the UGA/Sec codon. Thus, this transcript would produce a truncated protein that does not contain Sec and cannot make the selenosulfide bond. While the variant 2 3'UTR does support Sec insertion, its activity is weak. Bioinformatic analysis revealed two highly conserved stem-loop structures, one in the proximal part of the variant 2 3'UTR and the other immediately downstream of the SECIS element. The proximal stem-loop promotes Sec insertion in the native context but not when positioned far from the UGA/Sec codon in a heterologous mRNA. In contrast, the 140 nucleotides downstream of the SECIS element inhibit Sec insertion. We also show that endogenous SelS is enriched at perinuclear speckles, in addition to its known localization in the endoplasmic reticulum. Our results suggest the expression of endogenous SelS is more complex than previously appreciated, which has implications for past and future studies on the function of this protein.

[PMID: 8634917]
In eukaryotes, co-translational insertion of selenocysteine into selenoproteins necessitates the participation of the selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS), an element lying in the 3'-untranslated region of selenoprotein mRNAs. We report a detailed experimental study of the secondary structures of the SECIS elements of three selenoprotein mRNAs, the rat and human type I iodothyronine deiodinase (5'DI) and rat glutathione peroxidase (GPx). Based on RNase and chemical probing, a new secondary structure model is established. It is characterized by a stem-loop structure, comprising two helices (I and II) separated by an internal loop, with an apical loop surmounting helix II. Sequence comparisons of 20 SECIS elements, arising from 2 5'DI, 13 GPx, 2 selenoprotein P, and 1 selenoprotein W mRNAs, confirm the secondary structure model. The most striking finding of the experimental study concerns a set of conserved sequences in helix II that interact to form a novel RNA structural motif consisting of a quartet composed of non-Watson-Crick base pairs 5'UGAY3': 5'UGAU3'. The potential for forming the quartet is preserved in 15 SECIS elements, but three consecutive non-Watson-Crick base pairs can nevertheless form in the other five SECIS, the central G.A tandem being invariant in all cases. A 3D model, derived by computer modeling with the use of the solution data, suggests that the base pairing interactions in the G.A tandem are of the type found in GNRA loops. The 3D model displays the quartet lying in an accessible position at the foot of helix II, which is bent at the internal loop, suggesting that the non-Watson-Crick base pair arrangement provides an unusual pattern of chemical groups for putative ligand interaction.

[PMID: 19179357]
Selenoproteins contain the 21st amino acid selenocysteine which is encoded by an inframe UGA codon, usually read as a stop. In eukaryotes, its co-translational recoding requires the presence of an RNA stem-loop structure, the SECIS element in the 3 untranslated region of (UTR) selenoprotein mRNAs. Despite little sequence conservation, SECIS elements share the same overall secondary structure. Until recently, the lack of a significantly high number of selenoprotein mRNA sequences hampered the identification of other potential sequence conservation. In this work, the web-based tool SECISaln provides for the first time an extensive structure-based sequence alignment of SECIS elements resulting from the well-defined secondary structure of the SECIS RNA and the increased size of the eukaryotic selenoproteome. We have used SECISaln to improve our knowledge of SECIS secondary structure and to discover novel, conserved nucleotide positions and we believe it will be a useful tool for the selenoprotein and RNA scientific communities. SECISaln is freely available as a web-based tool at http://genome.crg.es/software/secisaln/.

[PMID: 20385601]
Selenium, an essential trace element, is incorporated into selenoproteins as selenocysteine (Sec), the 21st amino acid. In order to synthesize selenoproteins, a translational reprogramming event must occur since Sec is encoded by the UGA stop codon. In mammals, the recoding of UGA as Sec depends on the selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) element, a stem-loop structure in the 3' untranslated region of the transcript. The SECIS acts as a platform for RNA-binding proteins, which mediate or regulate the recoding mechanism. Using UV crosslinking, we identified a 110 kDa protein, which binds with high affinity to SECIS elements from a subset of selenoprotein mRNAs. The crosslinking activity was purified by RNA affinity chromatography and identified as nucleolin by mass spectrometry analysis. In vitro binding assays showed that purified nucleolin discriminates among SECIS elements in the absence of other factors. Based on siRNA experiments, nucleolin is required for the optimal expression of certain selenoproteins. There was a good correlation between the affinity of nucleolin for a SECIS and its effect on selenoprotein expression. As selenoprotein transcript levels and localization did not change in siRNA-treated cells, our results suggest that nucleolin selectively enhances the expression of a subset of selenoproteins at the translational level.

[PMID: 10567350]
Mammalian selenium-containing proteins identified thus far contain selenium in the form of a selenocysteine residue encoded by UGA. These proteins lack common amino acid sequence motifs, but 3'-untranslated regions of selenoprotein genes contain a common stem-loop structure, selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS) element, that is necessary for decoding UGA as selenocysteine rather than a stop signal. We describe here a computer program, SECISearch, that identifies mammalian selenoprotein genes by recognizing SECIS elements on the basis of their primary and secondary structures and free energy requirements. When SECISearch was applied to search human dbEST, two new mammalian selenoproteins, designated SelT and SelR, were identified. We determined their cDNA sequences and expressed them in a monkey cell line as fusion proteins with a green fluorescent protein. Incorporation of selenium into new proteins was confirmed by metabolic labeling with (75)Se, and expression of SelT was additionally documented in immunoblot assays. SelT and SelR did not have homology to previously characterized proteins, but their putative homologs were detected in various organisms. SelR homologs were present in every organism characterized by complete genome sequencing. The data suggest applicability of SECISearch for identification of new selenoprotein genes in nucleotide data bases.