[PMID: 21358337]
Familial Mediterranean fever is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. There are two phenotypes: types 1 and 2. Familial Mediterranean fever type 1 is characterized by recurrent short episodes of inflammation and serositis, including fever, peritonitis, synovitis, pleuritis, and, rarely, pericarditis. The symptoms and severity vary among affected individuals, sometimes even among members of the same family. Amyloidosis, which can lead to renal failure, is the most severe complication. Familial Mediterranean fever type 2 is characterized by amyloidosis as the first clinical manifestation of familial Mediterranean fever in an otherwise asymptomatic individual. Routine treatment of end-stage renal disease, including renal transplantation, is advised. Lifelong treatment with colchicine is required for homozygotes for the p.Met694Val mutation or compound heterozygotes for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele; this prevents the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Individuals who do not have the p.Met694Val mutation and who are only mildly affected should be either treated with colchicine or monitored every 6 months for the presence of proteinuria. Molecular genetic testing of the MEFV gene, the only gene currently known to be associated with familial Mediterranean fever, can be offered to family members, especially when the p.Met694Val allele is present, because renal amyloidosis can be prevented by colchicine.

[PMID: 28040706]
MEditerranean FeVer (MEFV) gene encodes for the pyrin protein and a mutated pyrin is associated with a prolonged or augmented inflammation. Hence, various diseases were reported to be associated with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) or carriers of MEFV mutations. However, systematic evaluation of all associated diseases in children with FMF has not been done previously. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency and type of FMF-associated diseases in children. Files of FMF patients who had been seen in two reference hospitals in Ankara, in the last two years, were retrospectively evaluated. Patients with FMF and concomitant diseases were included to the study. Among 600 FMF patients, 77 were found to have a concomitant disease (12.8%). Thirty patients (5%) had vasculitis; 21 (3.5%) had juvenile idiopathic artritis (JIA); 7 (1.16%) had inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and 19 had other diseases including 5 patients with isolated sacroiliitis. Overall, 13 (2.17%) patients had sacroiliitis in our cohort. The most frequent mutation was M694V/M694V (44%) and 81% of the patients had at least one M694V mutation. Majority of the patients (74%) developed associated diseases while they were not receiving colchicine therapy. Certain inflammatory diseases including vasculitis, chronic arthritis and IBD were more frequently detected in patients with FMF during childhood. M694V mutation is a susceptibility factor for associated diseases. In countries where FMF is prevalent, clinicians dealing with FMF and other inflammatory diseases should be aware of these associations.

[PMID: 18219832]
Asthma is an inflammatory airway disease caused by interaction between susceptibility genes and diverse environmental factors. In Israel, asthma seems to be familial and more severe in patients of Iraqi Jewish descent. On the other hand, asthma is less frequent in individuals with familial Mediterranean fever, an autoinflammatory disease prevalent in the Iraqi Jewish community and linked to mutations in the familial Mediterranean fever gene, designated MEFV. To explore a possible role for mutated MEFV in the reduced susceptibility to asthma and to determine its expression in Israeli subjects of Iraqi origins. Using a case-control approach, we studied the presence of the 3 most common MEFV mutations (M694V, V726A, and E148Q) in DNA samples from 75 patients with asthma and 45 asymptomatic first-degree relatives, all of Iraqi Jewish origin. The severity of asthma was evaluated using a published severity score. Eleven patients with asthma and 14 of their relatives carried 1 or 2 mutations in the MEFV gene, a carrier rate significantly lower in patients with asthma than in their first-degree relatives and in ethnically matched healthy individuals (P < .03 and P < .003, respectively). Carriers of MEFV mutations had less severe disease, compared with noncarriers (P < .002). These findings suggest that MEFV mutations may have a protective effect in the pathogenesis of asthma.

[PMID: 24702757]
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are very common in the general population. Atherosclerosis is the main pathogenesis. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease. The gene causing FMF, designated MEFV, encodes a protein called pyrin or marenostrin that is expressed mainly in myeloid bone marrow precursors, neutrophils and monocytes. We herein aimed to determine the prevalence of MEFV mutations (all exon 2, 10 mutations) in patients with early coronary heart disease (early CHD) and coronary heart disease (CHD) with multiple risk factors and among the healthy subjects as controls. A total of 197 patients and 119 healthy subjects were recruited and enrolled into three groups in terms of inclusion criteria. Ninety-one patients diagnosed with early CHD enrolled into group one (men < 45 years of age, women < 40 years of age), 106 patients with CHD (men > 50 years of age) to group two and 119 healthy controls enrolled into group three. None of patients was diagnosed with FMF. The diagnosis of CHD was established on electrocardiographic changes, echocardiography and coronary angiography. Thirty-eight patients (41.8%) with early CHD, 17 patients (16%) with CHD and 24 healthy controls (20.2%) carried at least one mutated MEFV allele. Young patients with CHD have different risk factor profiles, clinical presentations and prognoses than older patients. Young patients with CHD usually have multiple risk factors. This study suggests that MEFV mutations in early CHD patients had significantly increased in contrast to CHD patients and healthy controls.

[PMID: 23844200]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive autoinflammatory disorder due to MEFV mutations and one of the most frequent Mediterranean genetic diseases. The observation of many heterozygous patients in whom a second mutated allele was excluded led to the proposal that heterozygosity could be causal. However, heterozygosity might be coincidental in many patients due to the very high rate of mutations in Mediterranean populations. To better delineate the pathogenicity of heterozygosity in order to improve genetic counselling and disease management. Complementary statistical approaches were used: estimation of FMF prevalence at population levels, genotype comparison in siblings from 63 familial forms, and genotype study in 557 patients from four Mediterranean populations. At the population level, we did not observe any contribution of heterozygosity to disease prevalence. In affected siblings of patients carrying two MEFV mutations, 92% carry two mutated alleles, whereas 4% are heterozygous with typical FMF diagnosis. We demonstrated statistically that patients are more likely to be heterozygous than healthy individuals, as shown by the higher ratio heterozygous carriers/non carriers in patients (p<10(-7)-p<0.003). The risk for heterozygotes to develop FMF was estimated between 2.1 × 10(-3) and 5.8 × 10(-3) and the relative risk, as compared to non carriers, between 6.3 and 8.1. This is the first statistical demonstration that heterozygosity is not responsible for classical Mendelian FMF per se, but constitutes a susceptibility factor for clinically-similar multifactorial forms of the disease. We also provide a first estimate of the risk for heterozygotes to develop FMF.

[PMID: 14636645]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of fever, serositis, and a risk for AA amyloidosis. FMF is caused by mutations in the Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV), which is expressed in blood cells of the myelomonocytic differentiation pathway. We identified a novel mutation S1791 in exon 2 of MEFV in two members of a family of Turkish origin. In both cases, S1791 was in compound heterozygosity with MEFV mutation M694V, and the characteristic clinical syndrome of FMF including amyloidosis was found. The location of S1791 in exon 2 is of interest because (1) amyloidosis in FMF has previously been found to be strongly associated with compound exon 10 mutations and (2) it supports the notion that the mechanism causing FMF is connected to the cytoplasmic rather than nuclear function of the molecule.

[PMID: 16283319]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most frequent hereditary inflammatory disease characterized by self-limited recurrent attacks of fever and serositis. It is transmitted in an autosomal recessive pattern and affects certain ethnic groups mainly Jews, Turks, Arabs, and Armenians. FMF is caused by mutations in MEFV gene, which encodes pyrin. This protein is expressed mainly in myeloid/monocytic cells and modulates IL-1beta processing, NF-kappaB activation, and apoptosis. A mutated pyrin probably results in uncontrolled inflammation. The most devastating complication of FMF is amyloidosis, leading to chronic renal failure. M694V homozygocity, male gender and the alpha/alpha genotype of serum amyloid A1 gene are the currently established risk factors for development of amyloidosis. Daily colchicine is the mainstay of the therapy for the disease, resulting in complete remission or marked reduction in the frequency and duration of attacks in most patients. It is also effective in preventing and arresting renal amyloidosis.

[PMID: 22057232]
The aim of this study was to determine the relationship between clinical findings and the most common mutated alleles of MEFV gene in a childhood population and to determine the sensitivity of the 12-mutation-strip assay test in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). Records of 452 FMF children living in western Anatolia, Turkey, (12.3 ± 4.7 years mean) were retrospectively reviewed. Of the 408 patients who met the Tel-Hashomer criteria, 364 were classified into two main groups (two-mutant/one-mutant allele) either of which had three subgroups. The two-mutant allele frequency was 51% and one-mutant allele 38%; 1% had complex-mutant alleles and 10% no mutant-alleles. The mean severity score was 8.3 ± 2.5. Most common clinical features were fever (81.9%), abdominal pain (86.3%) and myalgia (58.8%), and the least common ones: diarrhea (1.7%), protracted febrile myalgia (1.2%) and acute orchitis (1.5%). We detected 33 different genotypes of the MEFV gene: the most common mutant allele was M694V followed by symptomatic allele mutation of E148Q. Although not significantly associated with clinical findings, P369S mutation was not rare (7.5%). Phenotype-genotype correlation revealed that patients with two-allele mutations had more severe clinical presentation and high constipation rate (22.5%); 32.6% of patients with M694V/M694V had splenomegaly. Acute orchitis and protracted febrile myalgia as rare clinical findings were more common in M694V homozygotes. Comparisons of clinical findings among patients with one-mutation allele were made for the first time, but no significant association was found. Positive predictive value of strip assay screening for 12 mutations was recorded as 89%. We suggest that whole sequence analysis for supportive diagnosis of FMF should be performed for selected patients only.

[PMID: 26042122]
The causative mutations for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) are located in the MEFV gene, which encodes pyrin. Pyrin modulates the susceptibility to apoptosis via its PYD domain, but how the mutated versions of pyrin affect apoptotic processes are poorly understood. Spontaneous and induced rates of systemic neutrophil apoptosis as well as the levels of proteins involved in apoptosis were investigated ex vivo in patients with FMF using flow cytometry and RT-qPCR. The freshly collected neutrophils from the patients in FMF remission displayed a significantly larger number of cells spontaneously entering apoptosis compared to control (6.27 ± 2.14 vs. 1.69 ± 0.18%). This elevated ratio was retained after 24 h incubation of neutrophils in the growth medium (32.4 ± 7.41 vs. 7.65 ± 1.32%). Correspondingly, the mRNA level for caspase-3 was also significantly increased under these conditions. In response to the inducing agents, the neutrophils from FMF patients also displayed significantly elevated apoptotic rates compared to control. The elevated rates, however, can be largely explained by the higher basal ratio of apoptotic cells in the former group. Monitoring of several proteins involved in apoptosis has not revealed any conventional mechanisms contributing to the enhanced apoptotic rate of neutrophils in FMF. Although the exact molecular mechanisms of accelerated neutrophil apoptosis in FMF remain unknown, it may provide a protection against excessive inflammation and tissue damage due to a massive infiltration of neutrophils in the acute period of the disease.

[PMID: 12387810]
Identification of the genes involved in hereditary periodic fever syndromes has led to the recognition of a new pathophysiological category, the autoinflammatory disorders. The main non-hereditary autoinflammatory disease in childhood is systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA), others being the chronic infantile neurological cutaneous arthropathy (CINCA) syndrome and the periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adenopathy (PFAPA) syndrome. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) has been traced to mutations in the MEFV gene. Mutations in the MVK gene, encoding the enzyme mevalonate kinase, cause the hyper-IgD periodic fever syndrome (HIDS). The tumour necrosis factor(TNF)-receptor-associated periodic syndromes (TRAPS) have been linked to mutations in theTNFRSF1A gene, encoding a TNF-alpha receptor, and the CIAS1 gene is mutated in familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome. We discuss how this knowledge has influenced diagnosis and treatment of these rare genetic disorders and how it might change our approach to the more common rheumatic diseases.

[PMID: 12966608]
To analyze 70 individuals who were found to have the Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene for the presence of definite familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) and to assess if they were prone to clinical and laboratory inflammation. We also prospectively evaluated 72 patients with childhood rheumatic diseases for the presence of MEFV mutations. Seventy patients with one MEFV gene mutation were reevaluated for the presence of a clinical FMF phenotype using a new set of criteria. They were also questioned for the presence of musculoskeletal symptoms and rheumatic diseases. They were sampled for erythrocyte sedimentation rates and C-reactive protein levels. A second group with childhood rheumatic diseases were diagnosed according to international criteria. Median age of the 70 heterozygous individuals was 12 years. About 1/3 (34.3%) were classified with clinical FMF phenotype according to the suggested criteria. Fifteen (21.4%) were classified as normal and 3 (4.3%) had recurrent abdominal pains but did not fulfill all criteria for clinical FMF. Overall, 28 (40.0%) had some form of rheumatic complaint and 15 (21.4%) had developed a rheumatic disease including Behçet's disease, a vasculitis, or acute rheumatic fever. The mean ESR and CRP levels were 45.47 +/- 33.05 mm/h and 4.00 +/- 6.73 mg/dl, respectively. Among the 72 patients with rheumatic diseases of childhood, 22 (30.5%) carried one or 2 mutations of the MEFV gene. The mutated allele frequency among patients with rheumatic diseases was significantly higher than those in controls (p < 0.05). Within this group, among the 59 patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis 15 had mutations in the heterozygous or homozygous form. We confirm the acute phase response in the carriers for MEFV mutations. We suggest that these patients may have a tendency to develop certain manifestations due to an increased baseline of inflammation, and the presence of these mutations may affect their disease course when they develop rheumatic disease.

[PMID: 22614345]
Familial Mediterranean fever is a recessive autoinflammatory disease that is frequent in Armenians, Jews, Arabs, and Turks. The MEFV gene is responsible for this disease. We looked for MEFV gene variations (polymorphism and mutations) in a population that resides in Central Anatolia, Turkey. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of 802 familial Mediterranean fever patients. The DNA sequence data were examined for approximately 150 different mutations and polymorphisms, including single nucleotide polymorphisms in different exons of the MEFV gene. The male:female ratio of these patients was 1.44:1. Mutations were detected in 48.1% of the patients; 7.5% were homozygous, 11.1% were compound heterozygous and 31.5% had only one identifiable mutant allele. No mutations were detected in 51.9% of the patients. The main clinical characteristics of the patients were: abdominal pain in 20.6%, arthritis in 22.9% and amyloidosis in 4.6%. Sixty-six percent of patients had a family history of familial Mediterranean fever; 19.4% of the patients were found to have parental consanguinity. We conclude that the genetics of familial Mediterranean fever is more complex than has previously been reported; heterozygous patients presenting a severe phenotype should be further analyzed for less common secondary MEFV mutations, using gene sequencing.

[PMID: 10666224]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessively inherited disorder characterized by recurrent, self-limited attacks of fever and serositis and by infiltration of affected tissues by large numbers of neutrophils. A candidate gene for FMF was identified by positional cloning and named "MEFV." The corresponding protein was named "pyrin." To elucidate the currently unknown function of pyrin, we characterized its tissue distribution, regulation of expression during hematopoietic differentiation, and subcellular localization. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis, followed by hybridization with an internal oligonucleotide, demonstrated expression of MEFV in different populations of peripheral blood cells. Among hematopoietic cell lines, MEFV was almost exclusively expressed in cells of the myeloid lineage. Furthermore, MEFV messenger RNA was strongly expressed within 24 hours of dimethyl sulfoxide-induced granulocytic differentiation of HL-60 cells. Analysis of complementary DNA from human solid tumor-derived cell lines revealed expression of MEFV in several cell lines derived from colon and prostate cancers. Expression of MEFV fused to enhanced green fluorescent protein showed that pyrin localized in distinct patches in the cytoplasm, forming a perinuclear cap. Taken together, MEFV is predominantly expressed in myeloid cells and upregulated during myeloid differentiation, and the corresponding protein, pyrin, is expressed in the cytoplasm. (Blood. 2000;95:1451-1455)

[PMID: 15720243]
Vasculitis is definitely associated with familial Mediterranean fever. This familial Mediterranean fever-associated vasculitis takes one of three forms: polyarteritis nodosa, with or without microscopic polyangiitis, and Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Behcet disease and inflammatory bowel diseases may also be associated with familial Mediterranean fever, though this is yet to be formally proven. The selective biological advantage, if any, for carriers of simple heterozygotic mutations in the gene responsible for familial Mediterranean fever, MEFV, is not known. Indirect arguments are given for a better defense against certain groups of bacterial pathogens and amongst intra-cellular bacteria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

[PMID: 23505242]
To define in patients affected by familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) whether or not interleukin (IL)-1β secretion (1) is enhanced, (2) correlates with the type of MEFV mutation and (3) is mediated by NLRP3. Freshly isolated monocytes from 21 patients with FMF (12 homozygous and 9 heterozygous), 14 MEFV healthy carriers and 30 healthy donors (HDs), unstimulated or after lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced activation, were analysed for redox state (production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant responses) and IL-1β and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) secretion. NLRP3 down-modulation was induced by in vitro silencing of the NLRP3 gene. LPS-stimulated monocytes from patients with FMF displayed enhanced IL-1β secretion, which correlated with number and penetrance of MEFV mutations. Silencing of NLRP3 consistently inhibited IL-1β secretion. As in other autoinflammatory diseases, FMF monocytes produced more ROS than genetically negative cells from HDs. Unlike in cryopyrin-associated periodic fever syndromes (CAPS), however, they were characterised by a conserved and sustained antioxidant response. Consistent with this finding, activated MEFV-mutated monocytes did not exhibit the functional indicators of oxidative stress observed in CAPS, including accelerated IL-1β secretion and deficient production of IL-1Ra. MEFV-mutated monocytes display enhanced IL-1β secretion, which correlates with number of high-penetrance mutations and level of endogenous ROS. Unlike NLRP3-mutated cells, monocytes carrying MEFV mutations withstand oxidative stress and preserve IL-1Ra production, thereby limiting inflammation. Finally, in contrast with that found in the animal model, the increased secretion of IL-1β by LPS-stimulated FMF monocytes is NLRP3-dependent.

[PMID: 9758573]
Familial Mediterranean fever is a recessively inherited disorder characterized by episodes of fever with abdominal pain, pleurisy, or arthritis. The familial Mediterranean fever gene, designated MEFV, was recently cloned, and at least three missense mutations (M6801, M694V, and V726A) that account for a large percentage of patients with this disease were identified. To establish a diagnostic test for familial Mediterranean fever. Cross-sectional study of a convenience sample of patients attending familial Mediterranean fever clinics. Tertiary referral hospitals. 107 patients with familial Mediterranean fever, their family members, and controls. Mutations in the 107 samples were assessed by amplifying genomic DNA with use of primers that selectively amplify the normal or altered DNA sequence of the 3 MEFV mutations (amplification refractory mutation system [ARMS]). Mutations were independently assessed by automated sequencing of genomic DNA amplified by polymerase chain reaction to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the ARMS assay. The ARMS assay correctly identified M6801, M694V, and V726A mutations in 82 persons with mutations documented by DNA sequencing (21 homozygotes, 2 compound heterozygotes, and 59 simple heterozygotes). Of 7 persons known from family studies to be noncarriers and 18 unrelated persons who were negative for these mutations by sequencing, none had MEFV mutations according to ARMS. The ARMS assay is a rapid, cost-effective, and accurate method for detecting three common mutations in familial Mediterranean fever.

[PMID: 28624931]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic periodic fever syndrome and characterized by recurrent episodes of fever, serositis, arthritis, dermal manifestations, and long-term renal complications. The MEFV gene was described in 1997 as the gene responsible for FMF and is inherited in autosomal recessive manner. It encodes mutated protein pyrin, an important player in the innate immune system and the component of inflammasome which leads to exaggerated inflammatory response through uncontrolled production of interleukin-1. The recent progress in molecular genetics and understanding of pathogenesis showed a more complicated picture of FMF inheritance, penetrance, and pathogenesis. The pathogenesis is not completely understood although the gene responsible for FMF has been identified. Whether the pyrin mutation effect in FMF is due to a loss of function or a gain of function is still controversial. The diagnosis is mainly clinical and the genetic testing is indicated to support it. Colchicine remains the mainstay of treatment of FMF since 1972. It decreases the attacks, improves quality of life, and prevents amyloidosis. The recent advances in genetic testing and molecular studies has led to the development of new therapies of interleukin-1 inhibitors; anakinra, canakinumab, and rilonacept.

[PMID: 24318677]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessive inherited autoinflammatory syndrome. Patients with FMF have symptoms such as recurrent fever and abdominal pain, sometimes accompanied by arthralgia. Biopsy specimens have revealed substantial neutrophil infiltration into synovia. FMF patients have a mutation in the Mediterranean fever gene, encoding pyrin, which is known to regulate the inflammasome, a platform for processing interleukin (IL)-1β. FMF patients heterozygous for E148Q mutation, heterozygous for M694I mutation, or combined heterozygous for E148Q and M694I mutations, which were found to be major mutations in an FMF study group in Japan, suffer from arthritis, the severity of which is likely to be lower than in FMF patients with M694V mutations. Expression plasmids of wild-type (WT) pyrin and mutated pyrin, such as E148Q, M694I, M694V, and E148Q+M694I, were constructed, and SW982 synovial sarcoma cells were transfected with these expression plasmids. IL-8 and IL-6 were spontaneously secreted from the culture supernatant of SW982 cells without any stimulation, whereas IL-1β and TNF-α could not be detected even when stimulated with lipopolysaccharide. Notably, two inflammasome components, ASC and caspase-1, could not be detected in SW982 cells by Western blotting. IL-8 but not IL-6 secretion from SW982 cells was largely suppressed by WT pyrin, but less suppressed by mutated pyrin, which appeared to become weaker in the order of E148Q, M694I, E148Q+M694I, and M694V mutations. As for IL-8 and IL-6, similar results were obtained using stable THP-1 cells expressing the WT pyrin or mutated pyrins, such as M694V or E148Q, when stimulated by LPS. In addition, IL-8 secretion from mononuclear cells of FMF patients was significantly higher than that of healthy volunteers when incubated on a culture plate. Thus, our results suggest that IL-8 secretion from SW982 synovial sarcoma cells suppressed by pyrin independently of inflammasome is affected by pyrin mutations, which may reflect the activity in FMF arthritis.

[PMID: 28690860]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a hereditary autoinflammatory disease that is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by mutations in the <i>MEFV</i> gene. As the name indicates, FMF occurs within families and is more common in individuals of Mediterranean descent than in persons of any other ethnicity. To date, 314 mutations have been reported. We studied a Moroccan family with a total of five members, including a mother who was presenting with symptoms of FMF, while her four children remained asymptomatic. The five patients were screened by DNA sequencing of exon 2 and exon 10 of the <i>MEFV</i> gene. Then, complete exome sequencing analysis of the <i>MEFV</i> gene was done for the patients in whom a novel mutation was detected. This analysis identified a novel single base Cytosine (C) insertion mutation in the coding region of the <i>MEFV</i> gene, named c.441dupC (p. Glu148Argfs*5 or E148RfsX5), which resulted in a mutated Pyrin/Marenostrin protein. This is the first report of a new mutation in exon 2 of the <i>MEFV</i> gene in a Moroccan family. This novel insertion mutation may provide important information for further studies of FMF pathogenesis.

[PMID: 20437121]
We aimed to investigate the rate of MEFV, the gene mutated in familial Mediterranean fever, mutations in patients with myeloid neoplasm and to determine if known mutations of MEFV cause a tendency for myeloid neoplasms. The frequency of the five most common MEFV gene mutations (M694V, M680I, V726A, E148Q and M694I) was determined in 26 patients with myeloid neoplasm. We identified 1 homozygous (E148Q/E148Q), 1 compound heterozygous (M694V/E148Q) and 5 heterozygous MEFV gene mutations; none had their own and/or family history compatible with familial Mediterranean fever. The mean overall mutation rate was 0.269. We found a high frequency of carriers in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (66.6%), polycythemia vera (33.3%) and acute myeloid leukemia (28.6%). However, there was no MEFV gene mutation in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. In conclusion, this study reports for the first time a possibly high prevalence of MEFV gene mutations in patients with myeloid neoplasm, especially myelodysplastic syndrome, polycythemia vera and acute myeloid leukemia. Our findings could open new perspectives for MEFV gene mutations in myeloid neoplasms and its association with tumor promotion. Further research is needed to determine the actual role of MEFV gene mutations in these malignancies.

[PMID: 25393764]
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is caused by mutations in the MEFV gene and the spectrum of mutations among Greek-Cypriots with FMF-related symptoms was examined. Sequence analysis for exons 2, 3, 5, and 10 of the MEFV gene was performed in a cohort of 593 patients. A total of 70 patients carried mutations in the homozygote or compound heterozygote state, 128 were identified with one MEFV mutation and 395 had no mutations. Of the 268 identified alleles, p.Val726Ala (27.61%) was the most frequent followed by p.Met694Val (19.40%). The missense mutations p.Arg761His (3.73%) and p.Ala744Ser (2.24%) were identified as the rarest. An interesting finding is the high frequency (18.28%) of the complex p.Phe479Leu-p.Glu167Asp that was identified in 49 of the mutated alleles. The MEFV genotypes did not follow a binomial distribution and proved not to satisfy the HWE (P < 0.001). The high percentage (66.61%) of patients with unidentified mutations could be due to mutations in the rest of the coding or noncoding MEFV gene or due to mutations in other genes that are also causing Hereditary Recurrent Fevers. Results from this work indicate the high incidence of FMF in Cyprus and describe the spectrum of the mutations which occur in the country.

[PMID: 24980720]
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), characterized by recurrent fever and inflammation of serous membranes, is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene. Around 296 mutations have been reported to date. Two two-generation Turkish families with a total of four members diagnosed with FMF clinically were screened with DNA sequencing performed on exon 2 and exon 10 of the MEFV genes. Then, complete exome sequencing analysis of MEFV gene was done for four patients in whom novel mutation was detected. A novel single base Guanine (G) insertion mutation in the coding region of MEFV gene, named c.2330dupG (p.Gln778Serfs*4 or Q778SfsX4) resulting in a mutated Pyrin/Marenostrin protein was identified. This is the first report of a new mutation in exon 10 of the MEFV gene in two Turkish families. This novel pattern of insertion mutation may provide important information for further studies on FMF pathogenesis.

[PMID: 15529356]
To investigate the expression of the familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) gene (MEFV) in human synovial fibroblasts. MEFV messenger RNA in synovial fibroblasts, chondrocytes, and peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) was analyzed by semiquantitative and real-time polymerase chain reaction and ribonuclease protection assay. The subcellular localization of pyrin, the MEFV product, was determined in transfected synovial fibroblasts and HeLa cells with plasmids encoding pyrin isoforms. Native pyrin was detected with an antipyrin antibody. MEFV was expressed in synovial fibroblasts, but not in chondrocytes. Four alternatively spliced transcripts were identified: an extension of exon 8 (exon 8ext) resulting in a frameshift that predicts a truncated protein lacking exons 9 and 10, the addition of an exon (exon 4a) predicting a truncated protein at exon 5, the in-frame substitution of exon 2a for exon 2, and the previously described removal of exon 2 (exon 2Delta). Exon 8ext transcripts represented 27% of the total message population in synovial fibroblasts. All other alternatively spliced transcripts were rare. Consensus and alternatively spliced transcripts were induced by lipopolysaccharide in synovial fibroblasts and PBLs. In transfected cells, the proteins encoded by all highly expressed splice forms were cytoplasmic. In contrast, native pyrin was predominantly nuclear in synovial fibroblasts, neutrophils, and dendritic cells, but was cytoplasmic in monocytes. Several MEFV transcripts are expressed and inducible in synovial fibroblasts. A prominent isoform lacks the C-terminal domain that contains the majority of mutations found in patients with FMF. While recombinant forms of all major pyrin isoforms are cytoplasmic, native pyrin is nuclear in several cell types. Thus, mechanisms in addition to splicing patterns must control pyrin's subcellular distribution.