[PMID: 30575804]
Thyroid eye disease is a disabling autoimmune disease associated with orbital inflammation and tissue remodeling which can result in significant proptosis, leading to visual alterations and is potentially sight threatening. Current evidence indicates that autoantibodies to the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), along with the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), mediate the pathogenesis in susceptible individuals. Teprotumumab, a monoclonal IGF-1R antagonist, has demonstrated previously in a 24 week, randomized, controlled trial to produce significant changes in composite outcomes of proptosis and clinical activity score as compared with placebo. Further examination of the proptosis results reported here, indicate that the proptosis outcome (≥ 2 mm reduction) was met in 71.4% of the teprotumumab-treated patients as compared with 20% of the placebo-treated patients (p < 0.001). Additionally, the proptosis benefit was observed early in the trial (study week 6), and all individual patients demonstrated some benefit at week 24. Improvement was noted among smokers, non-smokers, men and women, and particularly those with higher levels of proptosis at baseline. The level of proptosis reduction with teprotumumab reported here is similar to that seen with decompression surgery. If these results are confirmed in the ongoing Phase 3 trial, teprotumumab will offer an alternative to surgery and its associated complications.

[PMID: 29273685]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a vexing and poorly understood autoimmune process involving the upper face and tissues surrounding the eyes. In TAO, the orbit can become inflamed and undergo substantial remodeling that is disfiguring and can lead to loss of vision. There are currently no approved medical therapies for TAO, the consequence of its uncertain pathogenic nature. It usually presents as a component of the syndrome known as Graves' disease where loss of immune tolerance to the thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) results in the generation of activating antibodies against that protein and hyperthyroidism. The role for TSHR and these antibodies in the development of TAO is considerably less well established. We have reported over the past 2 decades evidence that the insulin-like growth factorI receptor (IGF1R) may also participate in the pathogenesis of TAO. Activating antibodies against IGF1R have been detected in patients with GD. The actions of these antibodies initiate signaling in orbital fibroblasts from patients with the disease. Further, we have identified a functional and physical interaction between TSHR and IGF1R. Importantly, it appears that signaling initiated from either receptor can be attenuated by inhibiting the activity of IGF1R. These findings underpin the rationale for therapeutically targeting IGF1R in active TAO. A recently completed therapeutic trial of teprotumumab, a human IGF1R inhibiting antibody, in patients with moderate to severe, active TAO, indicates the potential effectiveness and safety of the drug. It is possible that other autoimmune diseases might also benefit from this treatment strategy.

[PMID: 31377284]
Improved understanding of thyroid eye disease (TED) pathogenesis has facilitated identification of a targeted molecular approach for TED treatment offering the potential to halt or slow disease progression in a nonsurgical manner. Herein, we provide a summary of the current knowledge of TED management, followed by discussion of a novel insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antagonist antibody and its potential to change the course of the disease. Perspective. Review of the literature and authors' experience. Many publications demonstrate IGF-1R overexpression in TED, and its activation as an autoantigen as a critical factor in TED pathogenesis. Several in vitro studies demonstrate that IGF-1R inhibition attenuates downstream molecular events including cytokine and hyaluronan production, and cellular differentiation. These observations led to the hypothesis that blocking IGF-1R may abrogate the clinical progression of TED. The recent completion of phase 2 and 3 randomized, placebo-controlled trials demonstrate the efficacy and safety of teprotumumab, a fully human monoclonal IGF-1R antagonist antibody, in patients with moderate-to-severe, active TED. Both the phase 2 and the recent phase 3 study results demonstrate that more patients with active TED receiving teprotumumab experienced a meaningful improvement in proptosis. Current TED treatment strategies target inflammation and symptoms, but do not modify the disease course. Therefore, proptosis as well as strabismus and its resulting diplopia often remain, impacting patient well-being and quality of life over the long term. Targeted molecular therapy using teprotumumab demonstrates disease-modifying benefits with the potential to shift the paradigm for TED treatment.

[PMID: 31813786]
A Th1 immune-preponderance has been shown in the immunopathogenesis of autoimmune thyroiditis (AT), Graves' disease (GD) and Graves' Ophthalmopathy (GO), in which the Th1-chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11), and their (C-X-C)R3 receptor, have a crucial role. Methimazole, and corticosteroids have been shown to modulate these chemokines; several efforts have been done to modulate the autoimmune reaction with other drugs, i.e. PPAR-γ, or -α ligands, or antibodies, or small molecules directed against CXCL10, or CXCR3. Antigen-specific therapy for GD, by inducing T cell tolerance through an immunization with TSH-R peptides, has been published. Drugs targeting cytokines [anti-TNFα (Etanercept), and anti-IL-6 (Tocilizumab)], and RTX (a chimeric monoclonal antibody vs. CD20) have been used in GO, with promising results. Teprotumumab (a human monoclonal anti-IGF-1R blocking antibody) has been investigated in a trial, showing it was very effective in GO patients. Still, more studies are needed for new therapies targeting autoimmune thyroid disorders.

[PMID: 30385883]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO), an autoimmune component of Graves' disease, remains a disfiguring and potentially blinding condition. Here, the author reviews the role of insulin-like growth factor-I receptor pathway in TAO and how it might be therapeutically targeted. The recent literature is reviewed. TAO involves reactivity of orbital connective tissues and their remodeling. While many of the details concerning the pathogenesis of TAO remain to be determined, several insights have come to light recently. Among them is the apparent involvement of IGF-IR. This receptor protein, a membrane-spanning tyrosine kinase receptor can form both physical and functional complexes with the thyrotropin receptor (TSHR). This is notable because TSHR is the established primary autoantigen in Graves' disease. IGF-IR activity is critical to signaling downstream from both IGF-IR and TSHR. In addition, antibodies against IGF-IR have been detected in patients with Graves' disease and in rodent models of TAO. Evidence has been put forward that these antibodies may act directly on IGF-IR, perhaps in some manner activating the receptor. These experimental observations have led to the development of a novel therapy for active TAO, utilizing a monoclonal anti-IGF-IR inhibitory antibody which had been produced originally as treatment for cancer. The agent, teprotumumab was recently evaluated in a clinical trial and found to be highly effective and relatively well-tolerated. It is currently undergoing assessment in a follow-up trial. Should the current study yield similarly encouraging results, it is possible that teprotumumab will emerge as a paradigm-shifting medical therapy for TAO.

[PMID: 25105999]
In recent years, immunosuppressive therapy, as an alternative to corticosteroids, has been proposed as novel agents which target the various antigens involved in the pathogenesis of Graves' ophthalmopathy. Although the lack of randomized and controlled studies suggests caution in generalizing results, some data show interesting results. Potential targets for immune therapy in Graves' ophthalmopathy are the antigens expressed on the target organ of inflammation, namely the receptor and the insulin growth factor -1 receptor on fibroblasts, inflammatory cytokines, and B and T cells. The most promising results are observed with small thyroid stimulating hormone receptor molecules interacting with the receptor on thyrocytes and fibroblasts and with the anti-IGF-1 receptor antibody teprotumumab. A recent open study with tocilizumab, an anti-soluble interleukin-6 receptor, has shown inactivation of Graves' ophthalmopathy. Consistent reports on the efficacy of rituximab will have to be confirmed by randomized controlled trials, which are now in progress. Current clinical practice for Graves' ophthalmopathy will greatly benefit from the availability of immunosuppressors that act as disease-modifying drugs, as compared to steroids, the current standard treatment for Graves' ophthalmopathy. Rituximab seems to be a good candidate, as preliminary results from ongoing randomized trials suggest good efficacy with a relative well tolerated profile.

[PMID: 26087256]
Fibrocytes (FC) are bone marrow-derived progenitor cells that are more abundant and infiltrate the thyroid and orbit in Graves orbitopathy (GO). FCs express high levels of thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R). These receptors are physically and functionally associated, but their role in GO pathogenesis is not fully delineated. Treatment of FCs with thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) or M22 (activating antibody to TSHR) induces the production of numerous cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα). Teprotumumab (TMB) is a human monoclonal IGF-1R blocking antibody currently in clinical trial for GO and inhibits TSHR-mediated actions in FCs. To characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying TSH-induced TNFα production by FCs, and the role of IGF-1R blockade by TMB. FCs from healthy and GD patients were treated with combinations of TSH, M22, MG132 and AKTi (inhibitors of NF-κB and Akt, respectively), and TMB. TNFα protein production was measured by Luminex and flow cytometry. Messenger RNA expression was quantified by real time PCR. Treatment with TSH/M22 induced TNFα protein and mRNA production by FCs, both of which were reduced when FCs were pretreated with MG132 and AKTi (p<0.0001). TMB decreased TSH-induced TNFα protein production in circulating FCs from mean fluorescent index (MFI) value of 2.92 to 1.91, and mRNA expression in cultured FCs from 141- to 52-fold expression (p<0.0001). TMB also decreased M22-induced TNFα protein production from MFI of 1.67 to 1.12, and mRNA expression from 6- to 3-fold expression (p<0.0001). TSH/M22 stimulates FC production of TNFα mRNA and protein. This process involves the transcription factor NF-κB and its regulator Akt. Blocking IGF-1R attenuates TSH/M22-induced TNFα production. This further delineates the interaction of TSHR and IGF1-R signaling pathways. By modulating the proinflammatory properties of FCs such as TNFα production, TMB may be a promising therapeutic agent for GO.

[PMID: 33221815]
Teprotumumab, a blocking antibody to the insulin like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) has been shown to significantly reduce proptosis in recent phase 2 and 3 trials in patients with inflammatory thyroid eye disease (TED). Herein, we investigate the impact of teprotumumab on patients with non-inflammatory TED. We also investigate the expression of the IGF-1R on orbital tissues from patients with inflammatory and non-inflammatory TED compared to controls. Consecutive patients with non-inflammatory TED (clinical activity score, CAS ≤ 1, for at least 4 months, were treated with teprotumumab. They received a complete course (total eight infusions) of teprotumumab (10 mg/kg for the first infusion and 20 mg/kg for subsequent infusions every 3 weeks). The primary outcome was a proptosis response at week 24. Further, IGF-1R α and β expression was evaluated on orbital tissue from patients with inflammatory and non-inflammatory TED, as well as healthy controls. Non-biased histological analysis of IGF-1R expression was performed using ImageJ. Four patients met eligibility criteria for the clinical study, with a mean (SD) CAS of 0 (0). Following teprotumumab treatment, there was a mean (SD) reduction in proptosis of 2.6 mm (1.2). Five patients were included for each group of the histological study; inflammatory TED, non-inflammatory TED and controls. IGF-1Rα and IGF-1Rβ expression was significantly greater in the orbital tissues of patients with inflammatory TED and non-inflammatory TED, when compared to controls. Our findings demonstrate for the first time, that teprotumumab, a blocking antibody to the IGF-1R reduces proptosis in a series of patients with non-inflammatory TED. Overexpression of the IGF-1R in orbital tissue from patients with non-inflammatory disease compared to controls may be an important consideration for effect.

[PMID: 32088116]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) remains a vexing autoimmune component of Graves' disease that can diminish the quality of life as a consequence of its impact on visual function, physical appearance and emotional well-being. Because of its relative rarity and variable presentation, the development of highly effective and well-tolerated medical therapies for TAO has been slow relative to other autoimmune diseases. Contributing to the barriers of greater insight into TAO has been the historical absence of high-fidelity preclinical animal models. Despite these challenges, several agents, most developed for treatment of other diseases, have found their way into consideration for use in active TAO through repurposing. Among these, teprotumumab is a fully human inhibitory monoclonal antibody against the insulin-like growth factor I receptor. It has shown remarkable effectiveness in moderate to severe, active TAO in two completed multicenter, double masked, and placebo controlled clinical trials. The drug exhibits a favorable safety profile. Teprotumumab has recently been approved by the U.S. F.D.A, and may rapidly become the first line therapy for this disfiguring and potentially blinding condition.

[PMID: 32040069]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is an autoimmune component of Graves' disease for which no currently available medical therapy provides reliable and safe benefit. Based on insights generated experimentally over the past several decades, the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of TAO. Furthermore, an IGF-IR inhibitor, teprotumumab, has emerged from 2 clinical trials as a promising treatment for active, moderate to severe TAO. This brief review intends to provide an overview of the rationale underlying the development of teprotumumab for this disease. It is possible that teprotumumab will soon take its place in our therapeutic armamentarium for active TAO.

[PMID: 32059832]
Graves' disease (GD) is characterized by thyrotoxicosis, caused by the presence of circulating thyroid stimulating antibodies (TSAb), that are determinant also in the pathogenesis of its extrathyroidal manifestations [Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO), pretibial myxedema]. T helper (Th)1 immune response prevails in the immune-pathogenesis of GD and GO, during the active phase, when Th1 chemokines, and their (C-X-C)R3 receptor, play a key role. In GD, the existing treatments are not ideal for hyperthyroidism (long-term remission with anti-thyroid-drugs only in 50% of patients; while radioiodine and surgery cause hypothyroidism). In GD, antigen-specific therapy has been recently published, with the induction of T cell tolerance via an immunization by TSH-R peptides. In GO, rituximab and drugs targeting cytokines have been evaluated. Furthermore, teprotumumab (a human monoclonal anti-IGF-1R blocking antibody) showed to be very effective in GO patients. Further researches are necessary to identify novel effective therapies targeting GD, or GO.

[PMID: 32157641]
Teprotumumab (teprotumumab-trbw; TEPEZZA™ - Horizon Therapeutics) is a monoclonal antibody insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) antagonist developed for the treatment of thyroid eye disease (Graves ophthalmopathy/orbitopathy, thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy). Based on positive results from two multinational clinical trials teprotumumab was recently approved for this indication in the US. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of teprotumumab leading to this first approval for thyroid eye disease.

[PMID: 31814726]
Thyroid eye disease (TED) is a complex, debilitating autoimmune disease that causes orbital inflammation and tissue remodeling, resulting in proptosis, diplopia, and in severe cases, loss of vision. TED can lead to facial disfigurement and severely impact patients' quality of life. Although the course of TED was identified over 60 years ago, effective treatment options have proved to be challenging. Current treatments such as glucocorticoid therapy and orbital radiation focus on reducing orbital inflammation. However, these therapies fail to modify the disease outcomes, including proptosis and diplopia. Recent advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of TED have facilitated the development of targeted molecular therapies such as teprotumumab, an insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor inhibiting monoclonal antibody. In recent phase 2 and phase 3 randomized placebo-controlled trials, teprotumumab rapidly achieved improvement in clinical endpoints defining TED, including improved proptosis and diplopia. Dramatic improvement in clinical outcomes achieved after teprotumumab therapy during active TED are heretofore singular and comparable only to surgical therapies achieved during the inactive phase of TED. The advent of effective medical therapy can lead to a paradigm shift in the clinical management of TED. This review will provide an overview of TED, its epidemiology, insight into the molecular biology of the disease, clinical characteristics and diagnosis, and current and emerging treatment modalities.

[PMID: 30215690]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a complex disease process presumed to emerge from autoimmunity occurring in the thyroid gland, most frequently in Graves disease (GD). It is disfiguring and potentially blinding, culminating in orbital tissue remodeling and disruption of function of structures adjacent to the eye. There are currently no medical therapies proven capable of altering the clinical outcome of TAO in randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter trials. The orbital fibroblast represents the central target for immune reactivity. Recent identification of fibroblasts that putatively originate in the bone marrow as monocyte progenitors provides a plausible explanation for why antigens, the expressions of which were once considered restricted to the thyroid, are detected in the TAO orbit. These cells, known as fibrocytes, express relatively high levels of functional TSH receptor (TSHR) through which they can be activated by TSH and the GD-specific pathogenic antibodies that underpin thyroid overactivity. Fibrocytes also express insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) with which TSHR forms a physical and functional signaling complex. Notably, inhibition of IGF-IR activity results in the attenuation of signaling initiated at either receptor. Some studies suggest that IGF-IR-activating antibodies are generated in GD, whereas others refute this concept. These observations served as the rationale for implementing a recently completed therapeutic trial of teprotumumab, a monoclonal inhibitory antibody targeting IGF-IR in TAO. Results of that trial in active, moderate to severe disease revealed dramatic and rapid reductions in disease activity and severity. The targeting of IGF-IR with specific biologic agents may represent a paradigm shift in the therapy of TAO.

[PMID: 32429706]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a disfiguring, potentially blinding, and sub-optimally managed autoimmune condition. Current therapy of active TAO consists most frequently of glucocorticoid steroids, orbital radiation, or B-cell depletion; all of which are associated with substantial side effects. Teprotumumab (Tepezza) is a human monoclonal antibody against the insulin-like growth factor type I receptor (IGF-IR), recently evaluated in two clinical trials for active moderate-to-severe TAO that was recently approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in TAO. This article reviews phase II and III placebo-controlled, double-masked, prospective, multicenter studies assessing the efficacy and safety of teprotumumab for the treatment of active, moderate-to-severe TAO. Teprotumumab has demonstrated substantial and rapid improvement in Clinical Activity Score and proptosis reduction in TAO compared to placebo. Subjective diplopia and quality of life were also improved in both clinical trials. Teprotumumab exhibited a favorable safety profile, with transient hyperglycemia, muscle cramps, and auditory side effects being associated with the drug; these were usually transient. The trial findings indicate that teprotumumab is a promising, potential first-line therapy for treating TAO.

[PMID: 26361263]
The medical treatment of Graves' orbitopathy (GO) is usually reserved to moderate to severe disease. Steroids have been widely employed and possess anti-inflammatory activity, but about 20-30% of patients are not responsive and about 20% present with disease recurrence. Immunosuppressive therapy alternative to corticosteroids may target the different antigens involved in pathogenic mechanisms of GO. Some have already been employed in clinical studies and showed interesting results, although the lack of randomized and controlled trials suggests caution for their use in clinical practice. Potential targets for therapy in GO are the TSH receptor and the IGF-1 receptor on the fibroblasts, inflammatory cytokines, B and T cells. Most promising results are obtained by interacting with the PIK3/mTORC1 signaling cascades for adipogenesis and the anti-IGF-1R with the monoclonal antibody teprotumumab. A recent open study has shown that tocilizumab, an anti-sIL-6R antibody, inactivates GO. Consistent reports on the efficacy of rituximab have recently been challenged by randomized controlled trials. Clinical practice will greatly benefit from the use of disease modifying agents in GO, as compared to steroids, currently standard treatment for GO. Among these, rituximab may be useful, especially in patients resistant to steroid or with contraindications to steroids. However, larger randomized controlled trials are needed for definitive data on the potential disease-modifying role of rituximab in GO. Direct targeting of the orbital fibroblast via immunosuppression or nonimmunosuppressive drugs is emerging as a promising alternative.

[PMID: 32707005]
Thyroid eye disease is a debilitating, disfiguring, and potentially blinding periocular condition. Teprotumumab is a human insulin-like growth factor-I receptor monoclonal inhibitor antibody which indicated for treating thyroid eye disease. The authors performed a systematic review of the literature using the PubMed database, and the following keywords were used: 'teprotumumab,' 'thyroid eye disease,' and 'insulin-like growth factor I receptor.' The chemical property, mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, and safety of teprotumumab were introduced in this paper. Teprotumumab is a human monoclonal antibody targeting insulin-like growth factor-I receptor. Clinical trials indicated that proptosis response of teprotumumab was 83%, and clinical activity score, diplopia, and quality of life were also better than placebo. Teprotumumab was well tolerated, common adverse reactions included muscle spasm, nausea, alopecia, diarrhea, fatigue, hyperglycemia, hearing impairment, dysgeusia, headache, and dry skin.

[PMID: 31971679]
Thyroid eye disease is a debilitating, disfiguring, and potentially blinding periocular condition for which no Food and Drug Administration-approved medical therapy is available. Strong evidence has implicated the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) in the pathogenesis of this disease. In a randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, phase 3 multicenter trial, we assigned patients with active thyroid eye disease in a 1:1 ratio to receive intravenous infusions of the IGF-IR inhibitor teprotumumab (10 mg per kilogram of body weight for the first infusion and 20 mg per kilogram for subsequent infusions) or placebo once every 3 weeks for 21 weeks; the last trial visit for this analysis was at week 24. The primary outcome was a proptosis response (a reduction in proptosis of ≥2 mm) at week 24. Prespecified secondary outcomes at week 24 were an overall response (a reduction of ≥2 points in the Clinical Activity Score plus a reduction in proptosis of ≥2 mm), a Clinical Activity Score of 0 or 1 (indicating no or minimal inflammation), the mean change in proptosis across trial visits (from baseline through week 24), a diplopia response (a reduction in diplopia of ≥1 grade), and the mean change in overall score on the Graves' ophthalmopathy-specific quality-of-life (GO-QOL) questionnaire across trial visits (from baseline through week 24; a mean change of ≥6 points is considered clinically meaningful). A total of 41 patients were assigned to the teprotumumab group and 42 to the placebo group. At week 24, the percentage of patients with a proptosis response was higher with teprotumumab than with placebo (83% [34 patients] vs. 10% [4 patients], P<0.001), with a number needed to treat of 1.36. All secondary outcomes were significantly better with teprotumumab than with placebo, including overall response (78% of patients [32] vs. 7% [3]), Clinical Activity Score of 0 or 1 (59% [24] vs. 21% [9]), the mean change in proptosis (-2.82 mm vs. -0.54 mm), diplopia response (68% [19 of 28] vs. 29% [8 of 28]), and the mean change in GO-QOL overall score (13.79 points vs. 4.43 points) (P≤0.001 for all). Reductions in extraocular muscle, orbital fat volume, or both were observed in 6 patients in the teprotumumab group who underwent orbital imaging. Most adverse events were mild or moderate in severity; two serious events occurred in the teprotumumab group, of which one (an infusion reaction) led to treatment discontinuation. Among patients with active thyroid eye disease, teprotumumab resulted in better outcomes with respect to proptosis, Clinical Activity Score, diplopia, and quality of life than placebo; serious adverse events were uncommon. (Funded by Horizon Therapeutics; OPTIC ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03298867, and EudraCT number, 2017-002763-18.).

[PMID: 31356255]
Thyroid eye disease is a complex autoimmune disorder which causes substantial morbidity. It can result in orbital disfigurement, double vision, and visual loss. Consequently, it has a substantial negative effect on quality of life, mental health, and socioeconomic status. Most signs and symptoms of thyroid eye disease (TED) can be explained by the expansion of the orbital contents. Steroids are the mainstay of treatment in TED. However, recurrence may occur once steroids are withdrawn. Furthermore, in most cases, normal orbital anatomy is not restored, and skilled rehabilitative surgery is required to reduce disfigurement, double vision, and to preserve vision. Therefore, novel, causal, and more efficacious treatment strategies are warranted. In the last decade, the pathophysiology of TED has also been revised with the identification of new potential therapeutic targets. Recent clinical trials have shown that considerable benefit may be derived from the addition of antiproliferative agents (e.g., mycophenolate sodium) in preventing deterioration after steroid cessation. In addition, targeted biologic therapies have shown promise, including teprotumumab (anti-IGFR) which appears to substantially reduce proptosis, rituximab (anti-CD20) which reduces inflammation and tocilizumab (anti-IL-6) which potentially benefits both of these parameters. This short review summarizes the recent research developments in this area.

[PMID: 24878056]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is the component of Graves' disease characterized by orbital inflammation and connective tissue remodeling. The IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and TSH receptor (TSHR) form a physical and functional complex in orbital fibroblasts. A subset of these fibroblasts is derived from infiltrating CD34(+) fibrocytes. Teprotumumab (RV 001, R1507) is a human monoclonal anti-IGF-1R blocking antibody currently undergoing a phase 2 clinical trial in patients with active TAO. To determine whether teprotumumab inhibits the induction by TSH of IL-6 and IL-8 in fibrocytes. Fibrocytes were treated without or with teprotumumab in combination with IGF-1 or TSH. IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA expression and protein production were analyzed by real-time PCR and Luminex, respectively. Phosphorylated Akt (S473) levels were analyzed by Western blot. TSHR and IGF-1R display was assessed by flow cytometry. Fibrocyte display of IGF-1R and TSHR was reduced with teprotumumab, as were IGF-1- and TSH-dependent phosphorylated Akt levels. TSH induction of IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA and protein was also reduced by the monoclonal antibody. Teprotumumab attenuates the actions of both IGF-1 and TSH in fibrocytes. Specifically, it blocks the induction of proinflammatory cytokines by TSH. These results provide, at least in part, the molecular rationale for interrogating the therapeutic efficacy of this antibody in TAO.

[PMID: 28467880]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, a condition commonly associated with Graves' disease, remains inadequately treated. Current medical therapies, which primarily consist of glucocorticoids, have limited efficacy and present safety concerns. Inhibition of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) is a new therapeutic strategy to attenuate the underlying autoimmune pathogenesis of ophthalmopathy. We conducted a multicenter, double-masked, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to determine the efficacy and safety of teprotumumab, a human monoclonal antibody inhibitor of IGF-IR, in patients with active, moderate-to-severe ophthalmopathy. A total of 88 patients were randomly assigned to receive placebo or active drug administered intravenously once every 3 weeks for a total of eight infusions. The primary end point was the response in the study eye. This response was defined as a reduction of 2 points or more in the Clinical Activity Score (scores range from 0 to 7, with a score of ≥3 indicating active thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy) and a reduction of 2 mm or more in proptosis at week 24. Secondary end points, measured as continuous variables, included proptosis, the Clinical Activity Score, and results on the Graves' ophthalmopathy-specific quality-of-life questionnaire. Adverse events were assessed. In the intention-to-treat population, 29 of 42 patients who received teprotumumab (69%), as compared with 9 of 45 patients who received placebo (20%), had a response at week 24 (P<0.001). Therapeutic effects were rapid; at week 6, a total of 18 of 42 patients in the teprotumumab group (43%) and 2 of 45 patients in the placebo group (4%) had a response (P<0.001). Differences between the groups increased at subsequent time points. The only drug-related adverse event was hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes; this event was controlled by adjusting medication for diabetes. In patients with active ophthalmopathy, teprotumumab was more effective than placebo in reducing proptosis and the Clinical Activity Score. (Funded by River Vision Development and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01868997 .).

[PMID: 29744034]
Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO), a localized periocular manifestation of the autoimmune syndrome known as Graves' disease, remains incompletely understood. Discussions of its pathogenesis are generally focused on the thyrotropin receptor, the proposed role for which is supported by substantial evidence. Considerations of any involvement of the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) in the disease are frequently contentious. In this brief, topically focused review, I have attempted to provide a balanced perspective based entirely on experimental results that either favor or refute involvement of IGF-IR in TAO. Discussion in this matter seems particularly timely since the currently available treatments of this disfiguring and potentially sight-threatening disease remain inadequate. Importantly, no medical therapy has thus far received approval from the US Food and Drug Administration. Results from a very recently published clinical trial assessing the safety and efficacy of teprotumumab, an inhibitory human anti-IGF-IR monoclonal antibody, in active, moderate to severe TAO are extremely encouraging. That double-masked, placebo-controlled study involved 88 patients and revealed unprecedented clinical responses in the improvement of proptosis and clinical activity as well as a favorable safety profile. Should those results prove reproducible in an ongoing phase III trial, therapeutic inhibition of IGF-IR could become the basis for paradigm-shifting treatment of this vexing disease.

[PMID: 32795835]
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is the leading cause of death associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19. IGF-1 has been implicated in ARDS, yet its role in relation to COVID-19-related lung injury has not been investigated. We hypothesize that blockage of the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) mitigates lung injury and decreases the risk of death in patients COVID-19-related ARDS. Patients with fibroproliferative ARDS have been shown to have increased IGF-1 and IGF-1R staining in lung tissue specimens. Rising levels of IGF-1 in bronchioalveolar fluid (BAL) and increased IGF-1 mRNA expression in lung tissues (but declining serum IGF-1 levels) have been found in late stage ARDS compared with early lung injury. Blockage of IGF-1R decreases lung tissue damage and increases survival in bleomycin-induced as well as H1N1 influenza-related lung injury in animal models. Teprotumumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against the IGF-1R that was FDA-approved in 2020 for the treatment of Graves' orbitopathy. In order to determine if teprotumumab may reduce lung injury and death related to ARDS in the setting of COVID-19, preliminary clinical data is needed. IGF-1 levels in serum and BAL fluid must be measured in patients with COVID-19-related ARDS. Histopathology from lung samples from patients with COVID-19-related ARDS must be examined for increased expression of the IGF-1R. Once these are ascertained, and if the data support IGF-1 involvement, a randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2A trial of teprotumumab therapy in the setting of COVID-19-related ARDS and non-COVID-19-related ARDS designed to generate initial data on short-term efficacy, safety, dosing and administration should be performed.

[PMID: 33237667]
Thyroid eye disease (TED) is characterized by orbital inflammation and complicated by extraocular muscle fibrosis. Treatment with rapamycin/sirolimus has been reported to improve ocular motility and disease manifestations in TED. Whether this resulted from a primary antifibrotic effect on fibroblasts or was secondary to immune-suppression is unclear. In vitro contractility studies of primary orbital fibroblasts. Cells from patients with TED and controls were treated with rapamycin [mechanistic target of rapamycin an (mTOR) inhibitor] and MHY1485 (an mTOR stimulator) as well as inhibitors upstream in the same signaling cascade (saracatinib and befatinib). At concentrations consistent with the therapeutic dosing range in humans, rapamycin/sirolimus significantly reduces fibrosis in orbital fibroblasts from TED patients and controls in vitro. This effect is separate from, and in addition to, its immune suppressive effect. mTOR-driven fibrotic activity is greater in TED-derived fibroblasts and can be blocked also upstream of mTOR by inhibition of src. There was no adverse effect on cell survival. The authors present evidence for a direct antifibrotic effect of rapamycin/sirolimus in primary orbital fibroblasts. Targeting mTOR signaling presents a further and adjunctive treatment of TED alongside other immune-suppressive agents. By acting downstream of IGF1-R, sirolimus may offer a cost-effective alternative to teprotumumab therapy. Clinical case reports, now supplemented by this in vitro evidence, support the initiation of a clinical trial to treat the fibrotic sequelae of TED with this already-approved agent. Such an "off-the-shelf" therapy is a welcome prospect for TED treatment, particularly one available at a low price.