[PMID: 28034363]
Leishmania is an intracellular protozoan parasite which causes Leishmaniasis, a global health problem affecting millions of people throughout 89 different countries in the world. The current treatment which includes use of amphotericin B, antimonials, and others has major drawbacks due to toxicity, resistance, and extraordinary high cost. So there is an urgent need of development of new drug targets to fight against leishmaniasis. In this regard we have selected Leishmania donovani Ca2+ ion channel (Ld-CC) as potential drug target. Ld-CC regulates concentration of Ca2+ ions which is involved in several functions like flagellar motion, mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and entry inside the macrophages. Since Ld-CC has not been characterised yet, we performed homology modelling of Leishmania donovani Ca2+ ion channel (Ld-CC) and docking studies of ligand library against this channel. 542 compound library of National Cancer Institute (NCI) diversity 3 dataset selected for screening studies. The ligands ZINC17287336 and ZINC29590262 were selected as best energy conformers because they show highest binding affinity towards its target (Ld-CC). They interact with the active site residues in the pocket of Ld-CC which suggests that the docked conformations are good and acceptable. Moreover, these two selected compounds also have relatively high binding affinity than nifedipine and verapamil, known human calcium channel blockers which had been reported to have mild anti-leishmanial activity. Among these two top screened inhibitors the ligand ZINC29590262 shows poor binding affinity towards the Human voltagedependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C in comparison to the Ld-CC. Therefore, we proposed this ligand as the best inhibitor which shows 40% more binding affinity with Ld-CC than the human-VDCC. These results suggest that our screened ligand ZINC29590262 could act as novel drug and may show much better antileishmanial activity.

[PMID: 24105765]
Leishmania donovani is an intracellular protozoan parasite that causes leishmaniasis, which can range from a self-healing cutaneous disease to a fatal visceral disease depending on the infecting species. Miltefosine is currently the latest and only oral antileishmanial that came out of drug discovery pipelines in the past few decades, but recent reports indicate a significant decline in its efficacy against visceral leishmaniasis (also known as kala-azar) in the Indian subcontinent. This relapse rate of up to 20% within 12 months after treatment was shown not to be related to reinfection, drug quality, drug exposure, or drug-resistant parasites. We therefore aimed to assess other phenotypes of the parasite that may affect treatment outcome and found a significant association between the number of metacyclic parasites, parasite infectivity, and patient treatment outcome in the Indian subcontinent. Together with previous studies on resistance of L. donovani against pentavalent antimonials, these data suggest that the infectivity of the parasite, or related phenotypes, might be a more determinant factor for treatment failure in visceral leishmaniasis than drug susceptibility, warranting a reassessment of our current view on treatment failure and drug resistance in leishmaniasis and beyond. The high miltefosine relapse rate poses a major challenge for the current Kala-Azar Elimination Program in the Indian subcontinent and other leishmaniasis control programs worldwide. This relapse rate could not be related to reinfection, drug-resistant parasites, or reduced treatment quality. Here we report that an increased infectivity of the parasite is associated with miltefosine relapse of visceral leishmaniasis (VL) patients. These results supplement those obtained with antimonial-resistant L. donovani where an increased infectivity was also observed. This challenges the current view of Leishmania drug susceptibility being the biggest parasitic factor that contributes to treatment failure in leishmaniasis. These selected more infectious parasites may pose an additional burden to leishmaniasis control programs, highlighting the importance of multifaceted control measures to achieve leishmaniasis elimination in the Indian subcontinent and other regions where leishmaniasis is endemic.

[PMID: 25714343]
Leishmania is a digenetic protozoan parasite causing leishmaniasis in humans. The different clinical forms of leishmaniasis are caused by more than twenty species of Leishmania that are transmitted by nearly thirty species of phlebotomine sand flies. Pentavalent antimonials (such as Pentostam or Glucantime) are the first line drugs for treating leishmaniasis. Recent studies suggest that pentavalent antimony (Sb(V)) acts as a pro-drug, which is converted to the more active trivalent form (Sb(III)). However, sensitivity to trivalent antimony varies among different Leishmania species. In general, Leishmania species causing cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) are more sensitive to Sb(III) than the species responsible for visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Leishmania aquaglyceroporin (AQP1) facilitates the adventitious passage of antimonite down a concentration gradient. In this study, we show that Leishmania species causing CL accumulate more antimonite, and therefore exhibit higher sensitivity to antimonials, than the species responsible for VL. This species-specific differential sensitivity to antimonite is directly proportional to the expression levels of AQP1 mRNA. We show that the stability of AQP1 mRNA in different Leishmania species is regulated by their respective 3'-untranslated regions. The differential regulation of AQP1 mRNA explains the distinct antimonial sensitivity of each species.

[PMID: 16477557]
Tegumentary leishmaniasis in Latin America is caused mainly by Leishmania viannia braziliensis complex parasites. L. braziliensis and Leishmania viannia peruviana are the 2 predominant Leishmania species in Peru. L. braziliensis is more virulent, because it can cause mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, known as espundia, that results in severe facial destruction. Early identification of the species that causes the initial cutaneous infection would greatly help to prevent mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, because it would allow more aggressive treatment and follow-up. However, because of the close genetic similarity of L. braziliensis and L. peruviana, there currently exists no simple assay to distinguish between these species. We cloned the mannose phosphate isomerase gene from both L. braziliensis and L. peruviana. It is the only known isoenzyme capable of differentiating between L. braziliensis and L. peruviana in multilocus enzyme electrophoresis. Interestingly, only a single nucleotide polymorphism was found between the mannose phosphate isomerase genes from L. braziliensis and L. peruviana, resulting in an amino acid change from threonine to arginine at amino acid 361. A polymerase chain reaction assay was developed to distinguish the single nucleotide polymorphism of the mannose phosphate isomerase gene to allow for the specific identification of L. braziliensis or L. peruviana. This assay was validated with 31 reference strains that were previously typed by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, successfully applied to patient biopsy samples, and adapted to a real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. This innovative approach combines new genetic knowledge with traditional biochemical fundamentals of multilocus enzyme electrophoresis to better manage leishmaniasis in Latin America.

[PMID: 24946952]
Trypanosomatid parasites infect over 21 million people worldwide, with a range of disease phenotypes. Trypanosoma cruzi causes American trypanosomiasis, wherein 30-40% of infected individuals develop disease manifestations, most commonly cardiomyopathy but also digestive megasyndromes. In the case of Trypanosoma brucei, the etiological agent of African trypanosomiasis, disease progression can be rapid or slow, with early or late central nervous system involvement. Finally, Leishmania species cause leishmaniasis, a disease that ranges from self-healing but scarring cutaneous lesions to fatal visceral leishmaniasis in which parasites disseminate to the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. This review highlights parasite factors involved in disease phenotype in all three trypanosomatid diseases, with a particular focus on recent advances using large-scale 'omics' techniques.

[PMID: 15259461]
Sri Lankan cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL), once considered sporadic, is fairly widespread in some parts of the country. Identification of 5 isolates from 4 CL patients by enzyme analysis during 2002 showed that they were all Leishmania donovani zymodeme MON-37, the parasite which also causes visceral leishmaniasis in India and East Africa.

[PMID: 20145708]
Leishmania major causes leishmaniasis and is grouped within the Trypanosomatidae family, which also includes the etiologic agent for African sleeping sickness, Trypanosoma brucei. Previous studies on T. brucei showed that acyl carrier protein (ACP) of mitochondrial fatty acid synthase type 2 (FASII) plays a crucial role in parasite survival. Additionally, 3-oxoacyl-ACP synthase TbKASIII as well as TbHTD2 representing 3-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase were also identified; however, 3-oxoacyl-ACP reductase TbKAR1 has hitherto evaded positive identification. Here, potential Leishmania FASII components LmjF07.0440 and LmjF07.0430 were revealed as 3-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratases LmHTD2-1 and LmHTD2-2, respectively, whereas LmjF27.2440 was identified as LmKAR1. These Leishmania proteins were ectopically expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae htd2Delta or oar1Delta respiratory deficient cells lacking the corresponding mitochondrial FASII enzymes Htd2p and Oar1p. Yeast mutants producing mitochondrially targeted versions of the parasite proteins resembled the self-complemented cells for respiratory growth. This is the first identification of a FASII-like 3-oxoacyl-ACP reductase from a kinetoplastid parasite.

[PMID: 16436699]
Leishmania major is an important trypanosomatid pathogen that causes leishmaniasis, which is a serious disease in much of the Old World. Current treatments include a small number of antimony compounds that, while somewhat effective, are limited by serious side effects. We have screened a small portion of a unique chemical library and have found at least three novel compounds that are effective against L. tarentolae and L. major in vitro and in a murine macrophage model of L. major infection. These compounds were effective in both assays at doses significantly lower than those of sodium stibogluconate (Pentostam) and represent possible candidates for drug development.

[PMID: 25116660]
Leishmaniasis is a clinically heterogeneous syndrome caused by intracellular protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania. The clinical spectrum of leishmaniasis encompasses subclinical (not apparent), localized (skin lesion), and disseminated (cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and visceral) infection. This spectrum of manifestations depends on the immune status of the host, on the parasite, and on immunoinflammatory responses. Visceral leishmaniasis causes high morbidity and mortality in the developing world. Reliable laboratory methods become mandatory for accurate diagnosis, especially in immunocompromised patients such as those infected with HIV. In this article, we review the current state of the diagnostic tools for leishmaniasis, especially  the serological test.

[PMID: 15071036]
Leishmania donovani in India causes visceral infection (kala-azar) and dermal infection (post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis). We report here the identification of polymorphism in a well-defined genetic locus among the Leishmania parasites causing the visceral and dermal manifestations, in a comparison of 15 post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis and 12 kala-azar patient isolates.

[PMID: 24707415]
Leishmaniasis is a tropical infection caused by the protozoan, belonging to the group of Leishmania which causes Old World and New World disease. These are typically divided into cutaneous, mucocutaneous, visceral, viscerotropic, and disseminated disease. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the presence of visceral disease is a rarity. Isolated case reports have documented this occurrence, in the immunocompromised setting, and few otherwise. The concurrent presence of visceral leishmaniasis (bone marrow involvement) with solitary cutaneous and ocular disease and also solitary cutaneous and visceral disease (bone marrow involvement) has been reported before. Here, we present an immunocompetent patient who was diagnosed to have visceral leishmaniasis (liver and bone marrow involvement) along with simultaneous disseminated mucocutaneous and ocular involvement, a combination that has never been reported before.

[PMID: 23219435]
Leishmaniasis is a neglected tropical disease caused by Leishmania protozoa and associated with three main clinical presentations: cutaneous, mucocutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis. Visceral leishmaniasis is the second most lethal parasitic disease after malaria and there is so far no human vaccine. Leishmania donovani is a causative agent of visceral leishmaniasis in South East Asia and Eastern Africa. However, in Sri Lanka, L. donovani causes mainly cutaneous leishmaniasis, while visceral leishmaniasis is rare. We investigate here the possibility that the cutaneous form of L. donovani can provide immunological protection against the visceral form of the disease, as a potential explanation for why visceral leishmaniasis is rare in Sri Lanka. Subcutaneous immunization with a cutaneous clinical isolate from Sri Lanka was significantly protective against visceral leishmaniasis in BALB/c mice. Protection was associated with a mixed Th1/Th2 response. These results provide a possible rationale for the scarcity of visceral leishmaniasis in Sri Lanka and could guide leishmaniasis vaccine development efforts.

[PMID: 29058760]
Leishmania, a protozoan parasite that causes leishmaniasis, affects 1-2 million people every year worldwide. Leishmaniasis is a vector born disease and characterized by a diverse group of clinical syndromes. Current treatment is limited because of drug resistance, high cost, poor safety, and low efficacy. The urgent need for potent agents against Leishmania has led to significant advances in the development of novel antileishmanial drugs. β-galactofuranose (β-Galf) is an important component of Leishmanial cell surface matrix and plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of parasite. UDP-galactopyranose mutase (UGM) converts UDP-galactopyranose (UDP-Galp) to UDP-galactofuranose (UDP-Galf) which acts as the precursor for β-Galf synthesis. Due to its absence in human, this enzyme is selected as the potential target in search of new antileishmanial drugs. Three dimensional protein structure model of Leishmania major UGM (LmUGM) has been homology modeled using Trypanosoma cruzi UGM (TcUGM) as a template. The stereochemistry was validated further. We selected already reported active compounds from PubChem database to target the LmUGM. Three compounds (6064500, 44570814, and 6158954) among the top hit occupied the UDP binding site of UGM suggested to work as a possible inhibitor for it. In vitro antileishmanial activity assay was performed with the top ranked inhibitor, 6064500. The 6064500 molecule has inhibited the growth of Leishmania donovani promastigotes significantly. Further, at similar concentrations it has exhibited significantly lesser toxicity than standard drug miltefosine hydrate in mammalian cells.

[PMID: 15135858]
BALB/c, C57BL/6, and DBA/2 mice were subcutaneously infected in the left footpad by injecting 10(4) Leishmania (Leishmania) amazonensis amastigotes. Mice were sacrificed 20, 30, 40, 60 and 90 days post-infection. Fragments of liver, kidney, spleen, skin, and draining lymph node were collected for histological examination. Light microscopy showed that at 20 days after infection BALB/c mice presented discrete inflammatory infiltrates in the skin made up of eosinophils, lymphocytes, and rare parasitized macrophages. Ninety days post-infection, the dermis showed necrotic tissue, large numbers of mononuclear cells and vacuolated macrophages filled with amastigotes. Forty days post-infection, the draining lymph nodes showed hyperplastic germinal centers, increase of high endothelial venules and apoptosis in germinal center cells. After the first 3 months post-infection, the involvement of spleen, kidney and liver was discreet, being characterized by multifocal inflammatory infiltrates. Eight months after infection, the animals presented metastatic lesions in the contralateral footpad and nose. In deep dermis, there was remarkable proliferation of fibroblasts associated with collagen fibers. The liver showed multifocal granulomas and mononuclear infiltrate around the blood vessels, but no parasites were observed, except in one animal. In some mice there were immature cells of the hematopoietic lineage. Both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice presented osteonecrosis, which is characterized by pycnotic osteocytes and empty lacunae at the point of inoculation and subsequently, replacement of this tissue by fibrous connective tissue and colonization of the bone marrow. A diffuse inflammatory process composed of mononuclear cells and rare parasites were seen in the kidneys. In one mouse, bone marrow cells were observed in the renal medulla along with where free amastigotes. DBA/2 mice developed a mild infection and they did not visceralize. In conclusion, our data demonstrates that in susceptible mice L. (L.) amazonensis, a causative agent of tegumentary leishmaniasis, causes pathological changes similar to those produced by Leishmania (L.) infantum in both humans and canids.

[PMID: 25988048]
Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is caused by the protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani and transmitted by the bite of infected sandfly Phlebotomus argentipes. The protozoa is obliged intracellularly and causes a wide spectrum of clinical syndromes: VL ('kala azar'), cutaneous leishmaniasis and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (espundia). Kala azar is the most aggressive form and if untreated causes high mortality. Here, we describe a case of VL that presented to us with high-grade fever and found to have Roth spots that were resolved after 15 days of therapy.

[PMID: 23868744]
Leishmania parasites cause leishmaniasis in humans and animals worldwide. These parasites are transmitted by phlebotomine sand flies, which become infected upon feeding on an infected mammalian host. We assessed the occurrence of Leishmania infection in small mammals in an area of cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis endemicity. A total of 180 small mammals were trapped in 2003 and 2006 in a rural area in north-eastern Brazil. Spleen and skin samples from these animals were assessed by two PCR protocols, one targeting Leishmania (Viannia) spp. and other Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum. Additionally, serum samples were tested by an immunochromatographic test with rK39 as antigen. Overall, 23.2% (38/164) of the animals were positive to L. (V.) spp. and 8.8% (14/160) to L. (L.) infantum). Five animals of four species (Didelphis albiventris, Nectomys squamipes, Rattus rattus and Holochilus sciureus) were positive by both PCR protocols, an overall co-infection rate of 2.5%. By serology, 5% (7/139) of the animals were positive, but all of them were PCR-negative. An isolate obtained from a water rat (N. squamipes) was characterized as L. (V.) braziliensis (zymodeme Z-74). This study reinforces the involvement of different small mammals (e.g., N. squamipes, R. rattus and H. scieurus) in the transmission cycles of L. (V.) braziliensis and L. (L.) infantum in north-eastern Brazil. The finding of L. (V.) braziliensis infection in black rats suggests a rapid process of adaptation of a New World Leishmania species to an Old World rodent and raises interesting questions regarding the co-evolution of these parasites and their vertebrate hosts.

[PMID: 23286822]
The leishmaniases are a group of diseases caused by species of Leishmania and transmitted by the bite of the female sandfly. The major clinical forms include localized or disseminated cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and visceral disease. Localized cutaneous leishmaniasis is most frequently caused by L. major and L. tropica in the Old World and by L. braziliensis, L. mexicana, and related species in the New World. L. donovani generally causes visceral disease in the Old World. We describe a case of disseminated cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by L. donovani in a traveller returning to the United States from Italy. Dermatologists should be aware of the clinical manifestations of leishmaniasis.

[PMID: 25228325]
Leishmaniasis is a major world health problem, and 12 million people are estimated to be infected in 88 countries. There have been few reports of leishmaniasis in Japan and all were of foreign origin; therefore diagnosis is difficult for Japanese physicians. There are 21 different pathogenic Leishmania species, and identification is obtained by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Here we report an imported case of leishmaniasis by Leishmania (Leishmania) donovani infection from Sri Lanka. L. (L.) donovani usually causes visceral leishmaniasis, but in this case, the patient manifested cutaneous leishmaniasis. The identification of Leishmania species by PCR and investigation of the patient's background such as nationality and disease endemicity are important for diagnosis and treatment. This is the first report of cutaneous leishmaniasis by L. (L.) donovani in Japan.

[PMID: 11175518]
This paper reviews the current knowledge of leishmaniasis epidemiology in Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. In all 5 countries leishmaniasis is endemic in both the Andean highlands and the Amazon basin. The sandfly vectors belong to subgenera Helcocyrtomyia, Nyssomiya, Lutzomyia, and Psychodopygus, and the Verrucarum group. Most human infections are caused by Leishmania in the Viannia subgenus. Human Leishmania infections cause cutaneous lesions, with a minority of L. (Viannia) infections leading to mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. Visceral leishmaniasis and diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis are both rare. In each country a significant proportion of Leishmania transmission is in or around houses, often close to coffee or cacao plantations. Reservoir hosts for domestic transmission cycles are uncertain. The paper first addresses the burden of disease caused by leishmaniasis, focusing on both incidence rates and on the variability in symptoms. Such information should provide a rational basis for prioritizing control resources, and for selecting therapy regimes. Secondly, we describe the variation in transmission ecology, outlining those variables which might affect the prevention strategies. Finally, we look at the current control strategies and review the recent studies on control.

[PMID: 19002608]
The intracellular protozoan parasite Leishmania causes leishmaniasis, which is the second biggest killer worldwide among parasitic diseases, after malaria. As drug therapy for leishmaniasis is toxic and resistance is growing, a vaccine is an important weapon against this disease. Unfortunately, no effective vaccine exists for any human parasitic infection. Worse yet, nearly all effective vaccines whose mechanisms are known work through the induction of protective antibodies. Leishmania mexicana causes primarily chronic cutaneous disease. Not only are antibodies not effective at killing Leishmania, as it hides inside the parasitophorous vacuole of the host cell, but new research indicates that IgG antibodies may be crucial in suppressing the host immune response by generating an immunosuppressive interleukin-10 response. IL-10 is able to decrease the needed Th1-generated IFN-gamma and downregulates production of nitric oxide, a required effector mechanism of parasite killing. We have been studying the pathways that the host uses to partially control L. mexicana infection, which include STAT4, IFN-gamma, and inducible nitric oxide synthase, but found that the IL-12 pathway is suppressed by IL-10. We are now studying the mechanisms by which IgG, bound to parasites, can induce IL-10 through FcgammaR ligation and how this suppresses a healing immune response. We are examining which IgG isotypes bind to which FcgammaRs and whether macrophages are the necessary source of IL-10 for chronic disease. Elucidation of these mechanisms may help us to design vaccines that will not induce antibody-mediated immunosuppressive IL-10 responses.

[PMID: 26989711]
Leishmaniasis, especially cutaneous leishmaniasis, is considered an important health problem in many parts of Iran including Kharve, Khorasan Razavi province. Cutaneous leishmaniasis is caused by various species of Leishmania, each having a different secondary host. Thus, identifying the parasites' specie is of paramount importance for containment strategy planning. The morphological differentiation of Leishmania species is not possible, rendering the molecular methods as the sole means to this purpose. Therefore, to identify the causative agent of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Kharve, Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA-PCR (RAPD-PCR) was used. The disease was first confirmed by direct smears. Samples were gathered from 22 patients with established cutaneous leishmaniasis. The samples were immediately cultured in NNN medium, followed by sub-culture in RPMI-1640. Afterwards, DNA was extracted and amplified using RAPD-PCR. Electrophoresis patterns from each isolate were compared with reference strains of Leishmania major (L. major) and Leishmania tropica (L. tropica). The results of this study indicated that the parasite causing cutaneous leishmaniasis in Kharve is L. tropica. It seems that L. tropica is the only causative agent of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Kharve, and RAPD-PCR is a suitable tool for Leishmania characterization in epidemiological studies.

[PMID: 2670376]
Leishmaniasis is a parasitic infection caused by many species of the protozoa Leishmania. It occurs in endemic foci scattered throughout Asia, Africa, the Americas, and the Mediterranean countries. The disease is complex and may simulate many skin and systemic diseases. With awareness and suspicion, however, leishmaniasis is relatively easy to diagnose. Undiagnosed, it causes considerable morbidity and mortality. Treatment is often difficult, and current therapies leave much to be desired.

[PMID: 24039881]
American Tegumentary Leishmaniasis is caused by parasites of the genus Leishmania, and causes significant health problems throughout the Americas. In Panama, Leishmania parasites are endemic, causing thousands of new cases every year, mostly of the cutaneous form. In the last years, the burden of the disease has increased, coincident with increasing disturbances in its natural sylvatic environments. The study of genetic variation in parasites is important for a better understanding of the biology, population genetics, and ultimately the evolution and epidemiology of these organisms. Very few attempts have been made to characterize genetic polymorphisms of parasites isolated from Panamanian patients of cutaneous leishmaniasis. Here we present data on the genetic variability of local isolates of Leishmania, as well as specimens from several other species, by means of Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms (AFLP), a technique seldom used to study genetic makeup of parasites. We demonstrate that this technique allows detection of very high levels of genetic variability in local isolates of Leishmania panamensis in a highly reproducible manner. The analysis of AFLP fingerprints generated by unique selective primer combinations in L. panamensis suggests a predominant clonal mode of reproduction. Using fluorescently labeled primers, many taxon-specific fragments were identified which may show potential as species diagnostic fragments. The AFLP permitted a high resolution genetic analysis of the Leishmania genus, clearly separating certain groups among L. panamensis specimens and highly related species such as L. panamensis and L. guyanensis. The phylogenetic networks reconstructed from our AFLP data are congruent with established taxonomy for the genus Leishmania, even when using single selective primer combinations. Results of this study demonstrate that AFLP polymorphisms can be informative for genetic characterization in Leishmania parasites, at both intra and inter-specific levels.

[PMID: 28903998]
The shape and form of protozoan parasites are inextricably linked to their pathogenicity. The evolutionary pressure associated with establishing and maintaining an infection and transmission to vector or host has shaped parasite morphology. However, there is not a 'one size fits all' morphological solution to these different pressures, and parasites exhibit a range of different morphologies, reflecting the diversity of their complex life cycles. In this review, we will focus on the shape and form of <i>Leishmania</i> spp., a group of very successful protozoan parasites that cause a range of diseases from self-healing cutaneous leishmaniasis to visceral leishmaniasis, which is fatal if left untreated.