[PMID: 19477402]
The clinical, morphological, and electrocardiographical relevance of delayed enhancement (DE) in cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was studied in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). A total of 56 patients underwent both gadolinium-enhanced CMR and 12-lead electrocardiogram. The CMR demonstrated DE at the left ventricular (LV) wall in 39 patients. The patients with DE included more cases with dilated phase of HCM, higher New York Heart Association (NYHA) classes and incidence of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VT), lower LV ejection fraction (LVEF) and mean LV wall thickness (WT), and a larger ratio of maximum to minimum LVWT. The QRS duration was prolonged and the QRS axis deviated toward left with increases in the DE volume (r = 0.58 and r = 0.41, P < .01). Abnormal Q waves were present in 5 patients and the location coincided with the DE segments in 4 patients, but the concordance was not significant. The amplitude of T waves correlated with the ratio of the apex to basal LVWT (r = 0.38, P < .01) and was more negative in cases with DE at the apex. In HCM, the DE was associated with higher NYHA classes and prevalence of VT, impaired global LV function and asymmetrical hypertrophy, and conduction disturbance, abnormal Q waves, and giant negative T waves.

[PMID: 19740409]
We sought to evaluate the relation between atrial fibrillation (AF) and the extent of myocardial scarring together with left ventricular (LV) and atrial parameters assessed by late gadolinium-enhancement (LGE) cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). AF is the most common arrhythmia in HCM. Myocardial scarring is also identified frequently in HCM. However, the impact of myocardial scarring assessed by LGE CMR on the presence of AF has not been evaluated yet. 87 HCM patients underwent LGE CMR, echocardiography and regular ECG recordings. LV function, volumes, myocardial thickness, left atrial (LA) volume and the extent of LGE, were assessed using CMR and correlated to AF. Additionally, the presence of diastolic dysfunction and mitral regurgitation were obtained by echocardiography and also correlated to AF. Episodes of AF were documented in 37 patients (42%). Indexed LV volumes and mass were comparable between HCM patients with and without AF. However, indexed LA volume was significantly higher in HCM patients with AF than in HCM patients without AF (68 +/- 24 ml.m-2 versus 46 +/- 18 ml.m-2, p = 0.0002, respectively). The mean extent of LGE was higher in HCM patients with AF than those without AF (12.4 +/- 14.5% versus 6.0 +/- 8.6%, p = 0.02). When adjusting for age, gender and LV mass, LGE and indexed LA volume significantly correlated to AF (r = 0.34, p = 0.02 and r = 0.42, p < 0.001 respectively). By echocardiographic examination, LV diastolic dysfunction was evident in 35 (40%) patients. Mitral regurgitation greater than II was observed in 12 patients (14%). Multivariate analysis demonstrated that LA volume and presence of diastolic dysfunction were the only independent determinant of AF in HCM patients (p = 0.006, p = 0.01 respectively). Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis indicated good predictive performance of LA volume and LGE (AUC = 0.74 and 0.64 respectively) with respect to AF. HCM patients with AF display significantly more LGE than HCM patients without AF. However, the extent of LGE is inferior to the LA size for predicting AF prevalence. LA dilation is the strongest determinant of AF in HCM patients, and is related to the extent of LGE in the LV, irrespective of LV mass.

[PMID: 23376948]
Risk assessment in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: contemporary guidelines hampered by insufficient evidence.

[PMID: 22128204]
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance has revolutionised the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, particularly through the use of late gadolinium enhancement imaging which provides the unique opportunity to assess myocardial fibrosis in vivo. More recently, the prognostic capability of cardiovascular magnetic resonance to predict outcomes has been assessed. Traditional risk markers do not at present adequately predict outcomes in either dilated cardiomyopathy or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which are the two most common causes of primary heart muscle disease. Many of these existing markers reflect underlying disease severity. Given the important role fibrosis is thought to play in the pathogenesis and sequelae of these cardiomyopathies, the presence and amount of fibrosis has been proposed as a potential novel risk factor for adverse events. This paper reviews the evidence for late gadolinium enhancement as a prognostic marker in dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and highlights the challenges ahead.

[PMID: 19784900]
Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) has been shown to be associated with ventricular arrhythmias, however, its prognostic role in predicting sudden cardiac death has not yet been established. To explore a potential relationship between LGE visualised by CMR and life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmia in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The LGE in CMR was assessed in 55 HCM patients. We compared the frequency and extent of LGE in HCM patients with sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or who survived ventricular fibrillation (VF) or sudden death [group VF (+)] versus HCM patients without these tachyarrhythmias [group VF (-)]. There were 14 patients in the VF (+) group and 41 patients in the VF (-) group, and they were followed for a mean period of 37 months. In group VF (+), adequate ICD intervention occurred in 9 patients (8 patients with VF and one patient with sustained VT), and VF arrest occurred in 5 patients (4 patients were resuscitated and one patient had a witnessed sudden death). In group VF (+) all patients had LGE whereas in group VF (-) 85% patients presented this abnormality (p = 0.13). Moreover, there were no statistical differences between groups in the following parameters: age, total left ventricular (LV) mass, maximal LV wall thickness, mass of hyperenhanced myocardium and percent of hyperenhanced myocardium. In HCM patients with life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmia LGE was both qualitatively and quantitatively comparable with patients without these tachyarrhythmias.

[PMID: 20688032]
We investigated the significance of fibrosis detected by late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance for the prediction of major clinical events in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The role of myocardial fibrosis in the prediction of sudden death and heart failure in HCM is unclear with a lack of prospective data. We assessed the presence and amount of myocardial fibrosis in HCM patients and prospectively followed them for the development of morbidity and mortality in patients over 3.1 +/- 1.7 years. Of 217 consecutive HCM patients, 136 (63%) showed fibrosis. Thirty-four of the 136 patients (25%) in the fibrosis group but only 6 of 81 (7.4%) patients without fibrosis reached the combined primary end point of cardiovascular death, unplanned cardiovascular admission, sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation, or appropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator discharge (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.4, p = 0.006). In the fibrosis group, overall risk increased with the extent of fibrosis (HR: 1.18/5% increase, p = 0.008). The risk of unplanned heart failure admissions, deterioration to New York Heart Association functional class III or IV, or heart failure-related death was greater in the fibrosis group (HR: 2.5, p = 0.021), and this risk increased as the extent of fibrosis increased (HR: 1.16/5% increase, p = 0.017). All relationships remained significant after multivariate analysis. The extent of fibrosis and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia were univariate predictors for arrhythmic end points (sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation, appropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator discharge, sudden cardiac death) (HR: 1.30, p = 0.014). Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia remained an independent predictor of arrhythmic end points after multivariate analysis, but the extent of fibrosis did not. In patients with HCM, myocardial fibrosis as measured by late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance is an independent predictor of adverse outcome. (The Prognostic Significance of Fibrosis Detection in Cardiomyopathy; NCT00930735).

[PMID: 18204915]
Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are predisposed to ventricular tachyarrhythmia (VT); likely due to myocardial fibrosis or disarray. Delayed hyperenhancement magnetic resonance imaging (DHE-MRI) accurately detects myocardial fibrosis (scar). We sought to determine the association between septal thickness, myocardial scar and VT. Sixty-eight patients (mean age 44 years, 69% males) with documented HCM underwent cine MRI (Siemens Sonata or Avanto 1.5 T scanner, Erlangen, Germany) in short axis, 2, 3 and 4-chamber views and maximal interventricular septal thickness was recorded at end-diastole. Corresponding DHE-MR images (8-10 mm thick) were obtained, approximately 20 min after injection of 0.2 mmol/kg of Gadolinium. Scar was determined semi-automatically (as % of total myocardium) using VPT software (Siemens) and defined as intensity >2 SD above viable myocardium in a 12 segment short-axis model at apex, mid LV and base. Presence of VT (documented on ambulatory ECG monitoring) and history of sudden death were recorded. One patient had a history of sudden death and 9 (13%) had VT on ambulatory ECG monitoring. On DHE-MRI, 39 (57%) patients had myocardial scar. Patients with VT had significantly higher scar %, compared to those without: 14% [6, 19] vs. 6% [0, 10], P = 0.01. On logistic regression, only the size of the scar was a significant predictor of VT (P = 0.03). HCM subjects with VT have a higher % of myocardial scarring noted on DHE-MRI, independent of septal thickness or beta-blocker use.

[PMID: 22135401]
In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), the arrhythmic potential associated with a variety of left ventricular myocardial signal intensities evident on contrast-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) is unresolved. In 145 HCM patients (43±15 years old), visually identified areas of LGE in left ventricle were analyzed quantitatively for intermediate (≥4 but <6 SD) and high (≥6 SD above the mean signal intensity of normal myocardium) LGE signal intensity (LGE-SI). Ambulatory Holter ECGs were obtained within 7.8±8.3 weeks of cardiovascular magnetic resonance. HCM patients with nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, ventricular couplets, and premature ventricular contractions showed greater amounts of intermediate LGE-SI (17±7 versus 10±10 g, 16±10 versus 10±11 g, and 13±8 versus 10±13 g, respectively; P=0.003 to <0.001) and greater amounts of high LGE-SI (15±6 versus 10±8 g, 14±9 versus 10±12 g, and 12±7 versus 10±8 g, respectively; P=0.02-0.003) than patients without these arrhythmias. In HCM patients with either nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, couplets, or premature ventricular contractions, the extent of intermediate LGE-SI exceeded that of high LGE-SI (17±7 versus 15±6 g, 16±10 versus 14±9 g, and 13±8 versus 12±7 g, respectively; P=0.01-0.04). In addition, the receiver operating characteristic area under the curve established intermediate LGE-SI as a better discriminator of patients with nonsustained ventricular tachycardia than was high LGE-SI, with 7 additional patients with this arrhythmia identified. In patients with HCM, intermediate LGE-SI is a better predictor of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (including nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, a risk factor for sudden death) than is high LGE-SI. Longitudinal studies in larger HCM cohorts are justified to define the independent prognostic impact of intermediate LGE-SI.

[PMID: 12224720]
Myocardial fibrosis can occur in patients who have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the absence of epicardial coronary disease. In such patients, myocardial fibrosis has been linked to a poorer prognosis than in those without fibrosis. Gadolinium-DTPA delayed-enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (de-MRI) accurately identifies regions of myocardial fibrosis. We used de-MRI to screen for myocardial fibrosis in 8 patients with nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that had been diagnosed by 2-dimensional echocardiography. After localization of the heart and acquisition of electrocardiographically gated cine images, gadolinium-DTPA (0.2 mmol/kg) was administered to the patient. Fifteen minutes later, de-MRI images were obtained using a T1-weighted, inversion-recovery fast, low-angle shot sequence. Images were gated to end-diastole and obtained during a single breath-hold. The inversion time was modified iteratively to obtain maximal nulling of the signal from the ventricular myocardium. Regions of myocardium with abnormally high signals (>300% of remote normal myocardium) were designated as fibrotic. Eight patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy underwent de-MRI. The mean age was 52 years, the mean left ventricular mass was 201 grams, and the mean ejection fraction was 0.68. In the 6 patients with recent clinical deterioration, de-MRI showed clearly delineated areas of myocardial fibrosis; no such areas were seen in the 2 asymptomatic patients. We conclude that patients with symptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy display regions of abnormal signal intensity on de-MRI that likely represent fibrosis. This technique may provide useful information in the evaluation of such patients and warrants further study.

[PMID: 19808288]
Contrast-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance with delayed enhancement (DE) can provide in vivo assessment of myocardial fibrosis. However, the clinical significance of DE in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) remains unresolved. Cine and cardiovascular magnetic resonance with DE were performed in 202 HCM patients (mean age, 42+/-17 years; 71% male), DE was compared with clinical and demographic variables, and patients were followed up for 681+/-249 days for adverse disease events. DE was identified in 111 (55%) HCM patients, occupying 9%+/-11% of left ventricular myocardial volume, including >25% DE in 10% of patients. The presence of DE was related to occurrence of heart failure symptoms (P=0.05) and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (P=0.001). DE was present in all patients with ejection fraction < or =50% but also in 53% (102/192) of patients with preserved ejection fraction (P<0.001); %DE was both inversely related to (r=-0.3; P<0.001) and an independent predictor of ejection fraction (r=-0.4; P<0.001). DE (7%+/-7% of left ventricle) was present in 54 patients who were asymptomatic (and with normal ejection fraction). Over the follow-up period, the annualized adverse cardiovascular event rate in patients with DE exceeded that in patients without DE but did not achieve statistical significance (5.5% versus 3.3%; P=0.5). In a large HCM cohort, DE was an independent predictor of systolic dysfunction but with only a modest relationship to heart failure symptoms. These data suggest an important role for myocardial fibrosis in the clinical course of HCM patients but are not sufficient at this time to consider DE as an independent risk factor for adverse prognosis.

[PMID: 22498326]
The objective of this study was to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of the predictive value of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) for future cardiovascular events and death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The utility of LGE for detecting myocardial fibrosis is well established. The prognostic value of LGE in HCM has been described in several studies, but controversy exists given the limited power of these studies to predict future events. We searched multiple databases including PubMed for studies of LGE in HCM that reported selected clinical outcomes (cardiovascular mortality, sudden cardiac death [SCD], aborted SCD, and heart failure death). We performed a systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis to determine pooled odds ratios for these clinical events. Four studies evaluated 1,063 patients over an average follow-up of 3.1 years. The pooled prevalence of LGE was 60%. The pooled odds ratios (OR) demonstrate that LGE by CMR correlated with cardiac death (pooled OR: 2.92, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.01 to 8.42; p = 0.047), heart failure death (pooled OR: 5.68, 95% CI: 1.04 to 31.07; p = 0.045), and all-cause mortality (pooled OR: 4.46, 95% CI: 1.53 to 13.01; p = 0.006), and showed a trend toward significance for predicting sudden death/aborted sudden death (pooled OR: 2.39, 95% CI: 0.87 to 6.58; p = 0.091). Late gadolinium enhancement by CMR has prognostic value in predicting adverse cardiovascular events among HCM patients. There are significant relationships between LGE and cardiovascular mortality, heart failure death, and all-cause mortality in HCM. Additionally, LGE and SCD/aborted SCD displayed a trend toward significance. The assessment of LGE by CMR has the potential to provide important information to improve risk stratification in HCM in clinical practice.

[PMID: 22348519]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetic disease of the heart. HCM is characterized by a wide range of clinical expression, ranging from asymptomatic mutation carriers to sudden cardiac death as the first manifestation of the disease. Over 1000 mutations have been identified, classically in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins. Noninvasive imaging is central to the diagnosis of HCM and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) is increasingly used to characterize morphologic, functional and tissue abnormalities associated with HCM. The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the clinical, pathological and imaging features relevant to understanding the diagnosis of HCM. The early and overt phenotypic expression of disease that may be identified by CMR is reviewed. Diastolic dysfunction may be an early marker of the disease, present in mutation carriers prior to the development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Late gadolinium enhancement by CMR is present in approximately 60% of HCM patients with LVH and may provide novel information regarding risk stratification in HCM. It is likely that integrating genetic advances with enhanced phenotypic characterization of HCM with novel CMR techniques will importantly improve our understanding of this complex disease.

[PMID: 21234292]
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI (CE-CMR) can detect potentially prognostic myocardial fibrosis in DCM. We investigated the role of CE-CMR in New Zealand patients with DCM, both Maori and non-Maori, including the characteristics and prognostic importance of fibrosis. One hundred and three patients (mean age 58 ± 13, 78 male) referred for CMR assessment of DCM were followed for 660 ± 346 days. Major adverse cardiac events (MACE) were defined as death, infarction, ventricular arrhythmias or rehospitalisation. CE-CMR used cines for functional analysis, and delayed enhancement to assess fibrosis. Myocardial fibrosis was present in 30% of patients, the majority of which was mid-myocardial (63%). Volumetric parameters were similar in patients with or without fibrosis. At 2 years patients with fibrosis had an increased rate of MACE (HR = 0.77, 95% CI 0.3-2.0). Patients with full thickness or subendocardial fibrosis had the highest MACE, even in the absence of CAD). More Maori had fibrosis on CE-CMR (40% vs. 28% for non-Maori), and the majority (75%) was mid-myocardial. Maori and non-Maori had similar outcomes (25% vs. 24% with events during follow-up). DCM patients frequently have myocardial fibrosis detected on CE-CMR, the majority of which is mid-myocardial. Fibrosis is associated with worse outcome in the medium term. The information obtained using CE-CMR in DCM may be of incremental clinical benefit.

[PMID: 15861263]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a genetic disease that affects the cardiac sarcomere, resulting in myocardial hypertrophy and disarray. Affected patients have a predisposition for malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmias and, consequently, sudden cardiac death. With the availability of therapeutic measures that prevent sudden death, the identification of high-risk patients is now of greater importance. Clinical risk factors for sudden death (ie, age, syncope, family history of sudden cardiac death, cardiac arrest survivor, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia and abnormal blood pressure response to exercise) have been identified. The clinical electrophysiological study is of limited use for stratifying these patients. More recently, increased attention has been given to the degree of echocardiographically documented left ventricular hypertrophy and prognostically significant genetic mutations. Once a high-risk patient is identified, prophylactic treatment is warranted. For this purpose, amiodarone has been supplanted by the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator treatment appears to reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death in both primary and secondary prevention settings. Thus, tools are now available to identify and treat high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 21498307]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is reported to show patchy midwall myocardial hyperenhancement on delayed-enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (DE-MRI). The intramural distribution of myocardial hyperenhancement and its correlation with clinical symptoms, ventricular arrhythmias, and cardiac function have not been described forsymptomatic apical HCM. To evaluate the features and significance of myocardial hyperenhancement on DE-MRI insymptomatic apical HCM. Thirteen patients with symptomatic apical HCM and their 65 apical segments were investigated. Myocardial hyperenhancement and regional and global functional parameters were determined with MRI. We investigated the intramural distribution and frequencies of this myocardial hyperenhancement and compared them with the patients' clinical symptoms, the presence of ventricular arrhythmias, and cine MRI. Eight (61.5%) patients with symptomatic apical HCM displayed apical myocardial hyperenhancement, and 22 (33.8%) of the 65 apical segments examined showed myocardial hyperenhancement. Of the myocardial hyperenhancement observed, 81.8% showed a subendocardial pattern.The hyperenhanced apical myocardium had a lower percentage of systolic myocardial thickening, and was associated with serious symptoms (e.g. syncope) and ventricular arrhythmias. Patients with symptomatic apical HCMshowed myocardial hyperenhancement involving the subendocardial layer, which might be related to regional systolic dysfunction, serious clinical symptoms, and ventricular arrhythmias.

[PMID: 20339815]
The stratification of risk for sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) continues to be a true challenge due to the great heterogeneity of this disease's presentation, as most individuals remain asymptomatic during their entire lives and others present sudden death as first symptom. Recent studies have suggested that myocardial fibrosis may represent an important substrate for the malignant ventricular arrhythmias, that are responsible for the cases of sudden death related to this disease. To assess the prevalence and quantification of myocardial fibrosis (MF) in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients with implantablecardioverter - defibrillator (ICD) indicated due to their high risk or recovered from cardiac sudden death. Twenty-eight HCM patients with ICD were submitted to multidetector computed tomography to assess myocardial fibrosis by delayed enhancement technique. Myocardial fibrosis was present in 96% of these HCM patients with (20.38 +/- 15.55 g) comprising 15.96 +/- 10.20% of the total myocardial mass. MF was observed in a significantly higher prevalence as compared to other classical risk factors for sudden death. It is possible to conclude that there is a high prevalence of myocardial fibrosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with high-risk or recovered from cardiac sudden death, like those with clinical indication to implantable cardioverter -defibrillator. The higher prevalence of myocardial fibrosis in comparison to classical risk factors of worse prognosis raise the hypothesis that the myocardial fibrosis may be an important substrate in the genesis of lifethreatening arrhythmias in these high risk HCM population.

[PMID: 19474054]
To assess the relationship between cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) parameters and both spontaneous ventricular tachycardia (VT) and risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients. One hundred and eight consecutive HCM patients (mean age 42 +/- 15 years, 76% males) underwent CMR evaluation and risk assessment. Delayed contrast enhancement (DCE) was quantified with a specifically designed score. Endpoints were either the presence of clinical VT/ventricular fibrillation (VF) or of acknowledged risk factors for SCD. Compared to patients without arrhythmia, those with VT/VF (n = 33) had a higher DCE score [median 8 (2-13) vs. 11 (6-20); P = 0.01]; DCE score was also the only independent predictor of VT/VF in the multivariable model. DCE score [median 6 (1-10.5) vs. 12 (6-18); P = 0.001], mean and maximal left ventricular (LV) wall thickness (MaxLVWT), as well as LV mass index were significantly greater among patients at risk for SCD (n = 51) compared with the remaining 57 patients at low risk. DCE score and MaxLVWT were independent predictors of SCD risk. In HCM patients several CMR parameters are associated with risk for SCD. A semi-quantitative index of DCE is a significant multivariable predictor of both clinical VT/VF and of risk for SCD and may contribute to risk assessment in borderline or controversial cases.

[PMID: 22687593]
The use of cardiovascular magnetic resonance in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy over the last decade has helped elucidate the diagnosis, prognosis, pathophysiology, and management of this disease. Studies have shown that the use of magnetic resonance imaging in a patient with a permanent pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator is safe.

[PMID: 20079992]
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) often shows delayed contrast enhancement (DE) representing regions of focal myocardial fibrosis. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a commonly reported complication of HCM. We determined the relationship between the presence of left ventricular myocardial fibrosis (LVMF) detected by DE-CMR and the occurrence AF in a series of patients with HCM. 67 patients with HCM (47 males; mean age 50.1+/-18.5 years) were studied by CMR measuring mass of LVMF, left ventricular mass, volume and function, and left atrial (LA) area. AF was present in 17 (25%) patients. LVMF was observed in 57% of patients. AF was significantly more frequent in patients who also showed LVMF, compared with the group without LVMF (42.1% vs. 3.4%, respectively; p<0.0001). LA size was larger in patients showing DE (LA area: 37.4+/-11.1 vs. 25.9+/-6.8 cm(2); respectively, p=0.0001). AF in HCM is related with myocardial fibrosis detected by DE-CMR and dilatation of the LA. This fact adds to the proven adverse prognostic value of myocardial fibrosis in HCM, thus, reinforcing the usefulness of this technique in the assessment of these patients.

[PMID: 20667520]
We sought to establish the prognostic value of a comprehensive cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) examination in risk stratification of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients. With annual mortality rates ranging between 1% and 5%, depending on patient selection, a small but significant number of HCM patients are at risk for an adverse event. Therefore, the identification of and prophylactic therapy (i.e., defibrillator placement) in patients with HCM who are at risk of dying are imperative. Two-hundred forty-three consecutive patients with HCM were prospectively enrolled. All patients underwent initial CMR, and 220 were available for clinical follow-up. The mean follow-up time was 1,090 days after CMR. End points were all-cause and cardiac mortality. During follow-up 20 of the 220 patients died, and 2 patients survived sudden cardiac death due to adequate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator discharge. Most events (n = 16) occurred for cardiac reasons; the remaining 6 events were related to cancer and accidents. Our data indicate that the presence of scar visualized by CMR yields an odds ratio of 5.47 for all-cause mortality and of 8.01 for cardiac mortality. This might be superior to classic clinical risk factors, because in our dataset the presence of 2 risk factors yields an odds ratio of 3.86 for all-cause and of 2.20 for cardiac mortality, respectively. Multivariable analysis also revealed the presence of late gadolinium enhancement as a good independent predictor of death in HCM patients. Among our population of largely low or asymptomatic HCM patients, the presence of scar indicated by CMR is a good independent predictor of all-cause and cardiac mortality.

[PMID: 20102955]
The aim of the present study was to evaluate, in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HC), the association between late gadolinium enhancement and clinical end points, such as nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, arrhythmic risk factors, New York Heart Association class, symptoms, and left ventricular functional parameters. A total of 20 normal subjects (mean age 38 years, 16 men) and 100 patients with HC (mean age 46 years, 70 men) were enrolled in the present study. In the late gadolinium enhancement images, the extent of unenhanced, mildly enhanced, and higher enhanced myocardium was measured. Higher enhancement was present in 80% of the HC population and was significantly greater in patients with a New York Heart Association class >1. Mild enhancement was present in all the patients with HC. Receiver operating characteristic analysis revealed that a cutoff of >4.9% of mild enhancement had 100% sensitivity and 86% specificity to predict the occurrence of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and a cutoff of >2.4% of hyperenhancement had 77% sensitivity and 96% specificity. In conclusion, late gadolinium enhancement was associated with nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, arrhythmic risk factors, and worse New York Heart Association class.

[PMID: 18208827]
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) is an evolving technology with growing indications within the clinical cardiology setting. This review article summarises the current clinical applications of CMR. The focus is on the use of CMR in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease with summaries of validation literature in CMR viability, myocardial perfusion, and dobutamine CMR. Practical uses of CMR in non-coronary diseases are also discussed.

[PMID: 18562248]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is associated with myocardial scarring and ventricular tachycardia (VT). Contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CE-CMR) can quantify myocardial scar, and scar imaging has been documented in patients with HCM. We investigated the assessment of myocardial scar in HCM patients using CE-CMR, and its correlation with proven VT. Twenty-five patients (mean age 54 +/- 8) with HCM who underwent CE-CMR were identified, and clinical data obtained from chart review. Parameters of LV function were calculated from cine imaging, and myocardial scar was assessed using delayed enhancement imaging following gadolinium administration. Myocardial scar was detected in 16 (64%) patients with a mean mass 9 +/- 15 g. Scar was patchy, mid-myocardial and located in the basal anteroseptum, and RV insertion sites. Scar was seen in septal, apical and concentric variants of HCM. Scar mass correlated with both LV Mass (r2 = 0.74) and maximal LV wall thickness (r2 = 0.42). VT occurred in 32% of patients, and was associated with both increased scar mass and wall thickness compared to non-VT patients (21 +/- 22 g vs. 4 +/- 6 g, and 2.4 +/- 0.5 cm vs. 1.8 +/- 0.5 cm, p < 0.05). LV size and function were similar in patients with and without VT. A scar mass of >7 g predicted the presence of VT with a sensitivity of 75% and specificity 82%. Myocardial scar imaged by CE-CMR is common in patients with HCM, and is predictive of VT. Scar is seen in all HCM variants, and is associated with maximal wall thickness. There may be a role for CE-CMR in improved risk stratification for individual patients with HCM.

[PMID: 22935464]
This study sought to assess the rate of progression of fibrosis by 2 consecutive cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) examinations and its relation with clinical variables. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) myocardial fibrosis, detected by late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), is associated to a progressive ventricular dysfunction and worse prognosis. A total of 55 HCM patients (37 males; mean age 43 ± 18 years) underwent 2 CMR examinations (CMR-1 and CMR-2) separated by an interval of 719 ± 410 days. Extent of LGE was measured, and the rate of progression of LGE (LGE-rate) was calculated as the ratio between the increment of LGE (in grams) and the time (months) between the CMR examinations. At CMR-1, LGE was detected in 45 subjects, with an extent of 13.3 ± 15.2 g. At CMR-2, 53 (96.4%) patients had LGE, with an extent of 24.6 ± 27.5 g. In 44 patients, LGE extent increased significantly (≥1 g). Patients with apical HCM had higher increments of LGE (p = 0.004) and LGE-rate (p < 0.001) than those with other patterns of hypertrophy. The extent of LGE at CMR-1 and the apical pattern of hypertrophy were independent predictors of the increment of LGE. Patients with worsened New York Heart Association functional class presented higher increase of LGE (p = 0.031) and LGE-rate (p < 0.05) than those with preserved functional status. Myocardial fibrosis in HCM is a progressive and fast phenomenon. LGE increment, related to a worse clinical status, is more extensive in apical hypertrophy than in other patterns.