[PMID: 21982627]
Type 2 Gaucher disease is a rare and progressive subtype of this lysosomal storage disorder, marked by rapid, early-onset neurodegeneration. Distinguishing type 2 from types 1 and 3 Gaucher disease has remained challenging, due to the lack of a clear correlation between phenotype and enzymatic activity or genotype. β-glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, also has an essential role in maintaining epidermal permeability function, by regulating the ratio of ceramides to glucosylceramides in the stratum corneum of the skin. To further assess the diagnostic utility of epidermal evaluations in distinguishing patients with type 2 Gaucher disease in an expanded cohort. Epidermal samples were evaluated from twenty children with type 2, three patients with type 3 Gaucher disease and two adults with type 1 Gaucher disease with different clinical manifestations and genotypes. Electron microscopy on ruthenium tetroxide post-fixed tissue was performed. Compared to controls and subjects with type 1 and type 3 Gaucher disease, only patients with type 2 Gaucher disease displayed characteristic electron dense, non-lamellar clefts and immature-lamellar membranes. The appearance of characteristic alterations in epidermal ultrastructure provides an early and specific diagnostic tool to help in distinguishing type 2 from the other types of Gaucher disease.

[PMID: 20946052]
Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GBA, E.C.3.2.1.45). Three clinical forms of Gaucher disease have been described: type 1, nonneuronopathic; type 2, acute neuronopathic; and type 3, subacute neuronopathic (OMIM 230800, 230900, 231000). Over the past decade, recognition of a distinct, perinatal lethal form of Gaucher disease (PLGD) has led researchers and clinicians to evaluate Gaucher disease in the differential diagnosis of congenital ichthyosis and nonimmune hydrops fetalis. To date, more than 30 cases of PLGD have been genotyped and reported. It has been observed that homozygosity for recombinant GBA alleles, which are fundamentally null alleles, leads to early lethality, usually in utero or during the 1st few days of life, whereas genotypes involving a recombinant allele and a missense mutation may be less detrimental. Here, we report a case of Gaucher disease with prenatal onset and death within hours of birth, likely due to compound heterozygosity for the GBA Rec Nci I null allele and a R131C missense mutation. In view of the patient's severe clinical course, and based on reviews of other PLGD cases, we postulate that a missense mutation that abruptly disrupts the structure/function of GBA, in combination with a null allele, may result in early lethality in patients with PLGD. We also speculate that R131C is an extremely severe mutation that has occurred more than once in different populations and, in either the homozygous form or heterozygous with another severe mutation, will result in a poor prognosis.

[PMID: 17644022]
Although Gaucher disease is a rare disorder, recent developments in novel means for therapeutic intervention have invigorated both academic research and pharmaceutical industry discovery programmes. The common mutations found in the lysosomal enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, beta-glucocerebrosidase, earmark these proteins for destruction by the endoplasmic reticulum-localised protein folding machinery, resulting in enzyme insufficiency, lysosomal glycolipid storage and subsequent pathology. However, many of these mutants can be rescued from global misfolding to preserve glycolipid substrate binding and eventual catalysis in the lysosome, by the addition of subinhibitory concentrations of pharmacologically active small molecules. This novel, chaperon-mediated approach has benefited from insights into the molecular understanding of beta-glucocerebrosidase structure, drug design and development in cellular models for disease.

[PMID: 18627336]
Gaucher's disease is caused by deficient lysosomal glucocerebrosidase activity. Intravenous enzyme replacement therapy with imiglucerase (Cerezyme, Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, MA), a recombinant human glucocerebrosidase, ameliorates systemic manifestations such as hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia and skeletal abnormalities in patients with type 1 (non-neuronopathic) and type 3 (chronic neuronopathic) Gaucher's disease. The aim of this study was to identify and comment on the current issues related to imiglucerase for Gaucher's disease based on a review of published English language literature and personal clinical experience. The following topics were covered with respect to imiglucerase: development, pharmacokinetics, preparation and administration, efficacy, pediatrics, pregnancy, type 3 Gaucher's disease, dosing, treatment interruptions, safety and alternative pharmacological therapies. Imiglucerase is safe and well tolerated. In addition, it corrects the hepatic, splenic, hematologic and bone abnormalities observed with types 1 and 3 Gaucher's disease effectively and enhances health-related quality of life.

[PMID: 20945983]
Although Parkinson's disease was long considered a nongenetic disorder, it is now clear that there are multiple predisposing genes, and that the disorder can exhibit either Mendelian or non-Mendelian modes of inheritance. The identification of several of these genes has provided important insights into the pathogenesis of this common complex disorder. This article presents an overview of the genes associated with autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease, including Parkin (PARK2), PINK1 (PARK6), DJ1 (PARK7) and ATP13A2 (PARK9). Recently, it was recognized that mutations in the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, are associated with an increased incidence of parkinsonism. While Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder, patients with Parkinson's disease can be Gaucher heterozygotes or homozygotes. Elucidating the basis for this association may shed light on new disease mechanisms that contribute to the development of parkinsonism.

[PMID: 22843412]
Mutations in GBA, the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, are common risk factors for Parkinson disease, as patients with Parkinson disease are over five times more likely to carry GBA mutations than healthy controls. Patients with GBA mutations generally have an earlier onset of Parkinson disease and more cognitive impairment than those without GBA mutations. We investigated whether GBA mutations alter the neurobiology of Parkinson disease, studying brain dopamine synthesis and resting regional cerebral blood flow in 107 subjects (38 women, 69 men). We measured dopamine synthesis with (18)F-fluorodopa positron emission tomography, and resting regional cerebral blood flow with H(2)(15)O positron emission tomography in the wakeful, resting state in four study groups: (i) patients with Parkinson disease and Gaucher disease (n = 7, average age = 56.6 ± 9.2 years); (ii) patients with Parkinson disease without GBA mutations (n = 11, 62.1 ± 7.1 years); (iii) patients with Gaucher disease without parkinsonism, but with a family history of Parkinson disease (n = 14, 52.6 ± 12.4 years); and (iv) healthy GBA-mutation carriers with a family history of Parkinson disease (n = 7, 50.1 ± 18 years). We compared each study group with a matched control group. Data were analysed with region of interest and voxel-based methods. Disease duration and Parkinson disease functional and staging scores were similar in the two groups with parkinsonism, as was striatal dopamine synthesis: both had greatest loss in the caudal striatum (putamen Ki loss: 44 and 42%, respectively), with less reduction in the caudate (20 and 18% loss). However, the group with both Parkinson and Gaucher diseases showed decreased resting regional cerebral blood flow in the lateral parieto-occipital association cortex and precuneus bilaterally. Furthermore, two subjects with Gaucher disease without parkinsonian manifestations showed diminished striatal dopamine. In conclusion, the pattern of dopamine loss in patients with both Parkinson and Gaucher disease was similar to sporadic Parkinson disease, indicating comparable damage in midbrain neurons. However, H(2)(15)O positron emission tomography studies indicated that these subjects have decreased resting activity in a pattern characteristic of diffuse Lewy body disease. These findings provide insight into the pathophysiology of GBA-associated parkinsonism.

[PMID: 25429104]
Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GCase), the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, are a common genetic risk factor for the development of Parkinson disease and related disorders, implicating the role of this lysosomal hydrolase in the disease etiology. A specific physical interaction exists between the Parkinson disease-related protein α-synuclein (α-syn) and GCase both in solution and on the lipid membrane, resulting in efficient enzyme inhibition. Here, neutron reflectometry was employed as a first direct structural characterization of GCase and α-syn·GCase complex on a sparsely-tethered lipid bilayer, revealing the orientation of the membrane-bound GCase. GCase binds to and partially inserts into the bilayer with its active site most likely lying just above the membrane-water interface. The interaction was further characterized by intrinsic Trp fluorescence, circular dichroism, and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy. Both Trp fluorescence and neutron reflectometry results suggest a rearrangement of loops surrounding the catalytic site, where they extend into the hydrocarbon chain region of the outer leaflet. Taking advantage of contrasting neutron scattering length densities, the use of deuterated α-syn versus protiated GCase showed a large change in the membrane-bound structure of α-syn in the complex. We propose a model of α-syn·GCase on the membrane, providing structural insights into inhibition of GCase by α-syn. The interaction displaces GCase away from the membrane, possibly impeding substrate access and perturbing the active site. GCase greatly alters membrane-bound α-syn, moving helical residues away from the bilayer, which could impact the degradation of α-syn in the lysosome where these two proteins interact.

[PMID: 8294487]
Structure/function relationships of acid beta-glucosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, were evaluated by characterizing the proteins expressed from cDNAs encoding normal and mutant enzymes. Twenty-two Gaucher disease mutations or created mutations were expressed in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells and analyzed for catalytic properties, stability, inhibitor binding, and modifier interactions. Many Gaucher disease mutations encoded highly disruptive amino acid substitutions (e.g. P289L and D409V) and produced severely compromised proteins with very reduced activity (kcat < 1% of normal) and/or stability. Six mutant enzymes had sufficient catalytic activity (kcat approximately 5-30% of normal) for extensive studies. The highly conservative substitutions, i.e. F216Y or S364T and V394L, led to severe, but selective, abnormalities of enzyme stability or large decreases in catalytic activity, respectively. The T323I, N370S, and V394L enzymes interacted abnormally with active site-directed inhibitors and localized these residues to the glycon binding region. Selected mutant enzymes were poorly activated by phosphatidylserine (V394L, L444P, and R463C) or by saposin C (L444P and T323I), indicating that the enzyme sites for interaction with these activators were within the carboxyl one-third of the enzyme. Substitutions of Ser, Glu, and/or Gly at residues Asp-443 and/or Asp-445 demonstrated important steric roles for these residues in the active site, but neither is the catalytic nucleophile. Together with previous studies, the present analyses provide an insight into the pathogenesis of Gaucher disease and the functional organization of acid beta-glucosidase.

[PMID: 15024629]
The gene for glucocerebrosidase ( GBA), the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, is located in a gene-rich region on 1q21. Metaxin 1( MTX1) is a convergently transcribed gene contiguous to the 3' end of the GBA pseudogene. A single nucleotide alteration in MTX1, 628T-->C, resulting in the amino acid change F202L, was identified in patients with Gaucher disease in association with the common N370S mutation in GBA. The polymorphism was also present on 4.6% of 152 control alleles, but could have functional consequences that have a modifying role in Gaucher disease.

[PMID: 20074983]
Gaucher disease (GD) is a lysosomal storage disorder, caused by deficient activity of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase. GD is classically divided into three major phenotypes. The most prevailing form is type 1, which presents with variable hepatosplenomegaly, cytopenia, and/or bone disease. In adult patients with mild manifestations, progress of disease might be slow or even absent. As a consequence, treatment with intravenous enzyme replacement or substrate reduction is not always necessary. In the Netherlands, the follow-up of GD patients is centralized, which allows detailed investigation of untreated patients. A retrospective study was conducted in 18 type 1 GD patients, (2 teenagers: 15 and 16 years of age at first visit) who were not treated for at least one year. The chitotriosidase activity, platelet count, hemoglobin level, lumbar bone marrow fat content measured with quantitative chemical shift imaging (QCSI), liver ratio (ml/kg body weight), and spleen volume were recorded. Criteria were developed to score regression, stability or progression of disease. During a mean follow up of 4.5 years (range 1.1-12.2) seven patients (39%) showed spontaneous regression of GD. Eight patients (44%) were stable. Two patients had progressive disease, solely based upon a sustained increase in chitotriosidase activity. A pediatric patient had an increase in splenomegaly but an improvement in bone marrow fat fraction, probably due to aging. Nine patients fulfilled the local criteria to start treatment at first visit, of whom six started treatment within 1.1 to 6.8 years. The other three refused therapy, but nevertheless showed stability or even regression of the disease during a follow up of 4.6, 9.5 and 11.4 years respectively. None of the parameters was predictive of progression or regression of disease. In conclusion, GD in adults can, in some cases, regress spontaneously. No parameters for accurately predicting future disease course exist.

[PMID: 17433057]
Gaucher disease (GD) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal disorder caused by a deficiency of glucocerebrosidase. The neurologic manifestations of GD patients have to date been refractory to any treatment approach. We present a report of a neuronopathic GD patient whose myoclonic epilepsy improved after combination therapy with imiglucerase and miglustat. In an adult type 3 GD patient who, despite good visceral and analytic response to ERT, developed progressive neurologic deterioration with marked myoclonic epilepsy and dystonia, we added miglustat to the enzyme-replacement therapy. After 2 years of combined miglustat (200 mg, 3 t.i.d.) and imiglucerase (60 IU/kg every 2 weeks), generalized tonic-clonic seizures decreased, speech improved, and the general neurologic clinical picture improved markedly. The EEG showed a reduction in focal and generalized paroxysmal discharges. No significant adverse effects were observed. Combined imiglucerase and miglustat therapy may be beneficial for some neuronopathic forms of GD.

[PMID: 15453048]
Gaucher's disease is an uncommon inborn recessive autosomal disease, due to a deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme beta glucocerebrosidase. This disease is usually diagnosed in the first or second decade of life with the arising of bone pains, splenomegaly and hemorragic manifestations due to thrombocytopenia. When the enlarged spleen is not evident, or after splenectomy, patients may be mis-identified as having Gaucher's disease. We present here two cases of elderly patients aged 70 and 46 years respectively, in whom the disease was a surprising finding of bone marrow examination, during check up for pancytopenia.

[PMID: 21653695]
The presynaptic protein α-synuclein (α-syn), particularly in its amyloid form, is widely recognized for its involvement in Parkinson disease (PD). Recent genetic studies reveal that mutations in the gene GBA are the most widespread genetic risk factor for parkinsonism identified to date. GBA encodes for glucocerebrosidase (GCase), the enzyme deficient in the lysosomal storage disorder, Gaucher disease (GD). In this work, we investigated the possibility of a physical linkage between α-syn and GCase, examining both wild type and the GD-related N370S mutant enzyme. Using fluorescence and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we determined that α-syn and GCase interact selectively under lysosomal solution conditions (pH 5.5) and mapped the interaction site to the α-syn C-terminal residues, 118-137. This α-syn-GCase complex does not form at pH 7.4 and is stabilized by electrostatics, with dissociation constants ranging from 1.2 to 22 μm in the presence of 25 to 100 mm NaCl. Intriguingly, the N370S mutant form of GCase has a reduced affinity for α-syn, as does the inhibitor conduritol-β-epoxide-bound enzyme. Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence studies verified this interaction in human tissue and neuronal cell culture, respectively. Although our data do not preclude protein-protein interactions in other cellular milieux, we suggest that the α-syn-GCase association is favored in the lysosome, and that this noncovalent interaction provides the groundwork to explore molecular mechanisms linking PD with mutant GBA alleles.

[PMID: 8437594]
Liver transplantation for type IV glycogen storage disease (branching-enzyme deficiency) results in the resorption of extrahepatic deposits of amylopectin, but the mechanism of resorption is not known. We studied two patients with type IV glycogen storage disease 37 and 91 months after liver transplantation and a third patient with lysosomal glucocerebrosidase deficiency (type 1 Gaucher's disease), in whom tissue glucocerebroside deposition had decreased 26 months after liver replacement, to determine whether the migration of cells from the allograft (microchimerism) could explain the improved metabolism of enzyme-deficient tissues in the recipient. Samples of blood and biopsy specimens of the skin, lymph nodes, heart, bone marrow, or intestine were examined immunocytochemically with the use of donor-specific monoclonal anti-HLA antibodies and the polymerase chain reaction, with preliminary amplification specific to donor alleles of the gene for the beta chain of HLA-DR molecules, followed by hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotide probes. Histopathological examination revealed that the cardiac deposits of amylopectin in the patients with glycogen storage disease and the lymph-node deposits of glucocerebroside in the patient with Gaucher's disease were dramatically reduced after transplantation. Immunocytochemical analysis showed cells containing the HLA phenotypes of the donor in the heart and skin of the patients with glycogen storage disease and in the lymph nodes, but not the skin, of the patient with Gaucher's disease. Polymerase-chain-reaction analysis demonstrated donor HLA-DR DNA in the heart of both patients with glycogen storage disease, in the skin of one of them, and in the skin, intestine, blood, and bone marrow of the patient with Gaucher's disease. Systemic microchimerism occurs after liver allotransplantation and can ameliorate pancellular enzyme deficiencies.

[PMID: 20947659]
Pathogenic variants in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) encoding the enzyme deficient in Gaucher's disease (GD) are associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). To investigate the sequence variants, their association with PD and the related phenotypes in a large cohort of European, mostly French, patients and controls, we sequenced all exons of GBA in 786 PD patients from 525 unrelated multiplex families, 605 patients with apparently sporadic PD and 391 ethnically matched controls. GBA mutations were significantly more frequent (odds ratio=6.98, 95% confidence interval 2.54-19.21; P=0.00002) in the PD patients (76/1130=6.7%) than in controls (4/391=1.0%) and in patients with family histories of PD (8.4%) than in isolated cases (5.3%). Twenty-eight different mutations were identified in patient and control groups, including seven novel variants. N370S and L444P accounted for 70% of all mutant alleles in the patient group. PD patients with GBA mutations more frequently had bradykinesia as the presenting symptom and levodopa-induced dyskinesias. The phenotype was similar in patients with one, two or complex GBA mutations, although the two patients with c.1263del+RecTL and N370S/RecΔ55 mutations had signs of GD. Segregation analyses in 21 multiplex families showed that 17% of the affected relatives did not carry GBA mutations found in the given family, indicating heterogeneity of the aetiology, but 46% of the unaffected relatives were GBA mutation carriers. These genotype and clinical analyses on the largest homogeneous sample of European patients studied to date confirmed that GBA mutations are the most common genetic risk factor for PD, particularly in familial forms.

[PMID: 16781064]
Alteration G2019S in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) has been identified in several populations of patients with parkinsonism, including Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with Parkinson disease. Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA), the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease, are also identified at an increased frequency among Parkinson probands, including those of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. A Taqman Assay-by-Design SNP genotyping strategy was utilized to establish whether G2019S was found in association with GBA mutations. Among 37 subjects with parkinsonism who were heterozygous for a GBA mutation, none carried G2019S. Furthermore, G2019S was not found in 18 patients with Gaucher disease who developed parkinsonian manifestations and 11 other Gaucher probands with parkinsonism in a first degree relative. Among 45 patients with Gaucher disease without a history of parkinsonism, one G2019S carrier was found. These findings suggest that GBA and LRRK2 mutations are discrete risk factors for parkinsonism in both Ashkenazi Jewish and non-Jewish subjects.

[PMID: 12412377]
Gaucher disease is an inborn recessive autosomal disease due to a partial deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme beta glucocerebrosidase. The deficient activity leads to accumulation of the lipid glucocerebroside in the liver, the spleen and bone marrow with concomitant anemia and thrombocytopenia. Patients with Gaucher disease have been classified in three types: type I is the more common, neurological manifestations occur in types II and III. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with modified placental human glucocerebrosidase (ceredase) or recombinant glucocerebrosidase (cerezyme) is effective in most type I Gaucher disease and has become the current standard care administered to thousand of patients worldwide. ERT has obviated the need for bone marrow transplantation and virtually eliminated the need for splenectomy. We report here the French study including adults and children. ERT of 30 to 60 U/K every two weeks as starting dose was administrated to 108 patients with severe type I Gaucher disease. ERT fully reverse many of the manifestations of the disease. ERT regimen alleviated fatigue, and hematological and visceral signs and symptoms in nearly all severely-ill patients. Skeletal responses to treatment develop much more slowly than hematological or visceral responses. Studies in pediatrics show that the disease is more severe in children. These children should be treated early in the course of their disease to avoid irreparable damage. Hematological manifestation in type II cannot be reversed with enzyme replacement. In type III treatment can rarely reverse neurological deficit. Gaucher disease is also an excellent candidate for gene therapy.

[PMID: 18228687]
Gaucher's disease is due to glucocerebrosidase deficiency which is responsible for the accumulation of non degraded glucosylceramide within the lysosomes of macrophages: these "Gaucher cells", overloaded and alternatively activated, release in patient's plasma numerous compounds (cytokines, chemokines, hydrolases...) some of which contribute to the various tissue damages. Some of these compounds are surrogate biomarkers which contribute to the evaluation of disease severity, progression and stabilisation or regression during treatment. To date, the most interesting biomarkers are chitotriosidase and the chemokine CCL18/PARC, especially in chitotriosidase deficient patients. These biomarkers together with the clinical evaluation help to therapeutic choice (treatment by enzyme replacement therapy or substrate reduction therapy) and initiation decision, response follow-up and dose adjustments. Biomarkers should be assessed every 12 months together with clinical evaluation in patients not receiving specific treatments. An assessment every 3 months is recommended during the first year of treatment. Then when clinical goals have been achieved, the frequency can be reduced to every 12 months if the therapeutic scheme is not modified.

[PMID: 1379912]
Alglucerase is a mannose-terminated form of human placental glucocerebrosidase, developed to treat patients with Gaucher's disease. Functional glucocerebrosidase is deficient in Gaucher's disease, an autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder that affects people of all ethnic backgrounds, but has a higher incidence among East European Jews (Ashkenazim). Gaucher's disease manifests with hepatosplenomegaly, bleeding disorders and bone disease, with the more rare subtypes (types 2 and 3) featuring neurological dysfunction. Prior to the development of enzyme replacement therapy, treatment for Gaucher's disease was mainly symptomatic relief. Primary treatment with glucocerebrosidase focuses on removal of the lipid metabolite that causes the pathology. Because of the rarity of Gaucher's disease clinical trials are small, and much of the data investigating alglucerase therapy have been obtained from studies of patients with type 1 disease, the prevalent subtype. Nonetheless, after intravenous administration of alglucerase, improvements are evident within 6 months of therapy. Patients have increased haemoglobin levels and platelet counts, and decreased incidences of epistaxis and bruising. Spleen and liver size are reduced, and skeletal parameters improve. Children gain height and most patients receiving alglucerase therapy are able to resume work and daily activities. Alglucerase is well tolerated, with few mild adverse reactions reported. Although the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic information for alglucerase is limited, its unequivocal efficacy justifies enzyme replacement therapy with this compound as first-line treatment for patients with Gaucher's disease, for whom treatment options are limited.

[PMID: 10155294]
Alglucerase is a modified form of human placental glucocerebrosidase used as enzyme replacement therapy for patients with Gaucher's disease, in whom functional glucocerebrosidase is deficient. Alglucerase has provided a breakthrough in treatment for patients with this relatively rare disease. With alglucerase infusions typical disease manifestations are ameliorated or normalised: hepatosplenomegaly is reduced, haematological parameters improve, and patients experience an increased quality of life usually within 4 to 6 months of treatment. Parameters of bone disease also respond, but generally over a longer period of treatment. Alglucerase is well tolerated by children and adults, with few adverse effects reported. Seroconversion occurs in approximately 15% of patients on high-dose therapy, but does not appear to affect the efficacy of treatment. Several dosage regimens have been used to deliver alglucerase, and the comparative benefits of these remain controversial. High-dose regimens of 60 IU/kg bodyweight administered every 2 weeks are clearly effective; however, smaller dosages given more frequently are also effective and incur a greatly reduced acquisition cost. Patient responses are variable, and the dosage regimen should be tailored to individual needs. Dosage regimens may be considerably reduced for the maintenance phase of treatment, but clinical experience is as yet insufficient to establish the minimum dosages required in the long term. Acquisition cost of alglucerase is $US3.70 per unit (1994 US dollars); thus, a dosage regimen of 60 IU/kg bodyweight administered every 2 weeks for a patient weighing 70kg costs $US404,040 per year. The minimal costs per quality-adjusted life year saved (QALY) have been estimated for 3 dosage regimens over a 10-year period. Cost per QALY was $US147,000 for 60 IU/kg bodyweight administered every 2 weeks, $US75,000 for 30 IU/kg every 2 weeks, and $US49,000 for 2.3 IU/kg administered 3 times per week. These costs were calculated assuming immediate death with no treatment, which suggests that the actual costs per QALY for most patients with type 1 or 3 disease are likely to be much higher. Drug administration costs may become a significant part of the cost during maintenance therapy; in addition, possible cost savings due to increased patient productivity and reduced palliative treatments remain unresolved. Although some patients may obtain increased benefit from high-dosage regimens, the very high cost may preclude general use of these regimens. Healthcare resources consumed by alglucerase therapy represent a large opportunity cost for other therapeutic areas.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

[PMID: 22652185]
Saposin C is one of four homologous proteins derived from sequential cleavage of the saposin precursor protein, prosaposin. It is an essential activator for glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease. Gaucher disease is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the GBA gene that exhibits vast phenotypic heterogeneity, despite its designation as a "simple" Mendelian disorder. The observed phenotypic variability has led to a search for disease modifiers that can alter the Gaucher phenotype. The PSAP gene encoding saposin C is a prime candidate modifier for Gaucher disease. In humans, saposin C deficiency due to mutations in PSAP results in a Gaucher-like phenotype, despite normal in vitro glucocerebrosidase activity. Saposin C deficiency has also been shown to modify phenotype in one mouse model of Gaucher disease. The role of saposin C as an activator required for normal glucocerebrosidase function, and the consequences of saposin C deficiency are described, and are being explored as potential modifying factors in patients with Gaucher disease.

[PMID: 24485911]
Action myoclonus renal failure (AMRF) syndrome is a rare form of progressive myoclonus epilepsy with renal dysfunction related to mutations in the SCARB2 gene. This gene is involved in lysosomal mannose-6-phosphate-independent trafficking of β-glucocerebrosidase (GC), an enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease. We report a family with myoclonic epilepsy, ataxia and skeletal muscle atrophy but without cognitive impairment or overt renal disease. A novel SCARB2 mutation was indicated by a striking discrepancy between lymphocyte and fibroblast GC activity in the proband evaluated for possible Gaucher disease. Our findings expand the genetic and phenotypic diversity of AMRF and suggest that low GC activity may present an important biochemical clue to the diagnosis of AMRF.

[PMID: 2023606]
Gaucher's disease, the most prevalent of the sphingolipid storage disorders, is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase (glucosylceramidase). Enzyme replacement was proposed as a therapeutic strategy for this disorder in 1966. To assess the clinical effectiveness of this approach, we infused macrophage-targeted human placental glucocerebrosidase (60 IU per kilogram of body weight every 2 weeks for 9 to 12 months) into 12 patients with type 1 Gaucher's disease who had intact spleens. The frequency of infusions was increased to once a week in two patients (children) during part of the trial because they had clinically aggressive disease. The hemoglobin concentration increased in all 12 patients, and the platelet count in 7. Serum acid phosphatase activity decreased in 10 patients during the trial, and the plasma glucocerebroside level in 9. Splenic volume decreased in all patients after six months of treatment, and hepatic volume in five. Early signs of skeletal improvements were seen in three patients. The enzyme infusions were well tolerated, and no antibody to the exogenous enzyme developed. Intravenous administration of macrophage-targeted glucocerebrosidase produces objective clinical improvement in patients with type 1 Gaucher's disease. The hematologic and visceral responses to enzyme replacement develop more rapidly than the skeletal response.

[PMID: 24389070]
Lysosomes require the presence of many specialized proteins to facilitate their roles in cellular maintenance. One such protein that has proven to be an important player in the lysosomal field is lysosomal integral membrane protein-2 (LIMP-2), encoded by the gene SCARB2. LIMP-2 is required for the normal biogenesis and maintenance of lysosomes and endosomes and has been identified as the specific receptor for glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme deficient in Gaucher disease. Research into LIMP-2 and the SCARB2 gene indicate that it may be a factor contributing to the clinical heterogeneity seen among patients with Gaucher disease. Mutations in SCARB2 have also been identified as the cause of action myoclonus renal failure (AMRF), and in some cases progressive myoclonic epilepsy. A total of 14 disease-causing SCARB2 mutations have been identified to date. The role of LIMP-2 in human pathology has expanded with its identification as a component of the intercalated disk in cardiac muscle and as a receptor for specific enteroviruses, two unanticipated findings that reaffirm the myriad roles of lysosomal proteins. Studies into the full impact of LIMP-2 deficiency and the LIMP2/glucocerebrosidase molecular pathway will lead to a better understanding of disease pathogenesis in Gaucher disease and AMRF, and to new insights into lysosomal processing, trafficking and function.