[PMID: 24691094]
The aim of this study was to compare biweekly and monthly evolocumab with placebo and oral ezetimibe in patients with hypercholesterolemia in a phase III trial. Evolocumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody against proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), significantly reduced LDL-C in phase II trials. Patients 18 to 80 years of age with fasting low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) ≥100 and <190 mg/dl and Framingham risk scores ≤10% were randomized (1:1:1:1:2:2) to oral placebo and subcutaneous (SC) placebo biweekly; oral placebo and SC placebo monthly; ezetimibe and SC placebo biweekly; ezetimibe and SC placebo monthly; oral placebo and evolocumab 140 mg biweekly; or oral placebo and evolocumab 420 mg monthly. A total of 614 patients were randomized and administered doses. Evolocumab treatment reduced LDL-C from baseline, on average, by 55% to 57% more than placebo and 38% to 40% more than ezetimibe (p < 0.001 for all comparisons). Evolocumab treatment also favorably altered other lipoprotein levels. Treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), muscle-related AEs, and laboratory abnormalities were comparable across treatment groups. In the largest monotherapy trial using a PCSK9 inhibitor to date, evolocumab yielded significant LDL-C reductions compared with placebo or ezetimibe and was well tolerated in patients with hypercholesterolemia. (Monoclonal Antibody Against PCSK9 to Reduce Elevated LDL-C in Subjects Currently Not Receiving Drug Therapy for Easing Lipid Levels-2 [MENDEL-2]; NCT01763827).

[PMID: 25410046]
At present, lipoprotein apheresis, combined with high-dose statin and ezetimibe therapy, is the best available means of treating patients with homozygous and statin-refractory heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). However, the extent of cholesterol-lowering achieved is often insufficient to meet the targets set by current guidelines. The recent advent of three new classes of lipid-lowering agents provides new hope that the latter objective may now be achievable. These compounds act either by reducing low-density lipoprotein (LDL) production by inhibiting apolipoprotein B synthesis with an antisense oligonucleotide (mipomersen) or by inhibiting microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (lomitapide), or by enhancing LDL catabolism via monoclonal antibody-mediated inhibition of the activity of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9 (PCSK9) (evolocumab). Depending on the outcome of current trials, it seems likely that these compounds, used alone or combined with lipoprotein apheresis, will markedly improve the management of refractory FH.

[PMID: 25052769]
A decade after our discovery of the involvement of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) in cholesterol metabolism through the identification of the first mutations leading to hypercholesterolemia, PCSK9 has become one of the most promising targets in cholesterol and cardiovascular diseases. This challenging work in the genetics of hypercholesterolemia paved the way for a plethora of studies around the world allowing the characterization of PCSK9, its expression, its impact on reducing the abundance of LDL receptor, and the identification of loss-of-function mutations in hypocholesterolemia. We highlight the different steps of this adventure and review the published clinical trials especially those with the anti-PCSK9 antibodies evolocumab (AMG 145) and alirocumab (SAR236553/REGN727), which are in phase III trials. The promising results in lowering LDL cholesterol levels raise hope that the PCSK9 adventure will lead, after the large and long-term ongoing phase III studies evaluating efficacy and safety, to a new anticholesterol pharmacological class.

[PMID: 24661068]
Despite the proven efficacy of statins, they are often reported to be inadequate to achieve low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) goals (especially in high-risk patients). Moreover, a large number of subjects cannot tolerate statins or full doses of these drugs. Thus, there is a need for additional effective LDL-C reducing agents. Evolocumab (AMG145) is a monoclonal antibody inhibiting the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 that binds to the liver LDL receptor and prevents it from normal recycling by targeting it for degradation. Phase I and II trials revealed that its subcutaneous injection, either alone or in combination with statins, is able to reduce LDL-C from 40 to 80%, apolipoprotein B100 from 30 to 59% and lipoprotein(a) from 18 to 36% in a dose-dependent manner. The incidence of side effects seems to be low and mainly limited to nasopharyngitis, injection site pain, arthralgia and back pain. Evolocumab is an innovative powerful lipid-lowering drug, additive to statins and with an apparently large therapeutic range associated to a low rate of mild adverse events. If available data will be confirmed in long-term trials with strong outcomes, Evolocumab will provide an essential tool to treat high-risk patients who need to reach ambitious LDL-C target.

[PMID: 24477778]
Statins effectively lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Most patients tolerate statins well, but approximately 10% to 20% experience side effects (primarily muscle-related) contributing to diminished compliance or discontinuation of statin therapy and subsequent increase in cardiovascular risk. Statin-intolerant patients require more effective therapies for lowering LDL-C. Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a compelling target for LDL-C-lowering therapy. Evolocumab (AMG 145) is a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds PCSK9, inhibiting its interaction with the LDL receptor to preserve LDL-receptor recycling and reduce LDL-C. Phase 2 studies have demonstrated the safety, tolerability, and preliminary efficacy of subcutaneous evolocumab in diverse populations, including statin-intolerant patients. This article describes the rationale and design of the Goal Achievement After Utilizing an anti-PCSK9 Antibody in Statin-Intolerant Subjects 2 (GAUSS-2) trial, a randomized, double-blind, ezetimibe-controlled, multicenter phase 3 study to evaluate the effects of 12 weeks of evolocumab 140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg every month in statin-intolerant patients with hypercholesterolemia. Eligible subjects were unable to tolerate effective doses of ≥2 statins because of myalgia, myopathy, myositis, or rhabdomyolysis that resolved with statin discontinuation. The primary objective of the study is to assess the effects of evolocumab on percentage change from baseline in LDL-C. Secondary objectives include evaluation of safety and tolerability, comparison of the effects of evolocumab vs ezetimibe on absolute change from baseline in LDL-C, and percentage changes from baseline in other lipids. Recruitment of approximately 300 subjects was completed in August 2013.

[PMID: 25079474]
Dyslipidaemia is a critical risk factor for the development of cardiovascular complications such as ischemic heart disease and stroke. Although statins are effective anti-dyslipidemic drugs, their usage is fraught with issues such as failure of adequate lipid control in 30% of cases and intolerance in select patients. The limited potential of other alternatives such as fibrates, bile acid sequestrants and niacin has spurred the search for novel drug molecules with better efficacy and safety. CETP inhibitors such as evacetrapib and anacetrapib have shown promise in raising HDL besides LDL lowering property. Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) inhibitors such as lomitapide and Apo CIII inhibitors such as mipomersen have recently been approved in Familial Hypercholesterolemia but experience in the non-familial setting is pretty much limited. One of the novel anti-dyslipidemic drugs which is greatly anticipated to make a mark in LDL-C control is the PCSK9 inhibitors. Some of the anti-dyslipidemic drugs which work by PCSK9 inhibition include evolocumab, alirocumab and ALN-PCS. Other approaches that are being given due consideration include farnesoid X receptor modulation and Lp-PLA2 inhibition. While it may not be an easy proposition to dismantle statins from their current position as a cholesterol reducing agent and as a drug to reduce coronary and cerebro-vascular atherosclerosis, our improved understanding of the disease and appropriate harnessing of resources using sound and robust technology could make rapid in-roads in our pursuit of the ideal anti-dyslipidemic drug.

[PMID: 24662398]
YUKAWA is a 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 study evaluating the efficacy and safety of evolocumab (AMG 145) in statin-treated Japanese patients at high cardiovascular risk. 310 eligible patients receiving stable statin (±ezetimibe) therapy were randomized to 1 of 6 treatments: placebo every 2 weeks (Q2W) or monthly (QM), evolocumab 70 mg or 140 mg Q2W, or evolocumab 280 mg or 420 mg QM. The primary endpoint was the percentage change from baseline in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) measured by preparative ultracentrifugation (UC). Secondary endpoints included percentage changes in other lipid parameters and the proportion of patients with LDL-C <1.8 mmol/L. Mean (SD) age was 62 (10) years; 37% were female; and the mean (SD) baseline LDL-C was 3.7 (0.5) mmol/L (by UC). Mean (SE) changes vs. placebo in LDL-C were greatest in the high-dose groups: -68.6 (3.0) % and -63.9 (3.2) % with 140 mg Q2W and 420 mg QM dosing, respectively. Up to 96% of evolocumab-treated patients achieved LDL-C <1.8 mmol/L. Adverse events (AEs) were more frequent in evolocumab (51%) vs. placebo (38%) patients; 4 patients taking evolocumab discontinued treatment because of an AE. There were no significant differences in AE rates based on dose or dose frequency. In Japanese patients at high cardiovascular risk with hypercholesterolemia on stable statin therapy, evolocumab significantly reduced LDL-C and was well tolerated during this 12-week study.

[PMID: 25470376]
The serine protease proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) binds to the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor (LDLR) and directs it to lysosomes for intracellular degradation. This results in decreased numbers of LDLR available on the hepatic cell surface to bind LDL particles and remove them from the circulation and therefore to a subsequent increase in circulating LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) plasma levels. Since 2003, when the role of PCSK9 in LDL-C metabolism was discovered, there have been major efforts to develop efficient and safe methods to inhibit it. Amongst those, monoclonal antibodies against PCSK9 are the furthest in development, with multiple phase 3 trials already published and with cardiovascular endpoint trials currently underway. Two fully human monoclonal antibodies, evolocumab (AMG 145) and alirocumab (REGN727/SAR236553), have been extensively studied in a wide range of subjects, such as those with statin intolerance, as an add-on to statin therapy, as a monotherapy and in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. PCSK9 antibodies result in a consistent and robust decrease in LDL-C plasma levels ranging from 40% to 70%, either on top of statins or as a monotherapy. If the safety data from the on-going phase 3 trials remain as reassuring as the data available till now, PCSK9 antibodies will offer a novel, powerful therapeutic option to decrease LDL-C plasma levels and, hopefully, cardiovascular risk.

[PMID: 24694531]
This study sought to evaluate the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous evolocumab compared with oral ezetimibe in hypercholesterolemic patients who are unable to tolerate effective statin doses. Statin intolerance, which is predominantly due to muscle-related side effects, is reported in up to 10% to 20% of patients. Evolocumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody to proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), demonstrated marked reductions in plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in a phase 2 study in statin-intolerant patients. The GAUSS-2 (Goal Achievement after Utilizing an Anti-PCSK9 Antibody in Statin Intolerant Subjects) trial was a 12-week, double-blind study of randomized patients (2:2:1:1) to evolocumab 140 mg every two weeks (Q2W) or evolocumab 420 mg once monthly (QM) both with daily oral placebo or subcutaneous placebo Q2W or QM both with daily oral ezetimibe 10 mg. Co-primary endpoints were percent change from baseline in LDL-C at the mean of weeks 10 and 12, and at week 12. Three hundred seven patients (age 62 ± 10 years; LDL-C 193 ± 59 mg/dl) were randomized. Evolocumab reduced LDL-C from baseline by 53% to 56%, corresponding to treatment differences versus ezetimibe of 37% to 39% (p <0.001). Muscle adverse events occurred in 12% of evolocumab-treated patients and 23% of ezetimibe-treated patients. Treatment-emergent adverse events and laboratory abnormalities were comparable across treatment groups. Robust efficacy combined with favorable tolerability makes evolocumab a promising therapy for addressing the largely unmet clinical need in high-risk patients with elevated cholesterol who are statin intolerant. (Goal Achievement After Utilizing an Anti-PCSK9 Antibody in Statin Intolerant Subjects-2; NCT01763905).

[PMID: 24961142]
To answer the need of a better low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol control in statin-treated patients at high risk for cardiovascular disease, new injectable lipid-lowering drugs with innovative mechanisms of action are in advanced phase of development or have just been approved. Evolocumab and alirocumab are fully human monoclonal antibodies inhibiting the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) that binds to hepatic LDL receptor and prevents it from normal recycling by targeting it for degradation. Mipomersen specifically binds to a segment of the human apolipoprotein B100 messenger RNA, blocking the translation of the gene product. Phase II (for evolocumab and alirocumab) and III (for evolocumab) trials show that PCSK9 inhibitors are equally well tolerated, with adverse events mainly limited to mild-to-moderate nasopharyngitis, injection-site pain, arthralgia and back pain. Mipomersen use is mainly associated to hepatosteatosis, increased transaminases (> 3 times the upper limit of normal), mild-to-moderate injection-site reactions and flu-like symptoms. PCSK9 inhibitors have demonstrated their good safety and tolerability in a large number of subjects with different clinical conditions, including statin-intolerance, enlarging their potential use in a broader range of patients. Further data on long-term mipomersen safety are required.

[PMID: 24481874]
Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels are significantly associated with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) risk, and studies using interventions that lower LDL-C levels have been shown to reduce the risk of ASCVD events and mortality. Statin treatment is the current first-line therapy for lowering LDL-C and reducing ASCVD risk. However, many patients are still unable to reach recommended LDL-C goals on maximally tolerated statin therapy. Monoclonal antibodies that inhibit proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9, including evolocumab (previously AMG 145), dramatically lowered LDL-C in phase 2 clinical trials when administered alone or in combination with a statin. The aim of this phase 3 study is to evaluate the efficacy of 12 weeks of subcutaneous evolocumab (vs placebo) administered every 2 weeks or every month in combination with a statin in patients with hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia. This study will also provide comparative efficacy, safety, and tolerability data between evolocumab and ezetimibe when added to background atorvastatin therapy.

[PMID: 24373748]
The proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) regulates cholesterol metabolism mainly by targeting the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) for degradation in the liver. Gain-of-function mutations in PCSK9 are one of the genetic causes of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolaemia. Conversely, loss-of-function mutations are associated with lower concentrations of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) and reduced coronary heart disease. As these loss-of-function mutations are not associated with apparent deleterious effects, PCSK9 inhibition is an attractive new strategy for lowering LDL-C concentration. Among the various approaches to PCSK9 inhibition, human data are only available for inhibition of PCSK9 binding to LDLR by monoclonal antibodies. In phase II studies, the two most advanced monoclonal antibodies in development (alirocumab and evolocumab) decreased atherogenic lipoproteins very effectively and were well tolerated. A dramatic decrease in LDL-C up to 70% can be obtained with the most efficacious doses. Efficacy has been evaluated so far in addition to statins in hypercholesterolaemic patients with or without familial hypercholesterolaemia, in patients with intolerance to statin therapy and in monotherapy. Large phase III programmes are ongoing to evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of these very promising new agents.

[PMID: 25282520]
Homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia is a rare, serious disorder caused by very low or absent plasma clearance of LDL, substantially raised LDL cholesterol, and accelerated development of cardiovascular disease. Conventional lipid-lowering treatments are modestly effective. Evolocumab, a monoclonal antibody to proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), reduced LDL cholesterol by 16% in a pilot study. We now report results with evolocumab in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial was undertaken at 17 sites in ten countries in North America, Europe, the Middle East, and South Africa. 50 eligible patients (aged ≥12 years) with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia, on stable lipid-regulating therapy for at least 4 weeks, and not receiving lipoprotein apheresis, were randomly allocated by a computer-generated randomisation sequence in a 2:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous evolocumab 420 mg or placebo every 4 weeks for 12 weeks. Randomisation was stratified by LDL cholesterol at screening (<11 mmol/L or ≥11 mmol/L) and implemented by a computerised interactive voice-response system. Patients, study personnel, and the funder were masked to treatment and to the efficacy results by the central laboratory not returning LDL cholesterol or any lipid results to the clinical sites after the baseline visit. The primary endpoint was percentage change in ultracentrifugation LDL cholesterol from baseline at week 12 compared with placebo, analysed by intention-to-treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01588496. Of the 50 eligible patients randomly assigned to the two treatment groups, 49 actually received the study drug and completed the study (16 in the placebo group and 33 in the evolocumab group). Compared with placebo, evolocumab significantly reduced ultracentrifugation LDL cholesterol at 12 weeks by 30·9% (95% CI -43·9% to -18·0%; p<0·0001). Treatment-emergent adverse events occurred in ten (63%) of 16 patients in the placebo group and 12 (36%) of 33 in the evolocumab group. No serious clinical or laboratory adverse events occurred, and no anti-evolocumab antibody development was detected during the study. In patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia receiving stable background lipid-lowering treatment and not on apheresis, evolocumab 420 mg administered every 4 weeks was well tolerated and significantly reduced LDL cholesterol compared with placebo. Amgen Inc.

[PMID: 24953393]
Statins remain the cornerstone of hypolipidaemic drug treatment. The recent American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) lipid guidelines suggest using percent reductions of low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), according to cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk, rather than specific LDL-C targets. These guidelines raised concerns and other Societies (US, International, European) have not endorsed them. The implementation of previous guidelines in clinical practice is suboptimal due to attitudes of physicians and restrictions in health care systems. Monoclonal antibodies that inhibit proprotein convertase subtilisin/ kexin type 9 (PCSK9), which degrades the LDL receptor, like alirocumab and evolocumab, are in phase 3 trials. These drugs are suitable for statin intolerant or resistant patients, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia (HeFH) and some forms of homozygous FH (HoFH). Mipomersen (antisense oligonucleotide against apolipoprotein B) and lomitapide (microsomal triglyceride transfer protein blocker) have already been approved for HoFH. Eventually, silencing micro-RNA oligonucleotides may also become available. The repair or silencing of genes implicated in hyperlipidaemia and/or atherosclerosis is also on the horizon. If the new therapeutic options mentioned above prove to be effective and safe then by combining them with statins and/or ezetimibe we should be able to effectively control acquired or hereditary dyslipidaemias and substantially further reduce CVD morbidity and mortality.

[PMID: 24953396]
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common genetic disorder that presents with robust increases in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and can lead to premature cardiovascular disease. There are heterozygous and homozygous forms. The diagnosis is usually made based on blood cholesterol levels, clinical signs and family history. Genetic testing can be used to confirm the diagnosis. Effective lowering of LDL-C in FH can prevent cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, however, the disease remains greatly underdiagnosed. The mainstay of pharmacologic therapy in FH patients is high-dose statins, which are often combined with other lipid-lowering agents. The homozygous form is mainly treated with lipid apheresis. Guideline-recommended target levels of LDL-C are often not reached, making new treatment options desirable. Four classes of newer lipid-lowering drugs offer promising advances in treating FH, namely the apolipoprotein-B synthesis inhibitors (mipomersen), the microsomal transfer protein inhibitors (lomitapide), the cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibitors (anacetrapib, evacetrapib) and the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors (evolocumab, alirocumab). In this review, the available evidence regarding the use of these drugs in patients with FH is discussed, with particular focus on their efficacy and safety.

[PMID: 25002170]
Elevated plasma LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) levels are associated with cardiovascular diseases and statin therapy was proven to decrease LDL-C and reduce cardiovascular death. However, in patients at high cardiovascular risk, achievement of optimal LDL-C levels is challenging, and therefore additional strategies for further loweing LDL-C levels are under development. Recently, silencing of apolipoprotein B gene and MTP inhibition have been approved for the treatment of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia, and there is great interest in the inhibition of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9 (PCSK9). PCSK9 promotes the degradation of the LDL receptor. The inhibition of PCSK9 favors LDL catabolism and reduces plasma LDLC levels. Monoclonal antibodies against PCSK9 represent so far the most advanced approach in clinical development, with alirocumab, evolocumab and bococizumab under advanced clinical development. Recent data from the first phase III studies show LDL-C reduction in monotherapy and on top of statins. Long-term studies on cardiovascular endpoints are ongoing and the results will be crucial to translate the benefit of this promising approach into clinical practice.

[PMID: 24859266]
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a serine protease that plays an important role in the regulation of serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol by downregulation of LDL receptor, and as such is considered a novel target in cholesterol lowering therapy. In support of the drug development program for Evolocumab, a fully human IgG₂ antibody that targets PCSK9, a quantitative ELISA to measure free PCSK9 in human serum was developed. PCSK9 serves as a biomarker of pharmacological response during treatment, and measuring levels of the free ligand post-dosing was of interest as an aid to establishing the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the therapeutic. Given the complexities associated with the measurement of free ligand in the presence of high concentrations of circulating drug, it was important to challenge the method with experiments designed to assess ex vivo conditions that have the potential to affect the binding equilibrium of drug and ligand within test samples during routine sampling handling and assay conditions. Herein, we report results of experiments that were conducted to characterize the assay in alignment with regulatory guidance and industry standards, and to establish evidence that the method is measuring the free ligand in circulation at the time serum was collected. A robust supporting data package was generated that demonstrates the method specifically and reproducibly measures the free ligand, and is suitable for its intended use.

[PMID: 24678979]
Evolocumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), significantly reduced low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels in phase 2 studies. We conducted a phase 3 trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of 52 weeks of treatment with evolocumab. We stratified patients with hyperlipidemia according to the risk categories outlined by the Adult Treatment Panel III of the National Cholesterol Education Program. On the basis of this classification, patients were started on background lipid-lowering therapy with diet alone or diet plus atorvastatin at a dose of 10 mg daily, atorvastatin at a dose of 80 mg daily, or atorvastatin at a dose of 80 mg daily plus ezetimibe at a dose of 10 mg daily, for a run-in period of 4 to 12 weeks. Patients with an LDL cholesterol level of 75 mg per deciliter (1.9 mmol per liter) or higher were then randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either evolocumab (420 mg) or placebo every 4 weeks. The primary end point was the percent change from baseline in LDL cholesterol, as measured by means of ultracentrifugation, at week 52. Among the 901 patients included in the primary analysis, the overall least-squares mean (±SE) reduction in LDL cholesterol from baseline in the evolocumab group, taking into account the change in the placebo group, was 57.0±2.1% (P<0.001). The mean reduction was 55.7±4.2% among patients who underwent background therapy with diet alone, 61.6±2.6% among those who received 10 mg of atorvastatin, 56.8±5.3% among those who received 80 mg of atorvastatin, and 48.5±5.2% among those who received a combination of 80 mg of atorvastatin and 10 mg of ezetimibe (P<0.001 for all comparisons). Evolocumab treatment also significantly reduced levels of apolipoprotein B, non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), and triglycerides. The most common adverse events were nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infection, influenza, and back pain. At 52 weeks, evolocumab added to diet alone, to low-dose atorvastatin, or to high-dose atorvastatin with or without ezetimibe significantly reduced LDL cholesterol levels in patients with a range of cardiovascular risks. (Funded by Amgen; DESCARTES ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01516879.).

[PMID: 25282519]
Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia is characterised by low cellular uptake of LDL cholesterol, increased plasma LDL cholesterol concentrations, and premature cardiovascular disease. Despite intensive statin therapy, with or without ezetimibe, many patients are unable to achieve recommended target levels of LDL cholesterol. We investigated the effect of PCSK9 inhibition with evolocumab (AMG 145) on LDL cholesterol in patients with this disorder. This multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was undertaken at 39 sites (most of which were specialised lipid clinics, mainly attached to academic institutions) in Australia, Asia, Europe, New Zealand, North America, and South Africa between Feb 7 and Dec 19, 2013. 331 eligible patients (18-80 years of age), who met clinical criteria for heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia and were on stable lipid-lowering therapy for at least 4 weeks, with a fasting LDL cholesterol concentration of 2·6 mmol/L or higher, were randomly allocated in a 2:2:1:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous evolocumab 140 mg every 2 weeks, evolocumab 420 mg monthly, or subcutaneous placebo every 2 weeks or monthly for 12 weeks. Randomisation was computer generated by the study sponsor, implemented by a computerised voice interactive system, and stratified by LDL cholesterol concentration at screening (higher or lower than 4·1 mmol/L) and by baseline ezetimibe use (yes/no). Patients, study personnel, investigators, and Amgen study staff were masked to treatment assignments within dosing frequency groups. The coprimary endpoints were percentage change from baseline in LDL cholesterol at week 12 and at the mean of weeks 10 and 12, analysed by intention-to-treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01763918. Of 415 screened patients, 331 were eligible and were randomly assigned to the four treatment groups: evolocumab 140 mg every 2 weeks (n=111), evolocumab 420 mg monthly (n=110), placebo every 2 weeks (n=55), or placebo monthly (n=55). 329 patients received at least one dose of study drug. Compared with placebo, evolocumab at both dosing schedules led to a significant reduction in mean LDL cholesterol at week 12 (every-2-weeks dose: 59·2% reduction [95% CI 53·4-65·1], monthly dose: 61·3% reduction [53·6-69·0]; both p<0·0001) and at the mean of weeks 10 and 12 (60·2% reduction [95% CI 54·5-65·8] and 65·6% reduction [59·8-71·3]; both p<0·0001). Evolocumab was well tolerated, with rates of adverse events similar to placebo. The most common adverse events occurring more frequently in the evolocumab-treated patients than in the placebo groups were nasopharyngitis (in 19 patients [9%] vs five [5%] in the placebo group) and muscle-related adverse events (ten patients [5%] vs 1 [1%]). In patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia, evolocumab administered either 140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg monthly was well tolerated and yielded similar and rapid 60% reductions in LDL cholesterol compared with placebo. Amgen Inc.

[PMID: 24255061]
Evolocumab (AMG 145), a monoclonal antibody against proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), significantly reduced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in phase 2 studies of 12 weeks' duration. The longer-term efficacy and safety of PCSK9 inhibition remain undefined. Of 1359 randomized and dosed patients in the 4 evolocumab phase 2 parent studies, 1104 (81%) elected to enroll into the Open-Label Study of Long-term Evaluation Against LDL-C (OSLER) study. Regardless of their treatment assignment in the parent study, patients were randomized 2:1 to receive either open-label subcutaneous evolocumab 420 mg every 4 weeks with standard of care (SOC) (evolocumab+SOC, n=736) or SOC alone (n=368). Ninety-two percent of patients in the evolocumab+SOC group and 89% of patients in the SOC group completed 52 weeks of follow-up. Patients who first received evolocumab in OSLER experienced a mean 52.3% [SE, 1.8%] reduction in LDL-C at week 52 (P<0.0001). Patients who received 1 of 6 dosing regimens of evolocumab in the parent studies and received evolocumab+SOC in OSLER had persistent LDL-C reductions (mean reduction, 50.4% [SE, 0.8%] at the end of the parent study versus 52.1% [SE, 1.0%] at 52 weeks; P=0.31). In patients who discontinued evolocumab on entry into OSLER, LDL-C levels returned to near baseline levels. Adverse events and serious adverse events occurred in 81.4% and 7.1% of the evolocumab+SOC group patients and 73.1% and 6.3% of the SOC group patients, respectively. Evolocumab dosed every 4 weeks demonstrated continued efficacy and encouraging safety and tolerability over 1 year of treatment in the largest and longest evaluation of a PCSK9 inhibitor in hypercholesterolemic patients to date. http://clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT01439880.

[PMID: 24509273]
The purpose of this study was assess the effect of evolocumab (AMG 145) on lipoprotein (Lp)(a) from a pooled analysis of 4 phase II trials. Lp(a), a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particle linked to the plasminogen-like glycoprotein apolipoprotein(a), shows a consistent and independent positive association with cardiovascular disease risk in epidemiological studies. Current therapeutic options to reduce Lp(a) are limited. A pooled analysis of data from 1,359 patients in 4 phase II trials assessed the effects of evolocumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody to PCSK9, on Lp(a), the relationship between Lp(a) and lowering of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and apolipoprotein B, and the influence of background statin therapy. Lp(a) was measured using a standardized isoform-independent method. Evolocumab treatment for 12 weeks resulted in significant (p < 0.001) mean (95% confidence interval) dose-related reductions in Lp(a) compared to control: 29.5% (23.3% to 35.7%) and 24.5% (20.4% to 28.7%) with 140 mg and 420 mg, dosed every 2 and 4 weeks, respectively, with no plateau of effect. Lp(a) reductions were significantly correlated with percentages of reductions in LDL-C (Spearman correlation coefficient, 0.5134; p < 0.001) and apolipoprotein B (Spearman correlation coefficient, 0.5203; p < 0. 001). Mean percentage reductions did not differ based on age or sex but the trend was greater in those patients taking statins. Inhibition of PCSK9 with evolocumab resulted in significant dose-related reductions in Lp(a). While the mean percentage of reduction was significantly greater in those patients with baseline Lp(a) of ≤125 nmol/l, the absolute reduction was substantially larger in those with levels >125 nmol/l.

[PMID: 24284914]
Since 2010, mAbs has documented the biopharmaceutical industry's progress in transitioning antibody therapeutics to first Phase 3 clinical studies and regulatory review, and its success at gaining first marketing approvals for antibody-based products. This installment of the "Antibodies to watch" series outlines events anticipated to occur between December 2013 and the end of 2014, including first regulatory actions on marketing applications for vedolizumab, siltuximab, and ramucirumab, as well as the Fc fusion proteins Factor IX-Fc and Factor VIII-Fc; and the submission of first marketing applications for up to five therapeutics (secukinumab, ch14.18, onartuzumab, necitumumab, gevokizumab). Antibody therapeutics in Phase 3 studies are described, with an emphasis on those with study completion dates in 2014, including antibodies targeting interleukin-17a or the interleukin-17a receptor (secukinumab, ixekizumab, brodalumab), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (alirocumab, evolocumab, bococizumab), and programmed death 1 receptor (lambrolizumab, nivolumab). Five antibodies with US Food and Drug Administration's Breakthrough Therapy designation (obinutuzumab, ofatumumab, lambrolizumab, bimagrumab, daratumumab) are also discussed.

[PMID: 24598985]
Prior trials with monoclonal antibodies to proprotein convertase subtilizin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) reported robust low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) reductions. However, the ability to detect potentially beneficial changes in other lipoproteins such as lipoprotein (a), triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and apolipoprotein (Apo) A1, and adverse events (AEs) was limited by sample sizes of individual trials. We report a pooled analysis from four phase 2 studies of evolocumab (AMG 145), a monoclonal antibody to PCSK9. The trials randomized 1359 patients to various doses of subcutaneous evolocumab every 2 weeks (Q2W) or 4 weeks (Q4W), placebo, or ezetimibe for 12 weeks; 1252 patients contributed to efficacy and 1314, to safety analyses. Mean percentage (95% CI) reductions in LDL-C vs. placebo ranged from 40.2% (44.6%, 35.8%) to 59.3% (63.7%, 54.8%) among the evolocumab groups (all P < 0.001). Statistically significant reductions in apolipoprotein B (Apo B), non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C), triglycerides and lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)], and increases in HDL-C were also observed. Adverse events (AEs) and serious AEs with evolocumab were reported in 56.8 and 2.0% of patients, compared with 49.2% and 1.2% with placebo. Adjudicated cardiac and cerebrovascular events were reported in 0.3 and 0% in the placebo and 0.9 and 0.3% in the evolocumab arms, respectively. In addition to LDL-C reduction, evolocumab, dosed either Q2W or Q4W, demonstrated significant and favourable changes in other atherogenic and anti-atherogenic lipoproteins, and was well tolerated over the 12-week treatment period.

[PMID: 24825642]
In phase 2 studies, evolocumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody to PCSK9, reduced LDL-C levels in patients receiving statin therapy. To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of evolocumab when used in combination with a moderate- vs high-intensity statin. Phase 3, 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo- and ezetimibe-controlled study conducted between January and December of 2013 in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia at 198 sites in 17 countries. Patients (n = 2067) were randomized to 1 of 24 treatment groups in 2 steps. Patients were initially randomized to a daily, moderate-intensity (atorvastatin [10 mg], simvastatin [40 mg], or rosuvastatin [5 mg]) or high-intensity (atorvastatin [80 mg], rosuvastatin [40 mg]) statin. After a 4-week lipid-stabilization period, patients (n = 1899) were randomized to compare evolocumab (140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg monthly) with placebo (every 2 weeks or monthly) or ezetimibe (10 mg or placebo daily; atorvastatin patients only) when added to statin therapies. Percent change from baseline in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level at the mean of weeks 10 and 12 and at week 12. Evolocumab reduced LDL-C levels by 66% (95% CI, 58% to 73%) to 75% (95% CI, 65% to 84%) (every 2 weeks) and by 63% (95% CI, 54% to 71%) to 75% (95% CI, 67% to 83%) (monthly) vs placebo at the mean of weeks 10 and 12 in the moderate- and high-intensity statin-treated groups; the LDL-C reductions at week 12 were comparable. For moderate-intensity statin groups, evolocumab every 2 weeks reduced LDL-C from a baseline mean of 115 to 124 mg/dL to an on-treatment mean of 39 to 49 mg/dL; monthly evolocumab reduced LDL-C from a baseline mean of 123 to 126 mg/dL to an on-treatment mean of 43 to 48 mg/dL. For high-intensity statin groups, evolocumab every 2 weeks reduced LDL-C from a baseline mean of 89 to 94 mg/dL to an on-treatment mean of 35 to 38 mg/dL; monthly evolocumab reduced LDL-C from a baseline mean of 89 to 94 mg/dL to an on-treatment mean of 33 to 35 mg/dL. Adverse events were reported in 36%, 40%, and 39% of evolocumab-, ezetimibe-, and placebo-treated patients, respectively. The most common adverse events in evolocumab-treated patients were back pain, arthralgia, headache, muscle spasms, and pain in extremity (all <2%). In this 12-week trial conducted among patients with primary hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia, evolocumab added to moderate- or high-intensity statin therapy resulted in additional LDL-C lowering. Further studies are needed to evaluate the longer-term clinical outcomes and safety of this approach for LDL-C lowering. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01763866.