[PMID: 1354979]
Anterograde amnesia, possibly accompanied by acute brain syndrome, is a potential side-effect of certain benzodiazepines, particularly triazolam. Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine antagonist that is highly effective in reversing the central nervous system effects of benzodiazepine overdose. We report a case of triazolam overdose resulting in anterograde amnesia after flumazenil administration had restored clear consciousness. The defect in memory may have been due to too little flumazenil being given or failure of memory consolidation affected by the character of triazolam during the induced lucent period. We feel that physicians should be aware of the potential occurrence of acute brain syndrome in patients with benzodiazepine overdose despite treatment with flumazenil.

[PMID: 7629986]
In the assessment and management of the potentially poisoned patient with altered consciousness, the most consequential and controversial interventions occur during the first 5 minutes of care. In this review article, the risks and benefits of standard diagnostic and therapeutic interventions are presented to guide clinicians through this critical period of decision making. Data for discussion were obtained from a search of English-language publications referenced on MEDLINE for the years 1966 to 1994. Older literature was included when pertinent. Search terms included poisoning, overdose, toxicity, naloxone, glucose, thiamine, and flumazenil. Only large trials were used for determinations of diagnostic utility and efficacy. Small trials, case series, and case reports were reviewed extensively for adverse effects. Trials were reviewed for overall methodology, inclusion and exclusion criteria, sources of bias, and outcome. Analysis favors empirical administration of hypertonic dextrose and thiamine hydrochloride to patients with altered consciousness. Although rapid reagent test strips can be used to guide this therapy, they are not infallible, and they fail to recognize clinical hypoglycemia that may occur without numerical hypoglycemia. Administration of naloxone hydrochloride should be reserved for patients with signs and symptoms of opioid intoxication. Flumazenil is best left for reversal of therapeutic conscious sedation and rare select cases of benzodiazepine overdose.

[PMID: 8438687]
Flumazenil, a specific benzodiazepine antagonist, is useful in reversing the sedation and respiratory depression that often occur when benzodiazepines are administered to patients undergoing anesthesia or when patients have taken an intentional benzodiazepine overdose. Judicious use of flumazenil may provide useful diagnostic information and may obviate the need for mechanical ventilation and other invasive supportive measures. Although some controversy exists regarding the possible precipitation of seizure activity in the setting of mixed tricyclic antidepressant-benzodiazepine overdose, worldwide experience with flumazenil has validated its safety and efficacy.

[PMID: 2893240]
In anaesthesia and in the intensive care unit, benzodiazepines have proven safe and effective agents for the induction and maintenance of sedation for a variety of therapeutic goals. However, in these contexts, or in benzodiazepine overdose, it is often desirable to be able to terminate or interrupt sedation without waiting for the effect of the benzodiazepine to become dissipated by normal metabolism and excretion. Flumazenil, a 1,4-imidazobenzodiazepine, is a highly effective, specific benzodiazepine antagonist which is indicated for use when the effect of a benzodiazepine must be attenuated or terminated at short notice. It acts by displacing other benzodiazepines from the receptor site by competitive inhibition. The onset of effect after intravenous administration occurs within 1 to 3 minutes. The optimal dosage is determined for each patient by a dose titration procedure and lies in the range 0.2 to 1.0mg in anaesthesiology, and 0.1 to 2.0mg in intensive care use. Despite its short elimination half-life of around 1 hour, after general anaesthesia or conscious to moderate sedation for short procedures, a single dose of flumazenil is usually sufficient to attain and maintain the desired level of consciousness. After intoxication with high benzodiazepine doses, the duration of effect of a single dose of flumazenil is not expected to exceed 1 hour. In such cases, the period of wakefulness can be prolonged as necessary by repeated low intravenous doses of flumazenil or by infusion (0.1 mg/hour). Flumazenil is well tolerated both systemically and locally. The only adverse events seen with greater frequency after flumazenil compared with placebo were nausea and/or vomiting after general anaesthesia, although the incidence of actual vomiting was not significantly different between the 2 groups. Since these effects were virtually absent in studies of intensive care patients and after sedation for short procedures, and were not seen in tolerability studies in healthy volunteers receiving intravenous bolus doses of up to 100mg, there may be a link between these symptoms and the other agents used in general anaesthesia, some of which have well-known emetic properties. Thus, flumazenil provides a safe and effective means of attenuating or reversing the CNS-depressant effects of benzodiazepines whenever indicated, e.g. following benzodiazepine-induced general anaesthesia, conscious sedation, or after benzodiazepine overdose, either alone or in combination with other agents.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

[PMID: 11349753]
Sedation is an important aspect of care for critically ill newborns. Proper sedation reduces stress during procedures such as mechanical ventilation. Midazolam, a short-acting benzodiazepine, is widely administered as a sedative in newborn intensive care units but is not without side effects. Three term newborns developed myoclonic-like abnormal movements after receiving midazolam. In one, flumazenil controlled the abnormal movements. Flumazenil is a potent benzodiazepine antagonist that competitively blocks the central effects of benzodiazepines. It can reverse the sedative effects of benzodiazepines occurring after diagnostic or therapeutic procedures or after benzodiazepine overdose. Flumazenil may be considered in cases of abnormal movements associated with midazolam. However, further studies are needed to provide guidelines for the administration of this drug in newborns.

[PMID: 18175099]
The actions of benzodiazepines are due to the potentiation of the neural inhibition that is mediated by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Practically all effects of the benzodiazepines result from their actions on the ionotropic GABA(A) receptors in the central nervous system. Benzodiazepines do not activate GABA(A) receptors directly but they require GABA. The main effects of benzodiazepines are sedation, hypnosis, decreased anxiety, anterograde amnesia, centrally mediated muscle relaxation and anti-convulsant activity. In addition to their action on the central nervous system, benzodiazepines have a dose-dependent ventilatory depressant effect and they also cause a modest reduction in arterial blood pressure and an increase in heart rate as a result of a decrease of systemic vascular resistance. The four benzodiazepines, widely used in clinical anaesthesia, are the agonists midazolam, diazepam and lorazepam and the antagonist flumazenil. Midazolam, diazepam and flumazenil are metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and by glucuronide conjugation whereas lorazepam directly undergoes glucuronide conjugation. CYP3A4 is important in the biotransformation of both midazolam and diazepam. CYP2C19 is important in the biotransformation of diazepam. Liver and renal dysfunction have only a minor effect on the pharmacokinetics of lorazepam but they slow down the elimination of the other benzodiazepines used in clinical anaesthesia. The duration of action of all benzodiazepines is strongly dependent on the duration of their administration. Based on clinical studies and computer simulations, midazolam has the shortest recovery profile followed by lorazepam and diazepam. Being metabolized by CYP enzymes, midazolam and diazepam have many clinically significant interactions with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4 and 2C19. In addition to pharmacokinetic interactions, benzodiazepines have synergistic interactions with other hypnotics and opioids. Midazolam, diazepam and lorazepam are widely used for sedation and to some extent also for induction and maintenance of anaesthesia. Flumazenil is very useful in reversing benzodiazepine-induced sedation as well as to diagnose or treat benzodiazepine overdose.

[PMID: 14620397]
Flumazenil is indicated for reversal of sedation from benzodiazepines administered during therapeutic or diagnostic procedures and during induction or maintenance of general anesthesia, as well as for benzodiazepine overdose. Bolus doses of flumazenil are usually adequate to achieve reversal; however, when medical conditions may lead to a prolonged half-life of the benzodiazepine involved, continuous infusion may be warranted. A 67-year-old man with chlordiazepoxide toxicity required a 9-day infusion of flumazenil to prevent resedation and respiratory insufficiency; he initially was admitted to the hospital for alcohol detoxification. Concomitant medical conditions and the metabolism characteristics of each benzodiazepine must dictate the agent of choice. When measures are required to ensure adequate recovery of a patient's respiratory function and mental awareness, such as in patients with benzodiazepine toxicity, consideration of continuous-infusion flumazenil is warranted.

[PMID: 9306053]
The worldwide expansion in the use of benzodiazepines has led to their frequent, and often inappropriate, use and to increase in their involvement in self-induced poisoning and iatrogenic overdosing. Flumazenil is a specific and competitive antagonist at the central benzodiazepine receptor, reversing all effects of benzodiazepine agonists without tranquillising or anticonvulsant actions. Incremental intravenous bolus injections of flumazenil 0.1 to 0.3 mg are the most effective and well tolerated in the diagnosis and treatment of pure benzodiazepine overdose; additional boluses or an infusion (0.3 to 0.5 mg/h) can be given to prevent patients from relapsing into coma. Intravenous flumazenil 10 to 20 micrograms/kg is effective in neonates and small children. Intramuscular, oral (20 to 25 mg 3 times daily or as required) and rectal administration may be used as alternatives in long term regimens. Patients with mixed-drug overdose require higher doses (up to 2 mg bolus, approximately equal to 1 mg/h infusion) to regain consciousness. Children and the elderly, chronically ill patients, and pregnant women and their fetuses all respond satisfactorily to flumazenil, but the usefulness of the drug in patients with hepatic encephalopathy and alcohol overdose is debatable. The use of flumazenil results in complete awakening with restoration of upper airway protective reflexes, thus enabling gastric lavage to be performed and transfer of the patient from the emergency room to another hospital department. Resumption of effective spontaneous respiration allows for expeditious extubation, weaning off mechanical ventilation or the avoidance of endotracheal intubation. While flumazenil is not associated with haemodynamic adverse effects, caution should be exercised when using this agent in patients who have co-ingested chloral hydrate to carbamazepine or whose ECG shows abnormalities typical to those seen after overdose with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs); the use of flumazenil in the presence of these drugs can sometimes induce treatable cardiac dysrrhythmia. Flumazenil per se does not induce adverse effects. Coma reversal by flumazenil may cause mild, short-lived reactions caused by sudden awakening. Withdrawal symptoms in long term benzodiazepine users and seizures in patients who have taken an overdose of TCA or carbamazepine and a benzodiazepine can occur with flumazenil; these symptoms are avoidable by utilising slow flumazenil dose titration.

[PMID: 8644960]
To develop clinical rules for the safe and effective use of flumazenil in suspected benzodiazepine overdose. We assembled a retrospective series of 35 consecutive comatose patients admitted between October 1992 and July 1993 to a toxicologic ICU with the presumptive diagnosis of drug overdose. These patients were divided into two groups. Group A (low-risk) patients had a clinical picture compatible with uncomplicated benzodiazepine intoxication (calm, without abnormalities in pulse or blood pressure, lateralizing signs, hypertonia, hyperreflexia, or myoclonus) in the absence of predefined electrocardiographic or clinical signs of tricyclic antidepressant or other proconvulsant overdose, and absence of an available history of long-term benzodiazepine treatment or an underlying seizure disorder. Group B ("non-low risk") comprised all other patients. Efficacy of flumazenil was categorized as complete awakening (with normal level of alertness), partial awakening, or no change in alertness level. The safety of flumazenil was defined on the basis of the absence of seizures or death. In group A (n=4), flumazenil was associated with complete awakening in three patients and partial awakening in one. No seizures were observed. In group B (n=31), flumazenil was associated with complete awakening in 4 patients, partial awakening in 5, and no response in 22. In group B, five seizures occurred. Comatose patients with clinical or ECG criteria thought to contraindicate the use of flumazenil have a reasonably high risk of seizures after administration of this drug. Low-risk patients may be able to receive flumazenil safely, but they may be only a small portion of comatose patients with suspected overdose.

[PMID: 1672103]
Flumazenil, a potent benzodiazepine antagonist, is a newly synthetic imidazo-benzodiazepine, which blocks the neurological effects of benzodiazepines. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of this agent in reversal of benzodiazepine overdose and differentiation of comatous patients with drug overdose. Fifteen comatous patients with suspected sedatives/hypnotics overdose were included in this study and flumazenil 0.25 mg per dose was administrated intravenously. The average score of Glasgow Coma Scale increased from 7.13 +/- 2.92 to 10.93 +/- 3.67 after one dose of flumazenil. Clear consciousness was restored after multiple doses of flumazenil administration. Three cases with different drug history and variant response after flumazenil treatment were also illustrated and discussed. The dosage of flumazenil used in this study ranged from 0.25 mg to 3 mg (average 0.87 +/- 0.74 mg). We concluded that flumazenil is an excellent antidote for benzodiazepine overdose and valuable for differentiating the patients in comatose.

[PMID: 8239101]
To determine if flumazenil, when used in doses higher than those currently recommended, could reverse the effects of a benzodiazepine (BDZ) overdose in patients who might not otherwise respond and whether the higher dose was associated with increased adverse effects. Multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, balanced, with parallel groups. Open-label flumazenil administration was available if a patient failed to respond or became resedated. Sixteen emergency departments in the United States. Patients presenting to the ED with clinically significant signs and symptoms of a known or suspected BDZ overdose. Patients were randomized to receive 10 mL/min of placebo or flumazenil (1 mg/10 mL) each minute for ten minutes. If there was no response, up to 3 mg of open-label flumazenil could be administered. Of 170 patients enrolled, 87 received flumazenil and 83 received placebo. The demographic characteristics of both groups were comparable. Ten minutes after the beginning of study drug infusion, patients were evaluated using the Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGIS), Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC), and Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale (NAS). The mean +/- SD CGIS score at ten minutes for BDZ-positive patients was 1.41 +/- 0.72 for patients who received flumazenil and 3.41 +/- 0.91 for the placebo group (P < .01). There was no difference in the mean CGIS score between the flumazenil (3.25 +/- 1.15) and placebo (3.75 +/- 0.69) groups in BDZ-negative patients. The GCS and NAS were also significantly better in patients who were BDZ-positive and received flumazenil. The mean +/- SD dose of flumazenil administered during the double-blind phase was 71.3 +/- 34.2 mL (7.13 mg) compared with 95.06 +/- 16.03 mL of placebo. Of the 39 patients who had BDZ-positive drug screens and received flumazenil, 29 (74%) responded to 3 mg or less. Six additional patients responded to 4 or 5 mg, and one patient responded to 8 mg. The most common adverse effects in patients who received flumazenil were injection site pain (10.3%), agitation (8%), vomiting (3.4%), dizziness (3.4%), headache (3.4%), tachycardia (3.4%), and crying (3.4%). Three patients developed seizures. Two were associated with significant tricyclic antidepressant overdoses and one with propoxyphene ingestion. Two patients had positive drug screens for BDZ. Flumazenil rapidly and effectively reverses the clinical signs and symptoms of a BDZ overdose. Most patients will respond to 3 mg or less, but a small number may require a higher dose for reversal of clinical symptoms. Patients with concomitant tricyclic antidepressant overdose may be at risk for developing seizures.

[PMID: 2113543]
In a double-blind placebo-controlled prospective clinical trial we studied the efficacy and safety of the benzodiazepine antagonist, flumazenil. In 23 patients admitted to the Intensive Care Unit with coma due to overdose with benzodiazepines or other sedatives, flumazenil i.v. (up to 2 mg or placebo) was given. In 13 patients given flumazenil the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) increased significantly from 4.9 to 7.8 (p less than 0.05). Six of these 13 patients, including mainly benzodiazepine mono-intoxications, needed only one series of injections (up to 1.0 mg flumazenil); the GCS increased thereby from 4.5 to 10.7 within a maximum of 5 min (p less than 0.01). In the remaining 7 patients, needing two series of injections of flumazenil (up to 2.0 mg), GCS did not rise significantly and coma was related to intoxications with nonbenzodiazepine sedatives, flunitrazepam and in one patient, encephalitis. In the 10 patients receiving placebo, the GCS did not change. A significant increase in the GCS from 5.5 to 10.8 (p less than 0.001) was, however, observed when flumazenil (up to 1.0 mg) was given after placebo. In patients with EEG monitoring the changes in waveform pattern paralleled the clinical response. Effects could be detected within 1-2 min after flumazenil injection and lasted up to 45 min. There were no adverse reactions or benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms. We conclude that flumazenil is an effective and safe drug in the treatment of benzodiazepine overdose. The use of flumazenil is of diagnostic value in mixed-drug intoxications or coma of unknown origin and is of therapeutic importance for reversal of benzodiazepine intoxications.

[PMID: 1996802]
Flumazenil is a recently discovered pharmacologic antagonist of the CNS effects of benzodiazepines. It acts by binding CNS benzodiazepine receptors and competitively blocking benzodiazepine activation of inhibitory GABAergic synapses. Animal studies and some human studies appear to demonstrate that flumazenil has weak intrinsic agonist activity; on the other hand, studies are inconclusive in demonstrating any inverse agonist effects of this agent. Evidence available suggests that flumazenil is well tolerated in human beings over a broad range of doses when given either orally or parenterally and does not produce serious adverse effects. In the setting of isolated benzodiazepine overdose, flumazenil is capable of completely reversing coma within one to two minutes, with this effect lasting between one and five hours. Repeat doses can be given safely to reverse recurrent effects of longer-acting benzodiazepines. Flumazenil is undergoing further evaluation by the Food and Drug Administration; should this drug receive approval, it is likely to be used in emergency departments as well as in a variety of other clinical settings. First, it could be used to effect rapid reversal of benzodiazepine-induced sedation that has been administered to facilitate medical, orthopedic, and surgical procedures, particularly in the event of inadvertent respiratory depression. Second, flumazenil might have a therapeutic role in the management of patients who have taken benzodiazepine overdoses. Although most of these patients can be managed successfully with supportive therapy alone, it is possible that the use of flumazenil may obviate the need for intubation and respiratory support in such patients and eliminate the possible adverse effects of even short-term endotracheal intubation. Finally, flumazenil could have both diagnostic and therapeutic value in patients with acute alterations of mental status of unknown etiology, particularly when possible drug overdose is a consideration. Because flumazenil appears to be specific in its antagonism of benzodiazepine-induced respiratory and CNS depression, it could be used empirically to confirm or exclude a role of benzodiazepines in the generation of mental status changes in the setting of overdose or coma of unknown origin. This in turn might obviate the need for further expensive (eg, computed tomography) and sometimes invasive (eg, lumbar puncture) diagnostic modalities. This might be particularly useful because there is nothing about benzodiazepine-induced coma that clearly distinguishes it from other causes of coma; thus, there are no signs or symptoms that may reasonably allow benzodiazepine overdose to be confirmed or eliminated on clinical grounds. Further studies will continue to define the ultimate use of this new agent.

[PMID: 8905360]
Flumazenil is a competitive benzodiazepine antagonist that acts to reverse their sedative and hypnotic effects. It is indicated in the management of benzodiazepine overdose, but its role in the routine reversal of endoscopic conscious sedation has not been defined. Patients undergoing diagnostic upper endoscopy who received sedation with either diazepam or midazolam alone were given flumazenil 0.2 mg incrementally immediately following the procedure until awake. They were then asked to repeat three psychomotor tests measuring cognitive and motor skills, with their baseline scores compared with postprocedure scores over a 3-hour period. Full psychomotor function was restored to baseline values within 30 minutes after flumazenil in 79% of patients, with no differences in the reversal of psychomotor skill impairment observed between diazepam and midazolam sedation. There was no evidence of rebound sedation seen for up to 3 hours. No significant anterograde amnesia was evident in 78% of individuals. These results demonstrate that flumazenil's effects on reversing psychomotor impairment are similar when midazolam or diazepam are used for conscious sedation. However, the potential usefulness of routine flumazenil reversal of conscious sedation will require further evaluation of specific psychomotor performance skills (such as driving a car) before we lift the admonition against leaving the endoscopic suite unattended, driving a vehicle, or operating complicated machinery for several hours.

[PMID: 21785147]
Benzodiazepine (BZD) overdose (OD) continues to cause significant morbidity and mortality in the UK. Flumazenil is an effective antidote but there is a risk of seizures, particularly in those who have co-ingested tricyclic antidepressants. A study was undertaken to examine the frequency of use, safety and efficacy of flumazenil in the management of BZD OD in the UK. A 2-year retrospective cohort study was performed of all enquiries to the UK National Poisons Information Service involving BZD OD. Flumazenil was administered to 80 patients in 4504 BZD-related enquiries, 68 of whom did not have ventilatory failure or had recognised contraindications to flumazenil. Factors associated with flumazenil use were increased age, severe poisoning and ventilatory failure. Co-ingestion of tricyclic antidepressants and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease did not influence flumazenil administration. Seizure frequency in patients not treated with flumazenil was 0.3%. The frequency of prior seizure in flumazenil-treated patients was 30 times higher (8.8%). Seven patients who had seizures prior to flumazenil therapy had no recurrence of their seizures. Ventilation or consciousness improved in 70% of flumazenil-treated patients. Flumazenil administration was followed by one instance each of agitation and brief seizure. Flumazenil is used infrequently in the management of BZD OD in the UK. It was effective and associated with a low incidence of seizure. These results compare favourably with the results of published randomised controlled trials and cohort studies, although previous studies have not reported the use of flumazenil in such a high-risk population. This study should inform the continuing review of national guidance on flumazenil therapy.

[PMID: 1286503]
Flumazenil, a specific benzodiazepine antagonist, was evaluated as adjunctive therapy in the management of benzodiazepine overdose. Thirteen emergency departments enrolled 326 patients in this double-blind, placebo-controlled trial; 162 patients were randomly allocated to receive flumazenil (maximum dose, 30 ml, providing 3 mg of flumazenil), and 164 were allocated to receive placebo (maximum dose, 30 ml). A successful response was the attainment of a score of 1 or 2 on the Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGIS), denoting a very much improved or much improved status, 10 minutes after the start of intravenous administration of the test drug. Among those patients whose drug screen revealed the presence of benzodiazepines, 75 (77%) of 97 patients given flumazenil and 13 (16%) of 83 given placebo attained such a response. The mean CGIS score at 10 minutes for benzodiazepine-positive patients treated with flumazenil was 1.95 versus 3.58 for those given placebo. As determined by the Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale, 61% of patients who initially responded became resedated; in these patients, the effect of flumazenil lasted a median of 90 minutes. At the investigator's discretion, patients who did not achieve a criterion response in the double-blind trial could receive open-label flumazenil, titrated as in the double-blind phase. Among the benzodiazepine-positive patients, 9 (53%) of 17 patients from the flumazenil group responded to the additional flumazenil, and 58 (81%) of patients previously given placebo responded. Safety was assessed in all 326 patients given the test drug. The most frequent adverse experiences after the administration of flumazenil were agitation (7%), vomiting (7%), abnormal crying (4%), and nausea (4%); these effects were observed with a lower frequency in the placebo group. Serious adverse experiences were reported in 4 patients; these included seizures and cardiac arrhythmias. Of the 3 patients with seizures, 2 had ingested large doses of cyclic antidepressants in addition to the benzodiazepine. The toxicology screen for 1 of the 2 showed 1900 ng/ml of amoxapine and 900 ng/ml of nortriptyline; the toxicology screen for the other, who also had ventricular tachycardia, showed 1928 ng/ml of loxapine and 301 ng/ml of amoxapine. The results of this study confirm published reports of the efficacy of flumazenil in reversing benzodiazepine-induced sedation in patients with benzodiazepine overdose. This was accomplished irrespective of the presence of coingested drugs. Flumazenil is not recommended for patients with serious cyclic antidepressant poisoning or those who use benzodiazepines therapeutically to control seizure disorders. When used as recommended, however, flumazenil has been shown to have an acceptable safety level.

[PMID: 2575692]
For the first time a causal treatment of hepatic encephalopathy may be possible by the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil. In contrast to all other treatments used so far by flumazenil hepatic encephalopathy improves within minutes. Flumazenil is the first benzodiazepine antagonist which can be used in humans and is a well established for treatment of benzodiazepine overdose. For treatment of hepatic encephalopathy development of a new antagonist with a longer half-life is desirable. However, ut should be stressed that the current experience with flumazenil is limited and that the effects of flumazenil on hepatic encephalopathy is not proven by randomized controlled studies. Therefore, this drug should only be used in clinical studies.

[PMID: 19500521]
Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine antagonist. It is widely used as an antidote in comatose patients suspected of having ingested a benzodiazepine overdose. Flumazenil is known to induce cardiac arythmias and seizures, in part because of drug interactions. We present a 75-year-old woman, who was brought to the Emergency Department with a drug overdose following a suicide attempt. She developed generalized seizures shortly after the administration of flumazenil.

[PMID: 8605789]
To assess the efficacy, usefulness, safety, and dosages of flumazenil required when flumazenil is used in the diagnosis of benzodiazepine-induced coma (vs. other drug-induced coma), and to reverse or prevent the recurrence of unconsciousness. A two-phase study: a controlled, randomized, double-blind study followed by a prospective, open study. An 800-bed, teaching, university-affiliated hospital. Unconscious patients (n = 110) suspected of benzodiazepine overdose, graded 2 to 4 on the Matthew and Lawson coma scale, were treated with flumazenil, the specific benzodiazepine receptor antagonist. The first 31 patients were studied in a double-blind fashion, while the rest of the patients were given flumazenil according to an open protocol. INTERVENTIONS; All patients received supplemental oxygen; endotracheal intubation was performed, and synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation was initiated whenever it was deemed necessary. A peripheral intravenous cannula was inserted, as were indwelling arterial and urinary bladder catheters. Blood pressure, electrocardiogram, respiratory rate, end-tidal CO2, and core temperature were continuously monitored. The first 31 double-blind patients received either intravenous flumazenil (to a maximum of 1 mg) or saline, while the rest of the patients were given flumazenil until either regaining consciousness or a maximum of 2.5 mg was injected. Patients remaining unconscious among double-blind patients or those patients relapsing into coma after the first dose were later treated in the open phase of the study. Treatment continued by boluses or infusion as long as efficacious. Fourteen of 17 double-blind, flumazenil-treated patients woke after a mean of 0.8 +/- 0.3 (SD) mg vs. one of 14 placebo patients (p < .001). Seventy-five percent of the aggregated controlled and uncontrolled patients awoke from coma scores of 3.1 +/- 0.6 to 0.4 +/- 0.5 (p < .01) after the injection of 0.7 +/- 0.3 mg of flumazenil. These patients had high benzodiazepine serum blood concentrations. Twenty-five percent of the patients did not regain consciousness. These patients had very high serum concentrations of nonbenzodiazepine drugs. Sixty percent of the responders who had primarily ingested benzodiazepines remained awake for 72 +/- 37 mins after flumazenil administration; 40% relapsed into coma after 18 +/- 7 mins and various central nervous system depressant drugs were detected in their blood in addition to benzodiazepines. Seventy-one percent of the patients had ingested tricyclic antidepressants. Seventy-eight percent of the responders were continually and efficaciously treated for < or = 8 days. Fourteen (25%) of the intubated patients were extubated safely while 12 patients, who had shown increased respiratory insufficiency, resumed satisfactory respiration after flumazenil injection. Five cases of transient increase in blood pressure and heart rate were encountered. There were 27 mildly unpleasant "waking" episodes, such as anxiety, restlessness, and aggression, but no patient had benzodiazepine withdrawal signs, convulsions, or dysrhythmia, most noticeably absent in tricyclic antidepressant-intoxicated patients. Flumazenil is a valid diagnostic tool for distinguishing pure benzodiazepine from mixed-drug intoxication or nondrug-induced coma. Flumazenil is effective in preventing recurrence of benzodiazepine-induced coma. Respiratory insufficiency is reversed after its administration. Flumazenil is safe when administered cautiously, even in patients with coma caused by a mixed overdose of benzodiazepine plus tricyclic antidepressants.

[PMID: 8306565]
The mechanism of action, pharmacokinetics, and use of flumazenil in benzodiazepine overdose, as well as in the management of other disease states, are reviewed. Flumazenil interacts at the central benzodiazepine receptor to antagonize or reverse the behavioral, neurologic, and electrophysiologic effects of benzodiazepine agonists and inverse agonists. Flumazenil has been studied for a variety of indications, including as an antidote to benzodiazepine overdose and for awakening of comatose patients, reversal of sedation after surgery and in critically ill patients, and management of hepatic encephalopathy. It improves the level of consciousness in patients with benzodiazepine overdose; however, resedation may occur within one to two hours after administration, so repeated doses or a continuous infusion may be required to maintain therapeutic efficacy. It appears to be effective in reversing sedation induced by midazolam or diazepam, and case reports suggest that it is useful in awakening comatose patients, although its clinical utility is questionable. Flumazenil has proved useful in reversing conscious sedation in critically ill patients, although response may be dose dependent. Animal models indicate that flumazenil is of some benefit in hepatic encephalopathy, but until well-designed clinical trials are conducted, hepatic encephalopathy must be considered an investigational indication for flumazenil. Adverse reactions include CNS manifestations, resedation, cardiovascular effects, seizures, and alterations in intracranial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure. Hepatic dysfunction results in a substantial change in the pharmacokinetic profile of flumazenil; therefore, dosage adjustment may be necessary in patients with hepatic dysfunction or in those receiving medications that alter flumazenil metabolism. Flumazenil has been shown to reverse sedation caused by intoxication with benzodiazepines alone or benzodiazepines in combination with other agents, but it should not be used when cyclic antidepressant intoxication is suspected. It may be beneficial after surgery when benzodiazepines have been used as part of anesthesia and after a diagnostic or surgical procedure when assessment of CNS function is necessary.

[PMID: 11383664]
A 54-y-old man ingested 2 g of bulk laboratory diazepam and was treated with activated charcoal, enhanced diuresis and flumazenil infusion. The treatment resulted in awakening, but the patient had drowsiness, dysarthria, diplopia, and dizziness for 9 d. Blood levels of diazepam and its main metabolite, nordiazepam, were obtained for 1 mo. The half-lives in this benzodiazepine overdose were longer than those seen with therapeutic doses. Benzodiazepines should not be readministrated when patients awake after suicide attempts.

[PMID: 3132054]
The efficacy and safety of flumazenil were assessed in comparison to placebo in a double-blind randomised study of 31 adults intoxicated with benzodiazepines. The criteria of efficacy were the degree of sedation, and orientation in time and space. Patients who received flumazenil awoke within minutes but central depression returned partly one hour later, which reflects the short elimination half-life of the drug. Side effects were few and the results indicate that flumazenil is effective in the primary management of benzodiazepine overdose and in states where benzodiazepines have been taken with other drugs.

[PMID: 2231833]
The clinical efficacy of different doses of the specific benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil was studied in a total of 72 patients with benzodiazepine or ethanol overdose. In a randomized double-blind study, 18 patients (group 1) and eight patients (group 2) with suspected benzodiazepine overdose received 5 mg (group 1) or 1 mg (group 2) flumazenil or placebo, respectively. The stage of coma, heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory rate were monitored within the following 15 min. If no change in the stage of coma was observed, 5 mg (group 1) or 1 mg (group 2) flumazenil were given, and the stage of coma, heart rate and blood pressure were again monitored. In a similar way, the effect of 5 and 1 mg flumazenil was investigated in 13 patients (group 3) and four patients (group 4) with ethanol intoxication. In an open trial, the clinical efficacy of flumazenil for the diagnosis of benzodiazepine or ethanol overdose was studied in 29 patients (group 5). In all patients, a toxicological screening confirmed benzodiazepine or ethanol overdose. None of the patients receiving placebo showed effects on stage of coma, heart rate, blood pressure or respiratory rate. Patients with benzodiazepine overdose who received 5 mg flumazenil regained consciousness about 1-2 min after the end of injection. The effect of 1 mg flumazenil (group 2) on benzodiazepine-induced coma was less pronounced. In patients with ethanol overdose (group 3), ethanol-induced coma was reversed after 5 mg flumazenil more slowly than in patients of group 1. No effect of flumazenil on ethanol-induced coma was observed in group 4. In group 5, flumazenil proved to be useful for diagnosing benzodiazepine or ethanol intoxication. In one patient with coma due to carbamazepine overdose, flumazenil was also found to be effective. Additionally, a possible analytical interference of flumazenil and its metabolites with the identification of other benzodiazepines by a toxicological screening procedure was studied. Even after an oral dose of 200 mg flumazenil, no interference with immunological benzodiazepine assays (EMIT, TDX, and RIA) was found. A metabolite and an artifact of flumazenil could be identified in urine by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.

[PMID: 2899985]
Flumazenil (Ro 15-1788) proved to be a very efficacious competitive antagonist of benzodiazepines that reliably counteracts their pharmacological actions within 1-2 min as could be demonstrated in clinical and EEG studies. In general, a total dose of 0.3-0.8 mg will be sufficient in clinical practice, avoiding side effects like nausea, tremor, sweating, or transient anxiety that could be observed when higher dosages were administered. Its therapeutic range is very high as could be demonstrated in experimental animal in which up to 8.000-fold the clinical dose was administered. The total volume of distribution (Vdes) amounts to nearly 1.000 ml/kg BW and the total clearance exceeds 1.200 ml/min, resulting in a biological half-life of less than 60 min. According to the benzodiazepine dosage and the rapid plasma concentration decline of flumazenil, in some cases a resedation could be observed. Hence, a careful observation of the antagonised patient on the ward is mandatory for 1.5-2 h, even if at first sight the antagonization seemed successful and the patient fully awake and cooperative. In anaesthesia, indications to administer flumazenil are adverse drug reactions and prolonged recovery after adequate benzodiazepine dosage. In intensive care medicine, the antagonist may be used in the treatment of benzodiazepine overdose as well as in the differential diagnosis of a coma of unknown origin. Additionally, the antagonist may be administered to interrupt benzodiazepine sedation e.g. for neurological examination.