[PMID: 19514905]
This review focuses on the development of HLA-B*5701 genetic screening as a means of preventing drug hypersensitivity reactions caused by a commonly prescribed antiretroviral drug, abacavir. This strongly predictive genetic association, which in many respects represents a test case for the clinical application of pharmacogenetics, highlights the fine specificity of HLA-restricted immunity, here directed against a drug-specific antigen rather than an allogeneic molecule (as occurs in transplantation) or a pathogenic organism (as in viral infection). However, this example also demonstrates that successful implementation of pharmacogenetic screening requires that a range of criteria be adequately addressed. These include pharmaceutical factors (e.g. lack of alternative treatments with similar or improved cost effectiveness, safety, and efficacy), clinical factors (e.g. accurate diagnosis of the adverse event, in this case provided by clinical diagnostic criteria and adjunctive epicutaneous patch testing), sufficient objective evidence of the test's predictive value and generalizability (in this case provided by the first large-scale randomized trial of a pharmacogenetic test), as well as availability of quality-assured laboratory services that are responsive to the needs of targeted genetic screening. This example is intended to serve as a precedent for other pharmacogenetic screening strategies, particularly those aimed at reducing rates of serious drug hypersensitivity reactions in clinical practice.

[PMID: 16609367]
Abacavir hypersensitivity reaction (ABC HSR) is a potentially life-threatening adverse reaction that affects approximately 8% of patients that initiate this antiretroviral drug. Independent groups have shown a strong predictive association between ABC HSR and HLA-B*5701, indicating that exclusion of HLA-B*5701 positive individuals from abacavir treatment would largely prevent ABC HSR. However, the limited availability and relatively high cost of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing represent barriers to the widespread implementation of this pharmacogenetic approach to abacavir prescribing. To facilitate routine screening, we have developed a rapid flow cytometry method for HLA-B57 phenotyping using commercially available B17 monoclonal antibodies. Whole blood samples from 84 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients were examined by standard flow cytometry methods, using a two-colour B17-specific immunofluorescence assay in the CD45 lymphocyte population. All eight HLA-B57 individuals examined tested positive, while HLA-B57/58 negative individuals (n=74) tested negative for this flow cytometry test. Two non-HLA-B57 individuals showed weak cross-reactivity. In our predominantly Caucasian population, B17/CD45 dual staining was sufficient to identify individuals carrying B17 cell surface antigens. This approach, utilizing flow cytometry methods that are widely available in HIV laboratories, therefore offers a sensitive, rapid and cost-effective screening assay prior to abacavir prescription. Following risk stratification with this assay, it would be anticipated that identification of HLA-B*5701 using molecular HLA typing methods would be required in <10% of the screened population.

[PMID: 20602616]
Drug hypersensitivity reactions and severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis, are examples of serious adverse drug reactions mediated through a combination of metabolic and immunological mechanisms that could traditionally not have been predicted based on the pharmacological characteristics of the drug alone. The discovery of new associations between these syndromes and specific HLA has created the promise that risk for these reactions could be predicted through pharmacogenetic screening, thereby avoiding serious morbidity and mortality associated with these types of drug reactions. Despite this, several hurdles exist in the translation of these associations into pharmacogenetic tests that could be routinely used in the clinical setting. HLA-B*5701 screening to prevent abacavir hypersensitivity syndrome is an example of a test now in widespread routine clinical use in the developed world.

[PMID: 19351209]
Abacavir hypersensitivity syndrome (AHS) is a potentially life-threatening illness occurring in 4-8% of those initiating the drug. Early studies identified a strong association between the MHC class I allele HLA-B*5701 and AHS. These studies suggested that HLA-B*5701 holds promise as a screening test to prevent AHS, but concern arose from HLA-B*5701-negative cases with a clinical diagnosis of AHS, and particularly from early reports of apparently low sensitivities of HLA-B*5701 for AHS in patients of non-White race. However, open screening studies suggested that HLA-B*5701 screening can largely eliminate AHS. Furthermore, skin-patch testing was used in later-generation studies to separate those patients with true immunologically mediated AHS from those with false-positive clinical diagnoses. Currently, high-level evidence suggests that HLA-B*5701 has a negative predictive value of 100% for patch-test-confirmed AHS, which is generalizable across White and Black populations. Current HIV treatment guidelines have been revised to reflect the recommendation that HLA-B*5701 screening be incorporated into routine care for patients who may require abacavir. New laboratory techniques such as PCR and flow cytometric methods, as well as an international quality assurance program, have evolved to ensure the availability of cost-effective screening methods whose consistency and standard can be maintained over time. An elegant body of basic science has evolved, which supports and complements the clinical research in suggesting that AHS is specifically and exquisitely restricted by HLA-B*5701 and mediated by CD8+ lymphocytes. Abrogating factors explaining why 45% of those carrying HLA-B*5701 can tolerate abacavir remain to be defined. The research approach applied to AHS has led to a genetic screening test being successfully implemented globally in primary HIV clinical practice. The abacavir 'example' can be applied to other drugs to facilitate the development and operationalization of genetic tests that may be useful to predict and prevent otherwise unpredictable drug reactions.

[PMID: 21354501]
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions include syndromes such as drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) or drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS) and Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). An important advance has been the discovery of associations between HLA alleles and many of these syndromes, including abacavir-associated hypersensitivity reaction, allopurinol-associated DRESS/DIHS and SJS/TEN, and SJS/TEN associated with aromatic amine anticonvulsants. These HLA associations have created the promise for prevention through screening and have additionally shed further light on the immunopathogenesis of severe cutaneous adverse reactions. The rollout of HLA-B∗5701 into routine clinical practice as a genetic screening test to prevent abacavir hypersensitivity provides a translational roadmap for other drugs. Numerous hurdles exist in the widespread translation of several other drugs, such as carbamazepine, in which the positive predictive value of HLA-B∗1502 is low and the negative predictive value of HLA-B∗1502 for SJS/TEN might not be 100% in all ethnic groups. International collaborative consortia have been formed with the goal of developing phenotypic standardization and undertaking HLA and genome-wide analyses in diverse populations with these syndromes.

[PMID: 15247625]
Abacavir, a human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) nucleoside-analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor, causes severe hypersensitivity in 4-8% of patients. HLA B*5701 is a known genetic risk factor for abacavir hypersensitivity in Caucasians. Our aim was to confirm the presence of this genetic factor in our patients, and to determine whether genotyping for HLA B*5701 would be a cost-effective use of healthcare resources. Patients with and without abacavir hypersensitivity were identified from a UK HIV clinic. Patients were genotyped for HLA B*5701, and pooled data used for calculation of test characteristics. The cost-effectiveness analysis incorporated the cost of testing, cost of treating abacavir hypersensitivity, and the cost and selection of alternative antiretroviral regimens. A probabilistic decision analytic model (comparing testing versus no testing) was formulated and Monte Carlo simulations performed. Of the abacavir hypersensitive patients, six (46%) were HLA B*5701 positive, compared to five (10%) of the non-hypersensitive patients (odds ratio 7.9 [95% confidence intervals 1.5-41.4], P = 0.006). Pooling of our data on HLA B*5701 with published data resulted in a pooled odds ratio of 29 (95% CI 6.4-132.3; P < 0.0001). The cost-effectiveness model demonstrated that depending on the choice of comparator, routine testing for HLA B*5701 ranged from being a dominant strategy (less expensive and more beneficial than not testing) to an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (versus no testing) of Euro 22,811 per hypersensitivity reaction avoided. Abacavir hypersensitivity is associated with HLA B*5701, and pre-prescription pharmacogenetic testing for this appears to be a cost-effective use of healthcare resources.

[PMID: 23204921]
Many pharmacogenomic biomarkers (PGBM) were identified and translated into clinical practice, affecting the usage of drugs via label updates. In this context, abacavir is one of the most brilliant examples of pharmacogenetic studies translated into clinical practice. Pharmacogenetic studies have revealed that abacavir HSRs are highly associated with the major histocompatibility complex class I. Large studies established the effectiveness of prospective HLA-B*57:01 screening to prevent HSRs to abacavir. Accordingly to these results the abacavir label has been modified: the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the FDA recommend/suggested that the administration of abacavir must be preceded by a specific genotyping test. The HLA locus is extremely polymorphic, exhibiting many closely related alleles, making it difficult to discriminate HLA-B*57:01 from other related alleles, and a number of different molecular techniques have been developed recently to detect the presence of HLA-B*57:01. In this review, we provide a summary of the available techniques used by laboratories to genotype HLA-B*57:01, outlining the scientific and pharmacoeconomics pros and cons.

[PMID: 18680696]
In the last few years, research in pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics has identified distinct variants or markers that can help to define the benefits and risk of patients requiring antiretroviral treatment. The beneficial effect of the deletion 32 allele of the CCR5 coreceptor on the natural history of HIV infection and, to a certain extent, on treatment response is well known. The bases of immune reconstitution after initiation of antiretroviral therapy, although the subject of intense study, are probably multifactorial and polygenetic and consequently conclusions with clear applicability to clinical practice are currently lacking. Among the risks, no significant progress has been made in lipodystrophy. The origin of dyslipidemia associated with antiretroviral treatment and the excess cardiovascular risk conferred by some antiretroviral drugs is probably polygenetic and, at present, poorly defined. The genetic bases of efavirenz-induced neurological toxicity and of hyperbilirubinemia secondary to atazanavir are fairly well known, although their application in daily clinical practice has not been adequately assessed. Some aspects that help to understand the molecular bases of hypersensitivity reaction to nevirapine and of nevirapine-induced hepatotoxicity have been described but are not applicable in most cases and consequently further studies are required. Some data correlate tenofovir-induced renal toxicity with genetic variations in some transport proteins. The most significant advance for clinical practice is the correlation between the presence of the HLA-B*5701 allele and hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir. In particular, one clinical trial with a large number of patients from distinct ethnic groups found that the probability of not developing hypersensitivity reaction (immunologically confirmed) was 100% if the patient was HLA-B*5701-negative. These data suggest the need to implement this test in daily clinical practice.

[PMID: 18332899]
The hypersensitivity (HSR) to abacavir (ABC) pharmacogenetics (PGx) program represents the progression from an exploratory discovery to a validated biomarker. Within the program, two retrospective PGx studies were conducted to identify HIV-1 patients at increased risk for ABC HSR, a treatment-limiting and potentially life-threatening adverse event. A strong statistical association between the major histocompatibility complex allele, HLA-B*5701, and clinically diagnosed ABC HSR was identified but varied between racial populations. Subsequently, ABC skin patch testing was introduced as a research tool to supplement clinical case ascertainment. In a randomized, prospective study evaluating the clinical utility of HLA-B*5701 screening, avoidance of ABC in HLA-B*5701-positive patients significantly reduced clinically diagnosed ABC HSR and eliminated patch test-positive ABC HSR. Finally, a retrospective PGx study supports the generalizability of the association across races. Prospective HLA-B*5701 screening should greatly reduce the incidence of ABC HSR by identifying patients at high risk for ABC HSR before they are treated.

[PMID: 18784465]
To evaluate the clinical impact and cost-effectiveness of HLA-B*5701 testing to guide selection of first-line HIV regimens in the United States. Cost-effectiveness analysis using a simulation model of HIV disease. The prevalence of HLA-B*5701 and the probabilities of confirmed and unconfirmed severe systemic hypersensitivity reaction among patients taking abacavir testing HLA-B*5701 positive and negative were from the Prospective Randomized Evaluation of DNA Screening in a Clinical Trial study. The monthly costs of abacavir-based and tenofovir-based regimens were $1135 and $1139, respectively; similar virologic efficacy was assumed and this assumption was varied in sensitivity analysis. Simulated cohort of patients initiating HIV therapy. The interventions are first-line abacavir, lamivudine, and efavirenz without pretreatment HLA-B*5701 testing; the same regimen with HLA-B*5701 testing; and first-line tenofovir, emtricitabine, and efavirenz. Quality-adjusted life years and lifetime medical costs discounted at 3% per annum, cost-effectiveness ratios ($/QALY). Abacavir-based treatment without HLA-B*5701 testing resulted in a projected 30.93 years life expectancy, 16.23 discounted quality-adjusted life years, and $472,200 discounted lifetime cost per person. HLA-B*5701 testing added 0.04 quality-adjusted months at an incremental cost of $110, resulting in a cost-effectiveness ratio of $36,700/QALY compared with no testing. Initiating treatment with a tenofovir-based regimen increased costs without improving quality-adjusted life expectancy. HLA-B*5701 testing remained the preferred strategy only if abacavir-based treatment had equal efficacy and cost less per month than tenofovir-based treatment. Results were also sensitive to the cost of HLA-B*5701 testing and the prevalence of HLA-B*5701. Pharmacogenetic testing for HLA-B*5701 is cost-effective only if abacavir-based treatment is as effective and costs less than tenofovir-based treatment.

[PMID: 18923406]
Pharmacogenetics (PGX) is the study of drug response as a function of an individual's DNA. PGX is often viewed as an extension of disease association genetics, and although this information may be related, it is not the study of drug response. Although medicines are used to treat diseases, the value of strategies that identify and incorporate DNA biomarkers associated with clinical efficacy, or DNA biomarkers for untoward clinical responses, can be applied directly to pharmaceutical pipelines. The growth of adverse event PGX studies involving marketed medicines generally uses relatively large numbers of affected patients, but has been productive. However, the two critical strategies for pipeline genetics must make use of fewer patients: (1) the early identification of efficacy signals so that they can be applied early in development for targeted therapies and (2) identification of safety signals that can subsequently be validated prospectively during development using the least number of patients with adverse responses. Assumptions are often made that large numbers of patients are necessary to recognize PGX hypotheses and to validate DNA biomarkers. In some ways, pipeline pharmacogenetics may be viewed as the opposite of current genome-wide scanning designs. The goal is to obtain PGX signals in as few patients as possible, and then validate PGX hypotheses for specificity and sensitivity as development trials go forward--not using hundreds of thousand of markers to detect strong linkage disequilibrium signals in thousands of patients and their controls. Drug development takes 5-7 years for a drug candidate to traverse to registration--and this is similar to the timeframe for validating genetic biomarkers using sequential clinical trials. Two important examples are discussed, the association of APOE genotypes to the demonstration of actionable efficacy signals for the use of rosiglitazone for Alzheimer's disease; and the identification of HLA-B(*)5701 as a highly sensitive and specific predictive marker for abacavir treated patients who will develop hypersensitivity syndrome (HSS). The rosiglitazone study prevented pipeline attrition by changing the interpretation of a critical Phase IIB proof of concept study (2005) from a failed study, to a positive efficacy response in a genetically predictable proportion of patients. Now, three years later, a Phase III program of clinical trials using pharmacogenetic designs is months away from completion (late08). If successfully registered (early09), millions of patients could benefit, and efficacy PGX would have achieved its first prospective block-buster. The use of safety candidate gene association genetics in patients who received abacavir therapy and developed HSS starting in 1998 culminated in a double blind clinical trial that determined sensitivity > 97% and specificity >99% in 2007. Clinical consensus panels rapidly recommended abacavir as the preferred therapy along with HLA-B(*)5701 pre-testing, immediately increasing the market share of abacavir with respect to other reverse transcriptases that are associated with there own adverse events. Targeting of medicines during drug development is now possible, practical, and profitable.

[PMID: 19372817]
Although the past 20 years have seen many advances in HIV pharmacotherapy, host variability has only been more recently recognized as an important driver of both treatment response and toxicity. This review will focus on the importance of variability in drug metabolizing enzymes and the potential research and clinical applications of these findings in HIV care. The treatment of HIV is complex and involves chronic treatment with multiple drugs and drug classes. Recent research has been important in uncovering genetic differences in drug metabolizing and drug transporter genes, which underpin dose-dependent toxicity and efficacy, but also in genes defining differences in immune response and human leukocyte antigen genes, which restrict processes that are less dependent on the drug dose. The advancement of pharmacogenetics will continue to further our knowledge of disease-drug interactions and pathogenesis. Ultimately, the goals of pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics in HIV medicine will be the development of the right drugs for the right patient or population. The strong association between HLA-B5701 and abacavir hypersensitivity reaction shows promise for a genetic screening test to be feasibly incorporated into clinical practice. The clinical applicability of many findings demonstrating associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms, particularly in drug metabolism and transporter genes and drug efficacy and toxicity, are currently uncertain.

[PMID: 18680695]
The aim of the PREDICT-1 study was to determine the clinical utility of the pharmacogenetic test identifying HLA-B*5701 to reduce the incidence of hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir, diagnosed clinically and with immunological confirmation, as well as to reduce unwarranted withdrawal of this drug. In the PREDICT-1 study, 1,956 patients were randomized to be screened for HLA-B*5701 before starting abacavir treatment (excluding participants who were HLA-B*5701-positive) or to receive abacavir without knowing their HLA-B*5701 status under conventional clinical monitoring. The prevalence of HLA-B*5701-positivity was 5.7%. In the group that underwent prospective screening, no hypersensitivity tests with immunological confirmation (by positive epicutaneous patch testing) were observed compared with an incidence of 2.7% in the group undergoing standard follow-up. The sensitivity of prospective screening in predicting immunologically confirmed hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir was 100% and its negative predictive value was 100%. The number of clinically suspected hypersensitivity reactions to abacavir was also lower in the screened group (3.4% versus 7.8% in the group undergoing conventional follow-up). The sensitivity of epicutaneous patch testing for immunological confirmation was 100%.

[PMID: 20070406]
Prospective pharmacogenetic screening for the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) B*5701 allele can significantly reduce the number of cases of abacavir-related hypersensitivity among HIV-infected patients treated with this drug. The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of the HLA B*5701 variant in HIV-infected Poles. The sequence-specific primer (SSP) test was used to assess the feasibility of the introduction of such testing in clinical practice. For this purpose, 234 randomly selected HIV-positive patients were screened using a low-resolution SSP assay, with HLA B*5701-positive results confirmed using a high-resolution test. The HLA B*5701 variant was found in 11 of 234 subjects (4.7%). Testing with the selected method proved quick and reliable.

[PMID: 21691271]
Pharmacogenomic tests offer a promising strategy to improve the safety and efficacy of drug treatment. Compelling examples, such as HLA-B*5701 testing to identify patients at risk for abacavir-associated hypersensitivity, are already changing clinical care. However, the level of evidence required to establish clinical utility is often the subject of debate. Determining the most efficient and effective pathway to benefit for a given test is therefore both a practical and an ethical concern.

[PMID: 21521028]
International HIV treatment guidelines recommend HLA-B*57:01 typing before abacavir administration, in order to reduce the incidence of abacavir hypersensitivity reactions, the major cause of early therapy discontinuation. A fast, sensitive and specific test for HLA-B*57:01 detection has been developed in the present study. Two sets of sequence-specific primers were designed, and amplification rapidly detected by real-time PCR. A total of 108 samples were analyzed in a single-blind fashion, and 41 samples were identified as positive. Complete agreement, with κ = 1 (standard error = 0.0962, p < 0.0001), was found, with a validated methodology used in the EPI109367 clinical trial funded by GlaxoSmithKline, and consisting of low-resolution sequence-specific oligonucleotide PCR, followed by high-resolution sequence-specific oligonucleotide PCR carried out on the HLA-B*57-positive samples. We provided a detailed characterization of a novel HLA-B*57:01 screening test, which can be easily implemented by those laboratories already involved in the detection of viral load and virus genotyping. Original submitted 26 October 2010; Revision submitted 13 December 2010.

[PMID: 20487194]
Pharmacogenomics strives to explain the interindividual variability in response to drugs due to genetic variation. Although technological advances have provided us with relatively easy and cheap methods for genotyping, promises about personalised medicine have not yet met our high expectations. Successful results that have been achieved within the field of pharmacogenomics so far are, to name a few, HLA-B*5701 screening to avoid hypersensitivity to the antiretroviral abacavir, thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) genotyping to avoid thiopurine toxicity, and CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotyping for better dosing of the anticoagulant warfarin. However, few pharmacogenetic examples have made it into clinical practice in the treatment of complex diseases. Unfortunately, lack of reproducibility of results from observational studies involving many genes and diseases seems to be a common pattern in pharmacogenomic studies. In this article we address some of the methodological and statistical issues within study design, gene and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) selection and data analysis that should be considered in future pharmacogenomic research. First, we discuss some of the issues related to the design of epidemiological studies, specific to pharmacogenomic research. Second, we describe some of the pros and cons of a candidate gene approach (including gene and SNP selection) and a genome-wide scan approach. Finally, conventional as well as several innovative approaches to the analysis of large pharmacogenomic datasets are proposed that deal with the issues of multiple testing and systems biology in different ways.

[PMID: 19207023]
Abacavir hypersensitivity (ABC HSR) is a treatment-limiting adverse event associated with the use of the antiretroviral medicine, abacavir. The objective of the ABC HSR pharmacogenetics program was to identify clinically useful genetic risk factors to predict an individual patient's risk for ABC HSR. The major histocompatibility complex allele, HLA-B*5701, was identified retrospectively and confirmed with independent sample sets. The clinical utility of prospective HLA-B*5701 screening was demonstrated in a blinded randomized clinical trial and in open-label cohorts. Screening has been incorporated into clinical practice and the ABC HSR pharmacogenetics program has been highlighted as a success by pharmacogenetics researchers. Important lessons from this pharmacogenetics program will be discussed in this paper.

[PMID: 18444831]
Although the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B*5701 is highly associated with a hypersensitivity reaction (HSR) to abacavir (ABC), variable sensitivities have been reported when clinical data alone have been used to define an ABC HSR. This study evaluated the sensitivity of detection of the HLA-B*5701 allele as a marker of ABC HSRs in both white and black patients, using skin patch testing to supplement clinical diagnosis. White and black patients, identified through chart review, were classified as having received a diagnosis of an ABC HSR based on clinical findings only (a clinically suspected ABC HSR) or based on clinical findings and a positive skin patch test result (an immunologically confirmed [IC] ABC HSR). Control subjects were racially matched subjects who tolerated ABC for >/=12 weeks without experiencing an ABC HSR. Patients and control subjects were tested for the presence of HLA-B*5701. Sensitivity, specificity, and odds ratios for the detection of HLA-B*5701 as a marker for an ABC HSR were calculated for white and black participants. Forty-two (32.3%) of 130 white patients and 5 (7.2%) of 69 black patients who met the criteria for clinically suspected HSRs had IC HSRs. All 42 white patients with IC HSRs were HLA-B*5701 positive (sensitivity, 100%; odds ratio, 1945; 95% confidence interval, 110-34,352). Among all white patients with clinically suspected HSRs, sensitivity was 44% (57 of 130 patients tested positive for HLA-B*5701); specificity among white control subjects was 96%. Five of 5 black patients with IC HSRs were HLA-B*5701 positive (sensitivity, 100%; odds ratio, 900; 95% confidence interval, 38-21,045). Among black patients with clinically suspected HSRs, the sensitivity was 14% (10 of 69 tested positive for HLA-B*5701); specificity among black control subjects was 99%. Although IC ABC HSRs are uncommon in black persons, the 100% sensitivity of HLA-B*5701 as a marker for IC ABC HSRs in both US white and black patients suggests similar implications of the association between HLA-B*5701 positivity and risk of ABC HSRs in both races.

[PMID: 18192781]
Genetic associations highlighting differences in the response to HIV infection and treatment have significantly furthered our understanding of the pathogenesis, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antiretroviral drug action and toxicities and HIV disease itself. This review focuses on the current knowledge of associations between polymorphisms and treatment outcomes in HIV with particular emphasis on clinically relevant relationships likely to lead to the individualization of antiretroviral therapy. Our understanding of the immunogenetic basis of drug toxicity has been furthered by human leucocyte antigen associations with hypersensitivities for the antiretroviral drugs abacavir and nevirapine. For abacavir in particular, the use of HLA-B*5701 as a screening test appears to be generalizable across racially diverse populations and has been supported by both observational, and blinded randomized controlled trials. Differences in HIV acquisition and progression as well as antiretroviral efficacy and toxicity will continue to provide the basis for research to define the genetic basis of such diversity. Despite the plethora of research in this area, numerous barriers exist to the successful operationalization of genetic testing to the clinic. HLA-B*5701 screening to prevent abacavir hypersensitivity is currently the most relevant to clinical practice and highlights that the promise of cost-effective testing can be facilitated by robust laboratory methodology and quality assurance programs that can be applied to diverse treatment settings.

[PMID: 18256392]
Hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir is strongly associated with the presence of the HLA-B*5701 allele. This study was designed to establish the effectiveness of prospective HLA-B*5701 screening to prevent the hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir. This double-blind, prospective, randomized study involved 1956 patients from 19 countries, who were infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and who had not previously received abacavir. We randomly assigned patients to undergo prospective HLA-B*5701 screening, with exclusion of HLA-B*5701-positive patients from abacavir treatment (prospective-screening group), or to undergo a standard-of-care approach of abacavir use without prospective HLA-B*5701 screening (control group). All patients who started abacavir were observed for 6 weeks. To immunologically confirm, and enhance the specificity of, the clinical diagnosis of hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir, we performed epicutaneous patch testing with the use of abacavir. The prevalence of HLA-B*5701 was 5.6% (109 of 1956 patients). Of the patients receiving abacavir, 72% were men, 84% were white, and 18% had not previously received antiretroviral therapy. Screening eliminated immunologically confirmed hypersensitivity reaction (0% in the prospective-screening group vs. 2.7% in the control group, P<0.001), with a negative predictive value of 100% and a positive predictive value of 47.9%. Hypersensitivity reaction was clinically diagnosed in 93 patients, with a significantly lower incidence in the prospective-screening group (3.4%) than in the control group (7.8%) (P<0.001). HLA-B*5701 screening reduced the risk of hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir. In predominantly white populations, similar to the one in this study, 94% of patients do not carry the HLA-B*5701 allele and are at low risk for hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir. Our results show that a pharmacogenetic test can be used to prevent a specific toxic effect of a drug. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00340080.)

[PMID: 18673126]
HIV infection is a serious but treatable disease, yet current treatment is limited by development of resistance and high rates of adverse drug reactions. Antiretroviral therapy is especially suitable for pharmacogenomic investigation as both drug exposure and treatment response can be reliably measured. Increasing knowledge about genes implicated in pharmacokinetics, mode of action, efficacy, and toxicity of drugs has already provided relevant results for clinical practice, for example: The strong association of the abacavir hypersensitivity reaction with HLA-B*5701 permits testing patients for the allele, and if present avoiding the drug and therefore preventing the reaction. Persons with the allele CYP2B6*6 present higher efavirenz "area under the curve" and have increased risk of neuropsychological toxicity. Additional gene variants are being discovered that influence the action of antiretroviral drugs. And, moreover, it is expected that larger-scale comprehensive genome approaches will profoundly improve the landscape of knowledge of HIV therapy in the future. The present article shows some recent patents related to the treatment of viral infections.

[PMID: 17534855]
Pharmacogenetics (PGx) - the study of DNA variation in the human genome and the way this impacts the efficacy and safety of medicines - is becoming an increasingly important research tool as physicians, patients, regulatory authorities and payers look for innovative ways to improve the risk:benefit ratio of medicines. While scientific knowledge about PGx is rapidly increasing, implementation of PGx findings to patient care has yet to be fully achieved. One area where significant progress has been made is in the identification of PGx markers associated with variable response to antiretroviral medicines. For example, the major histocompatibility complex HLA-B*5701 allele has been associated with hypersensitivity to abacavir (ABC) by several independent researchers. While PGx associations have been identified largely through retrospective examination, the clinical utility of these PGx markers in patient care has not been prospectively determined in a randomized study. This paper outlines the design of a study to evaluate the utility of prospective screening for HLA-B*5701 to reduce the incidence of ABC hypersensitivity in an ABC-naïve population of HIV-infected subjects. This represents the first fully powered, randomized, blinded, prospective study to determine the clinical utility of PGx screening to reduce drug-associated adverse events in any patient population. This type of trial design may have utility for other important medicines which have treatment-limiting side effects.

[PMID: 21142908]
The 2010 US FDA-Drug Industry Association (DIA) Pharmacogenomics Workshop, the fifth in a series of meetings that begun in 2002, brought together multidisciplinary experts from regulatory authorities, medical research, healthcare and drug development. This article summarizes the 'Designing Pharmacogenomic Studies to be Fit for Purpose' track in which considerations regarding the use of retrospective and prospective studies were examined in relation to their ability to influence treatment decisions and labeling for drugs. The aim of the session, using real-world examples (KRAS/panitumumab and HLA-B*5701/abacavir), was to identify good scientific principles that would guide the design of studies to identify subgroups of responders during development programs (including marketed drugs), which could subsequently be used to guide treatment decisions.