[PMID: 26958560]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a group of connective tissue disorders characterized by triad of joint hypermobility, skin extensibility, and tissue fragility. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV places patients at risk for life-threatening, spontaneous, vascular or visceral rupture due to reduced or abnormal secretion of type III collagen. We present an adolescent male who was found to have a perisigmoid abscess with a fistula connecting to adjacent sigmoid colon secondary to undiagnosed EDS type IV. Conservative management with antibiotics and bowel rest was pursued to allow for elective resection for his acute complicated diverticulitis at a safer time.

[PMID: 15589118]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of inherited connective tissue disorders characterized by tissue fragility, hyperelasticity of the skin and joint hypermobility. This phenotype, accompanied by kyphoscoliosis and/or ocular fragility, is present in patients with the autosomal recessive type VI form of EDS. These patients have significantly decreased levels of lysyl hydroxylase (LH) activity, due to mutations in the LH1 gene. LH hydroxylates specific lysine residues in the collagen molecule that are precursors for the formation of cross-links which provide collagen with its tensile strength. No disorder has been directly linked to decreased expression of LH2 and LH3, two other isoforms of LH. This study describes 3 patients with mixed phenotypes of EDS, who have significantly decreased mRNAs for LH2, but normal levels of LH1 and LH3 mRNAs, in their skin fibroblasts. In contrast to the effect of LH1 deficiency in EDS VI patients, the decreased expression of LH2 does not affect LH activity, bifunctional collagen cross-links (measured after reduction as dihydroxylysinonorleucine (DHLNL) and hydroxylysinonorleucine (HLNL)), or helical lysine hydroxylation in these cell lines. Sequence analysis of full length LH2 cDNAs and 1kb of the promoter region of LH2 does not show mutations that could explain the decreased expression of LH2. These results suggest that the deficiency of LH2 in these fibroblasts may be caused by changes in other factors required for the expression of LH2.

[PMID: 26452443]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders characterized by increased fragility of various non-ossified tissues. It is usually ascertained due to abnormal skin texture, scarring complications, vascular fragility, or chronic symptoms, such as fatigue and musculoskeletal pain. Sometimes, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome remains undetected until the patient, usually in the pediatric age, shows extensive or severe mucocutaneous injuries after only minor traumas. In this scenario, the misdiagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with child abuse is a possibility, as occasionally reported in the literature. Recently, more attention was posed by lay people between the possible association of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and bone fragility. Literature and personal experience show a strong association between Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, generalized joint hypermobility and reduced bone mass density in older children and adults, especially fertile women. The existence of a true increased risk of fracture in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is still a matter of debate in children and adults with little and conflicting evidence. In case of suspected child abuse, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is certainly on the differential for bruising, especially in EDS types with marked cutaneous and capillary involvement. In suspected child abuse cases, careful examination of the index case and her/his extended family is routine, as well as exclusion of other disorders such as osteogenesis imperfecta. The hypothesis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome as an alternative explanation for infantile fractures remains speculative.

[PMID: 22981642]
The Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a rare connective tissue disorder characterised by fragility of the soft connective tissues and widespread manifestations in skin, ligaments, joints, blood vessels and internal organs. We report a case of a 12-year-old boy, previously diagnosed with kyphoscoliosis-type EDS (type VI), presenting with a left brachial artery pseudo-aneursym with history of multiple spontaneous and post-traumatic arterial ruptures. Surgical management of this patient was performed successfully by primary repair of brachial artery lesion.

[PMID: 25103963]
The classic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (cEDS) is an inherited connective tissue disorder, where mutations in type V collagen-encoding genes result in abnormal collagen fibrils. Thus the cEDS patients have pathological connective tissue morphology and low stiffness, but the rate of connective tissue protein turnover is unknown. We investigated whether cEDS affected the protein synthesis rate in skin and tendon, and whether this could be stimulated in tendon tissue with insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). Five patients with cEDS and 10 healthy, matched controls (CTRL) were included. One patellar tendon of each participant was injected with 0.1 ml IGF-I (Increlex, Ipsen, 10 mg/ml) and the contralateral tendon with 0.1 ml isotonic saline as control. The injections were performed at both 24 and 6 h prior to tissue sampling. The fractional synthesis rate (FSR) of proteins in skin and tendon was measured with the stable isotope technique using a flood-primed continuous infusion over 6 h. After the infusion one skin biopsy and two tendon biopsies (one from each patellar tendon) were obtained. We found similar baseline FSR values in skin and tendon in the cEDS patients and controls [skin: 0.005 ± 0.002 (cEDS) and 0.007 ± 0.002 (CTRL); tendon: 0.008 ± 0.001 (cEDS) and 0.009 ± 0.002 (CTRL) %/h, mean ± SE]. IGF-I injections significantly increased FSR values in cEDS patients but not in controls (delta values: cEDS 0.007 ± 0.002, CTRL 0.001 ± 0.001%/h). In conclusion, baseline protein synthesis rates in connective tissue appeared normal in cEDS patients, and the patients responded with an increased tendon protein synthesis rate to IGF-I injections.

[PMID: 15817074]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) comprise a heterogenous group of heritable disorders of connective tissue, characterized by joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility and tissue fragility. Most EDS types are caused by mutations in genes encoding different types of collagen or enzymes, essential for normal processing of collagen. Oral health was assessed in 31 subjects with EDS (16 with hypermobility EDS, nine with classical EDS and six with vascular EDS), including signs and symptoms of temporomandibular disorders (TMD), alterations of dental hard tissues, oral mucosa and periodontium, and was compared with matched controls. All EDS subjects were symptomatic for TMD and reported recurrent temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dislocations. Abnormal pulp shape (13%) and pulp calcification (78%) were observed in subjects affected with classical EDS. Caries experience was higher in EDS compared with controls and was related to poor oral hygiene, influenced by increased mucosal fragility and restraint of (wrist) joint mobility. The overall periodontal status in EDS was poor, with 62% of EDS subjects presenting high periodontal treatment needs (community periodontal index for treatment need, CPITN = II). Oral health may be severely compromised in EDS as a result of specific alterations of collagen in orofacial structures. When considering dental treatment in EDS, a number of tissue responses (mucosa, periodontium, pulp) and precautions (TMJ dislocation) should be anticipated.

[PMID: 8526413]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a group of heritable connective tissue disorders that share the common features of skin hyperextensibility, articular hypermobility, and tissue fragility. Considerable clinical and genetic heterogeneity exists, and more than nine separate forms have been recognized. Recent advances in the molecular analysis of EDS have identify defects responsible for EDS VI (homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in the lysyl-hydroxylase gene), EDS VIIA and EDS VIIB (mutations in the type I collagene genes), EDS VIIC (deficiency of procollagen N-proteinase), EDS IX (mutations in the MNK gene), and EDS IV (mutations in the type III collagen gene). Of the various types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome the most severe is type IV (EDS IV). Early studies showed that fibroblasts from EDS IV patients secreted lower than normal amounts of type III procollagen (Pope et al., 1975). Later, the disease was linked to COL3A1, the gene encoding this protein. More recently, with the publication of full length cDNA and partial characterisation of the gene structure, detailed analysis of mutations in EDS IV patients has become possible. Nineteen different mutations in the type III procollagen gene have been reported in different families with EDS IV. Recent results support the hypothesis that in EDS IV, dominant inheritance should be assumed, in sporadic cases also, unless proven otherwise. Very little is known about the genetics or biochemicals defects responsible for the others EDS subtypes, but with the applications of the tools of molecular biology, analysis of these defects if now within reach.

[PMID: 26433894]
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of hereditary connective tissue disorders characterized by joint hypermobility, widespread musculoskeletal pain and tissue fragility. Psychiatric disorders and psychosocial impairment are common, yet poorly characterized, findings in EDS patients. We investigated the frequency and types of psychiatric disorders and their relationship to systemic manifestations in a cohort of 106 classic and hypermobility type EDS patients. In this retrospective study, extensive medical chart review was performed for patients referred at two genetics clinics who were diagnosed with EDS. Statistical analysis was undertaken to determine the frequency of psychiatric disorders and association with systemic findings. Psychiatric disorders were found in 42.5% of the EDS cohort, with 22.7% of patients affected with 2 or more psychiatric diagnoses. Anxiety and depression were most commonly reported, with frequencies of 23.6 and 25.5%, respectively. A variety of other psychiatric diagnoses were also identified. Abdominal pain [odds ratio (OR) 7.38], neuropathic pain (OR 4.07), migraines (OR 5.21), joint pain (OR 2.85) and fatigue (OR 5.55) were significantly associated with the presence of a psychiatric disorder. The presence of any pain symptom was significantly associated with having a psychiatric disorder (OR 9.68). Muscle pain (OR 2.79), abdominal pain (OR 5.78), neuropathic pain (OR 3.91), migraines (OR 2.63) and fatigue (OR 3.78) were significantly associated with having an anxiety or mood disorder. Joint hypermobility and the classic dermatological features of EDS showed no significant association with having a psychiatric disorder. Our findings demonstrate a high frequency of psychiatric disorders and an association with pain symptoms in EDS.

[PMID: 16513057]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders characterised by joint hypermobility, involvement of skin and tissue fragility. The Villefranche criteria have simplified its diagnosis, which, however, remains difficult in children and young adults with vascular and hypermobile EDS as well as in patients without a positive family history. Diagnosis of vascular EDS is important for clinical follow-up, genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis. We describe the biochemical and molecular-genetic diagnosis of vascular EDS. We describe five families with vascular EDS. Analysis of (pro)collagens obtained from cultured fibroblasts was done using SDS-PAGE. The structure and amounts of (pro)collagen I, III and V were determined by autoradioflourography. This was also done in 362 controls or patients without a diagnosis of vascular EDS. Molecular testing was done in Professor Anne de Paepe's laboratory in Belgium by sequencing of COL3A1. (Pro)collagen from all five patients with vascular EDS was abnormal by SDS-PAGE: intracellular retention, reduced secretion and overmodification of the a1 chains of (pro)collagen III. Molecular analysis revealed an abnormality of COL3A1 in all patients. Abnormalities of (pro)collagen III were not observed in patients without a diagnosis of vascular EDS. Among 90 patients with non-vascular EDS, one patient had an abnormality of collagen I. Biochemical analysis of (pro)collagen obtained from cultured fibroblasts is a good screening procedure for vascular EDS, but it is of limited value in non-vascular EDS. Molecular testing will disclose an abnormality of COL3A1 in many patients with abnormal (pro)collagen III on SDS-PAGE. The findings make precise genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis possible in families with vascular EDS.

[PMID: 27084695]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is characterized by abnormal connective tissue but bone involvement is debated. We found a reduced BMD and bone quality and increased prevalence of asymptomatic vertebral fractures in eugonadal patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. These findings suggest the need of a bone health evaluation in these patients. The Ehlers-Danlos (EDS) syndrome is characterized by abnormalities of the connective tissue leading to ligamentous laxity and skin and tissue fragility. We evaluated the bone metabolism, bone mineral density (BMD) and bone quality (measured by trabecular bone score, TBS), and the prevalence of vertebral fractures (VFx) in a group of eugonadal adult EDS patients. Fifty consecutive Caucasian patients, aged 30-50 years (36 females, 14 males) with classical or hypermobility EDS and 50 age-, gender-, and body mass index (BMI)-matched control subjects were enrolled. In all subjects' calcium-phosphorous metabolism, bone turnover, BMD at the lumbar spine (LS) and femur (femoral neck, FN and total femur, FT) and TBS by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, and the VFx presence by spine radiograph were assessed. Patients showed reduced BMD (Z-scores LS -0.45 ± 1.00, FN -0.56 ± 1.01, FT -0.58 ± 0.92) and TBS (1.299 ± 0.111) and increased prevalence of morphometric VFx (32 %) than controls (Z-scores LS 0.09 ± 1.22, FN 0.01 ± 0.97, FT 0.08 ± 0.89; TBS 1.382 ± 0.176; VFx 8 %, p <0.05 for all comparisons), while vitamin D levels, calcium-phosphorous metabolism, and bone turnover were comparable. Fractured EDS patients showed lower TBS values than non-fractured ones (1.245 ± 0.138 vs 1.325 ± 0.086, p < 0.05), despite comparable BMD. In EDS patients, the VFx presence was significantly associated with TBS even after adjusting for sex, age, BMD, EDS type, and falls frequency. EDS patients have reduced BMD and bone quality (as measured by TBS) and increased prevalence of VFx.

[PMID: 11642233]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heritable connective-tissue disorder caused by defects in fibrillar-collagen metabolism. Mutations in the type V collagen genes account for up to 50 percent of cases of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, but many other cases are unexplained. We investigated whether the deficiency of the tenascins, extracellular-matrix proteins that are highly expressed in connective tissues, was associated with the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. We screened serum samples from 151 patients with the classic, hypermobility, or vascular types of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; 75 patients with psoriasis; 93 patients with rheumatoid arthritis; and 21 healthy persons for the presence of tenascin-X and tenascin-C by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We examined the expression of tenascins and type V collagen in skin by immunohistochemical methods and sequenced the tenascin-X gene. Tenascin-X was present in serum from all normal subjects, all patients with psoriasis, all patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and 146 of 151 patients with the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Tenascin-X was absent from the serum of the 5 remaining patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, who were unrelated. Tenascin-X deficiency was confirmed in these patients by analysis of skin fibroblasts and by immunostaining of skin. The expression of tenascin-C and type V collagen was normal in these patients. All five of these patients had hypermobile joints, hyperelastic skin, and easy bruising, without atrophic scarring. Tenascin-X mutations were identified in all tenascin-X-deficient patients; one patient had a homozygous tenascin-X gene deletion, one was heterozygous for the deletion, and three others had homozygous truncating point mutations, confirming a causative role for tenascin-X and a recessive pattern of inheritance. Tenascin-X deficiency causes a clinically distinct, recessive form of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. This finding indicates that factors other than the collagens or collagen-processing enzymes can cause the syndrome and suggests a central role for tenascin-X in maintaining the integrity of collagenous matrix.

[PMID: 16338669]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), a heterogeneous group of inheritable connective tissue disorders, is attributed to mutations in connective tissue genes. These mutations cause defects in collagen. Collagen, a connective tissue protein that acts like glue, gives strength to the body and provides support and elasticity for movement. Thus, the altered gene affects the mechanical properties of skin, joints, ligaments, and blood vessels. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is transmitted through autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or x-linked patterns of inheritance. The life expectancy of an affected infant varies with the type of EDS. This article provides an overview of the 6 major classifications of EDS, their unique clinical presentations, a focused physical assessment guide, considerations for nursing care, and resources for parents. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome can be a potentially debilitating syndrome. It requires preventative and protective measures starting at birth to preserve joint function to improve infant outcomes. Caring for patients with EDS requires an understanding of the potential associated complications to help minimize the physical and emotional impact of the syndrome and improve the quality of life for affected individuals.

[PMID: 9762220]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome denotes a group of inherited connective tissue diseases comprising nine types. Type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is the most life-threatening form. It is characterized by a type III collagen deficiency resulting in arterial fragility and death from vascular rupture or bowel perforation. This disease involves a col 3A1 gene mutation. We report the case of a 44 year-old woman with type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The medical history of our patient included bowel necrosis and two vascular ruptures. We indicate data required to establish Ehlers-Danlos syndrome diagnosis and guidelines for patient management.

[PMID: 24278273]
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders. Gastrointestinal manifestations in EDS have been described but their frequency, nature and impact are poorly known. We aimed to assess digestive features in a national cohort of EDS patients. A questionnaire has been sent to 212 EDS patients through the French patient support group, all of which had been formally diagnosed according to the Villefranche criteria. The questionnaire included questions about digestive functional symptoms, the GIQLI (Gastrointestinal Quality of Life Index), KESS scoring system and the Rome III criteria. Overall, 135 patients (64% response rate) completed the questionnaire and 134 were analyzable (123 women; 91%). Mean age and Body Mass Index were respectively 35±14.7 years and 24.3±6.1 kg/m(2). The most common EDS subtype was hypermobility form (n=108; 80.6%). GIQLI and KESS median values were respectively 63.5 (27-117) and 19 [13.5-22]. Eighty four percent of patients had functional bowel disorders (FBD) according to the Rome III criteria. An irritable bowel syndrome according to the same criteria was observed in 64 patients (48%) and 48 patients (36%) reported functional constipation. A gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD) was reported in 90 patients (68.7%), significantly associated with a poorer GIQLI (60.5±16.8 versus 75.9±20.3; p<0.0001). GIQLI was also negatively impacted by the presence of an irritable bowel syndrome or functional constipation (p=0.007). There was a significant correlation between FBD and GERD. Natural frequency of gastrointestinal manifestations in EDS seems higher than previously assessed. FBD and GERD are very common in our study population, the largest ever published until now. Their impact is herein shown to be important. A systematic clinical assessment of digestive features should be recommended in EDS.

[PMID: 15994863]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) comprises a group of hereditary connective tissue disorders. Periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH) is a human neuronal migration disorder characterised by seizures and conglomerates of neural cells around the lateral ventricles of the brain, caused by FLNA mutations. FLNA encodes filamin A, an actin binding protein involved in cytoskeletal organisation. The amino-terminal actin binding domain (ABD) of filamins contains two tandem calponin homology domains, CHD1 and CHD2. To report clinical and genetic analyses in a Spanish family affected by a connective tissue disorder suggestive of EDS type III and PNH. A clinical and molecular study was undertaken in the three affected women. Clinical histories, physical and neurological examinations, brain magnetic resonance imaging studies, and skin biopsies were done. Genetic analysis of the FLNA gene was undertaken by direct sequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. Mutation analysis of the FLNA gene resulted in the identification of a novel mutation in exon 3 (c.383C-->T) segregating with the combination of both syndromes. This mutation results in a substitution of an alanine residue (A128V) in CHD1. The findings suggest that the Ala128Val mutation causes the dual EDS-PNH phenotype. This association constitutes a new variant within the EDS spectrum. This is the first description of a familial EDS-PNH association with a mutation in FLNA.

[PMID: 18328988]
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) and Marfan syndrome (MFS) are multisystemic disorders that primarily affect the soft connective tissues. Both disorders have benefited from recent advances in clinical and molecular characterization, allowing improvements in clinical diagnosis and management. EDS are a heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, joint hypermobility and generalized tissue fragility. The current classification proposes six subtypes based on clinical, biochemical and molecular characteristics. However, examples of unclassified variants and 'overlap phenotypes' are becoming more common. Mutations in genes encoding fibrillar collagens or collagen-modifying enzymes have been identified in most forms of EDS, including the classic and vascular subtypes (collagen type V and III, respectively), and the rare arthrochalasis, kyphoscoliosis and dermatosparaxis variants (type I collagen defects). To date, the genetic background of the hypermobility type of EDS remains unclear, although some new insights have been gained recently. MFS is an autosomal-dominant disorder that affects the cardiovascular, ocular and skeletal system with aortic root dilation/dissection, ectopia lentis and bone overgrowth, respectively. Advances in therapeutic, mainly surgical, techniques have improved median survival significantly, yet severe morbidity and a substantial risk for premature mortality remain associated. The disorder is caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene, encoding the microfibrillar protein fibrillin-1. Recently, new insights in the pathogenesis changed the prevailing concept of this type 1 fibrillinopathy as a structural disorder of the connective tissue into a developmental abnormality manifesting perturbed cytokine signalling. These findings have opened new and unexpected targets for aetiologically directed drug treatments.

[PMID: 27931023]
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDSs) constitute a rare group of inherited connective tissue diseases, characterized by multisystemic manifestations and general tissue fragility. Most severe complications include vascular and gastrointestinal (GI) emergencies requiring acute surgery. The purpose of this systematic review was to assess the causes of GI-related surgery and related mortality and morbidity in patients with EDSs. A systematic search was conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Scopus to identify relevant studies. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis guidelines for systematic reviews were followed. According to eligibility criteria, data were extracted and systematically screened by 2 authors. Screening process identified 11 studies with a total of 1,567 patients. Findings indicated that patients with EDSs had a higher occurrence of surgery demanding GI manifestations, including perforation, hemorrhage, rupture of intra-abdominal organs, and rectal prolapse. Most affected was the vascular subtype, of which up to 33% underwent GI surgery and suffered from a lowered average life expectancy of 48 years (range 6-78). Secondary complications of surgery were common in all patients with EDSs. Studies suggested that patients with EDSs present an increased need for GI surgery, but also an increased risk of surgery-related complications, most predominantly seen in the vascular subtype.

[PMID: 22871544]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 4, the vascular type, is a rare, life-threatening inherited disorder of the connective tissue. Affected patients are at risk of arterial, bowel and uterine rupture during pregnancy. Generally, this syndrome remains undiagnosed until a sudden, acute presentation with organ rupture, and results in premature death, even if the patients survive the first and second major complications. An early diagnosis with genetic assays can help to plan the best treatment, which is often challenging due to the frailty of the arterial tissue. We report on a 28-year-old lady who presented with spontaneous rupture of a pseudoaneurysm of the posterior tibial artery.

[PMID: 17621503]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a complex hereditary connective tissue disorder that is characterized by abnormalities of the skin and joints and visceral and neurological manifestations. At present, at least 11 forms are recognized on the basis of their clinical characteristics, methods of transmission, and biochemical defect. The neurologic manifestations include cerebrovascular disease, peripheral neuropathy, plexopathy, periventricular subependymal heterotopias, and epilepsy. Previously, 2 females were reported to be affected with subependimal periventricular heterotopias and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 1. The authors report a new case of a 12-year-old girl with similar clinical and neuroradiological features.

[PMID: 20847697]
Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heritable connective tissue disorder characterized by skin hyperextensibility, fragile and soft skin, delayed wound healing with formation of atrophic scars, easy bruising, and generalized joint hypermobility. It comprises Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type I and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type II, but it is now apparent that these form a continuum of clinical findings and differ only in phenotypic severity. It is currently estimated that approximately 50% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome harbor mutations in the COL5A1 and the COL5A2 gene, encoding the α1 and the α2-chain of type V collagen, respectively. However, because no prospective molecular studies of COL5A1 and COL5A2 have been performed in a clinically well-defined patient group, this number may underestimate the real proportion of patients with classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome harboring a mutation in one of these genes. In the majority of patients with molecularly characterized classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, the disease is caused by a mutation leading to a nonfunctional COL5A1 allele and resulting in haploinsufficiency of type V collagen. A smaller proportion of patients harbor a structural mutation in COL5A1 or COL5A2, causing the production of a functionally defective type V collagen protein. Most mutations identified so far result in a reduced amount of type V collagen in the connective tissues available for collagen fibrillogenesis. Inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic variability is observed, but no genotype-phenotype correlations have been observed. No treatment for the underlying defect is presently available for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. However, a series of preventive guidelines are applicable.

[PMID: 25518796]
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (VEDS), previously called Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type-IV, is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders characterized by thin, translucent skin, easy bruising, arterial, intestinal, and/or uterine fragility. There is large vessel involvement that leads to arterial rupture often preceded by aneurysm, arteriovenous fistulae, or dissection. Noninvasive imaging studies such as CT angiography and MR angiography are preferred as diagnostic studies for this condition. We are reporting a 4 years old girl who was presented with right sided unilateral convulsions and hypertension. CT angiogram showed stenosis with post-stenotic dilatation of coeliac and superior mesenteric arteries. There were extensive calcified plaques with atherosclerotic changes in the segment of right common iliac artery with aneurysmal dilatation of celiac, superior mesenteric and common iliac artery. Radiological findings were consistent with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. She was successfully managed with anti-hypertensive and anticonvulsants.

[PMID: 21667916]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes comprise a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders characterized by articular hypermobility, skin extensibility, and tissue fragility. Surgical treatment of scoliosis associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome poses a challenge to spine surgeons because of the high risk of major complications. There is a paucity of evidence in the literature on surgical treatment for scoliosis in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome patient.This article describes 3 adolescent patients diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliosis type, which was treated by posterior spinal fusion only. After unsuccessful conservative treatment for at least 1 year, the patients underwent posterior spinal surgery for the correction of spinal deformity. A satisfactory correction in the spinal curve was achieved, with no obvious loss of correction during follow-up. No intra- or postoperative major complications were observed.Our experience supports that a satisfactory correction of scoliosis can be achieved by posterior spinal fusion only in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliosis type.

[PMID: 23405630]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), inherited disorder of connective tissue, frequently leads to impairment of various functional areas, including employment. In 35 subjects with classic type EDS, 14 hypermobile, 3 vascular was administered 7 visual analogical scales (pain, stiffness, activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, work, social relations). An impairment of particular significance in total score and in individual areas emerges is in the hypermobile group, followed by classic, less for the vasculature. Overall there is a significant alteration of the quality of life that deserves proper evaluation to facilitate the definition of fitness and the improvement of job insertion in patients with EDS.

[PMID: 16638060]
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome encompasses a group of hereditary disorders of the connective tissue, characterized by hyperextensible skin, joint hypermobility; and varying degrees of vessel and tissue fragility. The main forms are classical, hypermobile, vascular, kyphoscoliotic A/B, arthrochalasis A/B and dermatosparaxis types. We report our experience in diagnosis and classification of Ehlers-Danlos-syndrome, especially with the combination of clinical and morphological criteria, at the Department of Dermatology of the University of Heidelberg with more than 600 patients between 1984 and 2004. We classified those types of EDS which are characterized by regular and characteristic ultrastructural changes in the dermal components, primarily collagen, including the classical, hypermobile and vascular types as well as the less-common arthrochalasis and dermatosparaxis types. The combination of clinical and morphologic features facilitates the selection of candidate genes for molecular genetic investigation. Besides the skin, skeleton and vessels, many other organ systems such as eyes and intestine, can be affected in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Accordingly, interdisciplinary cooperation (pediatrics, surgery, orthopedics, rheumatology, neurology, genetics) is necessary. As the connective tissue of the skin is accessible for biopsy and diagnostic investigation, dermatologists should be trained in the diagnostic approach and classification of this syndrome.

[PMID: 2721265]
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is an inherited connective tissue disorder. Clinical manifestations of this syndrome are due to fragile connective tissue. Though many cardiovascular disorders in association with it have been reported, myocardial infarction is quite rare. In this report, two cases with type 4 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and myocardial infarction are described. Patient 1 was a 30-year-old woman. She was diagnosed as having myocardial infarction on the basis of typical changes in electrocardiograms and serum enzymes (CPK, SGOT and LDH). The diagnosis of type 4 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome was made by the microscopic examination of her connective tissue. Patient 2 was a 32-year-old man. He was also diagnosed as having acute myocardial infarction. His fibroblasts were cultured and they could not synthesize type 3 collagen. Type 4 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome was diagnosed. It was likely that myocardial infarction might have resulted from the fragility of their coronary arteries in type 4 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.