[PMID: 21699851]
Sudden death due to low-energy blunt trauma to the precordium (commotio cordis) has been described with a variety of sporting objects. However, the risk of ventricular fibrillation (VF) relative to the shape of the impact object is not known. The objective of the current experiment is to test whether the impact object shape is a clinical variable that affects the risk for commotio cordis. In a juvenile swine model, impacts were given in random order with two different spherical shapes (72 mm diameter, equivalent to a baseball; 42 mm diameter, equivalent to a golf ball) and a flat round object 72 mm in diameter. Objects were equal in weight (150 g), thrown at 30 mph, and gated to the vulnerable portion of the cardiac cycle. Sixteen swine received 144 impacts. The flat object did not cause VF (P = .01 compared with the two spherical objects), nonsustained VF, ST elevation, or bundle branch block. The smaller diameter sphere caused VF in nine of 48 impacts (19%), and the larger diameter sphere caused VF in five of 48 impacts (10%; P = .25). The smaller diameter sphere was associated with a greater increase in left ventricular pressure (P <.0001 and P = .001 compared with larger sphere only) and a higher likelihood of ST segment elevations (P <.001 and P = .08 compared with larger sphere only) and bundle branch block (Fisher's exact P = .008, and Fisher's exact P = .18 compared with larger sphere only). The shape of the projectile markedly influences the risk of VF from chest wall impact. This effect is likely mediated via a greater increase in left ventricular pressure with smaller diameter objects. Spreading the impact force over a larger area may decrease the risk of sudden death and has implications for the design of protective athletic equipment.

[PMID: 14646469]
Commotio cordis due to blunt trauma to the precordium is a rare cause of death in young athletes, occurring less frequently than all of the other athletics-related deaths. Commotio cordis is a term used to describe cases of blunt thoracic impact causing fatality without structural damage of the heart and internal organs. Death is attributed to ventricular fibrillation, which is often resistant to resuscitative therapy. In this article we discussed this catastrophic event, its historical development, epidemiology and clinical presentation, mechanisms for sudden death in commotio cordis, limitations of evidence using animal models, autopsy findings, resuscitation and preventive measures.

[PMID: 11048776]
Over the last few years, the recognised cardiovascular risks of sporting activities have been extended to include cardiac arrest resulting from low-energy precordial chest impact produced by projectiles (e.g. baseball) or bodily contact, in the young, healthy and active athlete [also known as commotio cordis (CC)]. However, case reports of CC in European medical literature can be traced back for at least 130 years. CC accounts for a small, but important, subset of sudden death during sporting activities. It is a devastating electrophysiological event in the young athlete, and one which has generated considerable concern, both in the medical profession as well as in the public. The mechanism of sudden death appears to be caused by ventricular fibrillation, which occurs when the chest impact is delivered within a narrow, electrically vulnerable portion of the cardiac cycle, that is, during repolarisation, just before the peak of the T wave. Resuscitation of these victims is possible with prompt cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation. Preventive measures, such as the use of age-appropriate safety baseballs and suitably designed chest wall protection, may reduce the risk of sudden death and, thus, make the athletic field a safer place for young athletes.

[PMID: 11208236]
Although thought to be rare, sudden deaths caused by nonpenetrating chest wall impact in the absence of structural injury to the ribs, sternum, and heart (commotio cordis) are reported with increasing frequency. This phenomenon is described in individuals when they are struck by relatively innocent blows to the chest wall. Young male athletes aged 5 to 18 years are particularly at risk for this catastrophe. It has been described after blows to the chest from baseballs, softballs, hockey pucks, and other objects. Death is usually instantaneous, and successful resuscitation is uncommon. A recently reported experimental model provides clues to the mechanisms and inferences for the prevention and treatment of this devastating condition. This swine model shows that a) ventricular fibrillation results from low-energy chest wall impacts during a vulnerable period of repolarization, b) the risk of this event can be decreased with softer-than-standard baseballs, and c) prompt defibrillation is crucial for resuscitation to be successful.

[PMID: 11334832]
Moderate pre-cordial mechanical impact can cause sudden cardiac death, even in the absence of morphological damage to the heart. This is the most severe expression of a condition termed, in the 19th century, Commotio cordis. Experimental studies performed in the early 1930s showed that sudden cardiac death after chest impact is brought about by an intrinsic cardiac response to the mechanical stimulus. The precise (sub-)cellular mechanisms of this response are still poorly understood. This article summarises experimental findings on the condition and relates them to the more recently established concept of cardiac mechano-electric feedback. As a result, an explanation of the mechanisms that give rise to sudden cardiac death by Commotio cordis and targets for further research are suggested.

[PMID: 17957272]
Sudden arrhythmic death as a result of a blunt chest wall blow has been termed Commotio Cordis (CC). CC is being reported with increasing frequency with more than 180 cases now described in the United States Commotio Cordis Registry. The clinical spectrum is diverse; however young athletes tend to be most at risk, with victims commonly being struck by projectiles regarded as standard implements of the sport. Sudden death is instantaneous and victims are most often found in ventricular fibrillation (VF). Chest blows are not of sufficient magnitude to cause any significant damage to overlying thoracic structures and autopsy is notable for the absence of any structural cardiac injury. Development of an experimental model has allowed for substantial insights into the underlying mechanisms of sudden death. In anesthetized juvenile swine, induction of VF is instantaneous following chest impacts that occur during a vulnerable window before the T wave peak. Other critical variables, including the impact velocity and location, and the hardness of the impact object have also been identified. Rapid left ventricular pressure rise following chest impact likely results in activation of ion channels via mechano-electric coupling. The generation of inward current through mechano-sensitive ion channels results in augmentation of repolarization and non-uniform myocardial activation, and is the cause of premature ventricular depolarizations that are triggers of VF in CC. Currently available chest protectors commonly used in sport are not adequately designed to prevent CC. The development of more effective chest protectors and the widespread availability of automated external defibrillators at youth sporting events could improve the safety of young athletes.

[PMID: 22869311]
Commotio Cordis (CC) is the second leading cause of mortality in youth sports. Impacts occurring directly over the left ventricle (LV) during a vulnerable period of the cardiac cycle can cause ventricular fibrillation (VF), which results in CC. In order to better understand the pathophysiology of CC, and develop a mechanical model for CC, appropriate injury criteria need to be developed. This effort consisted of impacts to seventeen juvenile porcine specimens (mass 21-45 kg). Impacts were delivered over the cardiac silhouette during the venerable period of the cardiac cycle. Four impact speeds were used: 13.4, 17.9, 22.4, and 26.8 m/s. The impactor was a lacrosse ball on an aluminum shaft instrumented with an accelerometer (mass 188 g-215 g). The impacts were recorded using high-speed video. LV pressure was measured with a catheter. Univariate binary logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the predictive ability of ten injury criteria. A total of 187 impacts were used in the analysis. The criteria were evaluated on their predictive ability based on Somers' D (D) and Goodman-Kruskal gamma (γ). Injury risk functions were created for all criteria using a 2-parameter Weibull distribution using survival analysis. The best criteria for predicting CC were impact force (D=0.52, and γ=0.52) force*compression (D=0.49, and γ=0.49), and impact power (D=0.49, and γ=0.49). All of these criteria proved significant in predicting the probability of CC from projectile impacts in youth sports (p<0.01). Force proved to be the most predictive of the ten criteria evaluated.

[PMID: 22816548]
Commotio cordis is a rare type of blunt cardiac injury in which low impact chest trauma causes sudden cardiac arrest, usually occurs from being struck by a projectile during sports. The most common arrhythmia during commotio cordis is ventricular fibrillation, although complete heart block and an idioventricular rhythm have also been reported. We describe a case of a young patient who presented with a persistent third-degree atrioventricular block and a left bundle branch block, following blunt chest trauma, as a result of blow by soccer ball and subsequently needed a permanent pacemaker.

[PMID: 17229310]
Commotio cordis (CC), sudden death as a result of a blunt, often innocent-appearing chest wall blow, is being reported with increasing frequency. The clinical spectrum is diverse; however, a substantial number of cases occur in youth athletics. In events that occur during sport, victims are struck by projectiles regarded as standard implements of the game. Sudden death is instantaneous and victims are most often found in ventricular fibrillation (VF). Overall survival is poor; however, successful resuscitation can be achieved with early defibrillation. Autopsy is notable for the absence of any significant cardiac or thoracic injury. Development of an experimental model has allowed for substantial insights into the underlying mechanisms of sudden death. In anesthetized juvenile swine, induction of VF is instantaneous following chest wall blows occurring during a vulnerable window before the T wave peak. Crucial variables including the velocity of impact, impact location, and hardness of the impact object have been identified. Rapid left ventricular (LV) pressure rise following chest impact likely results in activation of ion channels via mechano-electric coupling. The generation of inward current via mechano-sensitive ion channels likely results in augmentation of repolarization and nonuniform myocardial activation, and is the cause of premature ventricular depolarizations that are triggers of VF in CC. While softer-than-standard safety baseballs reduce the risk of CC, commercially available chest protectors are ineffective in preventing CC. The development of more effective chest protectors and more widespread use of automated external defibrillators at youth sporting events are needed.

[PMID: 23107651]
Commotio cordis events due to precordial blows triggering ventricular fibrillation are a cause of sudden death (SD) during sports and also daily activities. Despite the absence of structural cardiac abnormalities, these events have been considered predominantly fatal with low survival rates. To determine whether expected mortality rates for commotio cordis have changed over time, associated with greater public visibility. US Commotio Cordis Registry was accessed to tabulate frequency of reported SD or resuscitated cardiac arrest over 4 decades. At their commotio cordis event, 216 study patients were 0.2-51 years old (mean age 15±9 years); 95% were males. Death occurred in 156 individuals (72%), while the other 60 (28%) survived. Proportion of survivors increased steadily with concomitant decrease in fatal events. For the initial years (1970-1993), 6 of 59 cases survived (10%), while during 1994-2012, 54 of 157 (34%) survived (P = .001). The most recent 6 years, survival from commotio cordis was 31 of 53 (58%), with survivor and nonsurvivor curves ultimately crossing. Higher survival rates were associated with more prompt resuscitation (40%<3 minutes vs 5%>3 minutes; P<.001) and participation in competitive sports (39%; P<.001), but with lower rates in African Americans (1 of 24; 4%) than in whites (54 of 166; 33%; P = .004). Independent predictors of mortality were black race (P = .045) and participation in noncompetitive sports (P = .002), with an on-site automated external defibrillator use protective against SD (P = .01). Survival from commotio cordis has increased, likely owing to more rapid response times and access to defibrillation, as well as greater public awareness of this condition.

[PMID: 15331287]
Commotio cordis is ventricular fibrillation that results from blunt chest trauma and is a life threatening condition; early resuscitation and defibrillation are critical. This may occur during sporting events or from child abuse and most patients are boys who are younger than 16 years. Commotio cordis' prognosis depends on the availability of cardiac defibrillation. Automatic defibrillators at convenient locations near sporting events, combined with improved cardiopulmonary resuscitation education, may improve chances of survival after this rare phenomenon. Transient cardiac conduction abnormalities and arrhythmias have been observed in survivors; therefore, cardiac clearance before resumption of sports is indicated.

[PMID: 10392228]
Commotio cordis due to blunt trauma to the precordium is a rare cause of death in young athletes, occurring less frequently than all of the other athletics-related deaths. Several measures, such as the use of safety baseballs and the use of chest protectors, can help protect young athletes from commotio cordis. In general, sudden cardiac death in athletes is receiving increasing attention from the public as a result of recent deaths of high-profile athletes. Sudden cardiac death, however, is rare, with an estimated 1 out of 200,000 high school athletes at risk each year. However, the personal, physiological, and cardiovascular benefits of athletics far outweigh the risks. Therefore, the message to parents is to allow their children to participate in athletics because the benefits far outweigh the risks.

[PMID: 9930916]
Not particularly well recognized are athletic field catastrophes in which virtually instantaneous cardiac arrest is produced by nonpenetrating chest blows in the absence of heart disease or identifiable morphologic injury to the chest wall or heart (commotio cordis). To better characterize the clinical profile of this syndrome, we have assembled 70 cases, including 34 occurring during organized competitive athletics and 36 others that occurred during informal recreational sports at home, school or the playground, or during nonsporting activities. Ages were 2 to 38 (mean age: 12) with 70% < 16 years old. Most common sports involved were youth baseball (n = 40), softball (n = 7), and ice hockey (n = 7). Seven (10%) of the 70 commotio cordis victims, including six with documented ventricular fibrillation, have survived the consequences of their chest blow. Eleven of the events (16%) occurred despite the presence of chest padding believed to be potentially protective. Four victims experienced modest chest blows while in circumstances completely unrelated to sports activities; three of the four individuals who delivered these blows were ultimately convicted of criminal acts within the justice system. An experimental model of low-energy chest wall impact demonstrates that commotio cordis events are due largely to the exquisite timing of blows during a narrow window within the repolarization phase of the cardiac cycle, 15 to 30 msec prior to the peak of the T wave.

[PMID: 10894918]
Sudden death following blunt chest trauma is a frightening occurrence known as 'commotio cordis' or 'concussion of the heart'. It is speculated that commotio cordis could be caused by ventricular fibrillation secondary to an impact-induced energy that was transmitted via the chest wall to the myocardium during its vulnerable repolarization period. We describe a survivor of commotio cordis caused by a baseball. In this patient, an initial ventricular fibrillation was documented and converted by direct current defibrillation. Serial electrocardiographic changes (bifascicular conduction block and T wave inversion in precordial leads) were noticed in this patient. Our case suggested that coronary vasospasm might also play a role in commotio cordis.

[PMID: 22027166]
Blunt, non-penetrating trauma of the chest (commotio cordis) can cause sudden death in individuals without known cardiac disease. Sudden death in commotio cordis is due to ventricular fibrillation. The timing of the blow must be during the electric vulnerable period of the ECG cyclus, 10-40 milliseconds before the peak of the T-wave. The risk of arrhythmia increases progressively, until a velocity of 64 km/h, and at higher velocities the risk of ventricular fibrillation begins to diminish. The location of the impact must be directly over the cardiac silhouette.

[PMID: 15744544]
Commotio cordis is a recognised cause of sudden death in which an apparently minor blow to the chest causes ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest. It is best known for causing death during games of youth baseball in the United States, but individual cases have been recorded as a result of a wide range of activities, principally sporting. The underlying biochemical and mechano-electric causes have been well documented. However, there are few reported cases where commotio cordis is implicated as the cause of death in homicide cases. We present three cases from the north-east of England where an assault caused death by this mechanism.

[PMID: 6496438]
Nonpenetrating cardiac injuries due to direct precordial blunt impacts are a commonly encountered phenomenon in medicolegal offices. These injuries vary from contusions to valvular lacerations, or papillary muscle rupture to coronary arterial injury with resulting infarction. A less commonly occurring manifestation of nonpenetrating injury is a concussion of the heart (commotio cordis), often with dramatic physiological consequences but no morphologic cardiac injury. We describe four case reports of this entity. The cases were collected over a 5-year period (1978-1983) from the Wayne County Medical Examiner's Office in Detroit, Michigan.

[PMID: 9703576]
Cardiac concussion, previously known as commotio cordis, occurs in structurally normal hearts without gross or microscopic injury to the myocardium, cardiac valves, or coronary arteries, as opposed to other sports-related deaths known to occur more frequently in structural or congenital heart disease. We describe the sudden cardiac death of a 2-year-old child, who died as a result of a blunt force impact to the chest. A thorough medicolegal investigation was necessary to determine that the child died as a result of foul play.

[PMID: 20086611]
Commotio cordis is arrhythmia or sudden death from low-impact, blunt trauma to the chest without apparent heart injury. Ventricular fibrillation is the most common associated arrhythmia, and heart block, bundle branch block, and ST-segment elevation are also seen. Commotio cordis occurs most commonly in baseball but has also been reported in hockey, softball, and several other sports. Approximately two to four cases are reported each year, but the true incidence is uncertain. Survival is low, even when resuscitation is performed. Preventive measures include education of participants and coaches, chest protection, and softer baseballs. Other considerations include having external automatic defibrillators and trained personnel at youth sporting events.

[PMID: 11879111]
Although blunt, nonpenetrating chest blows causing sudden cardiac death (commotio cordis) are often associated with competitive sports, dangers implicit in such blows can extend into many other life activities. To describe the comprehensive spectrum of commotio cordis events. Analysis of confirmed cases from the general community assembled in the US Commotio Cordis Registry occurring up to September 1, 2001. Commotio cordis event. Of 128 confirmed cases, 122 (95%) were in males and the mean (SD) age was 13.6 (8.2) years (median, 14 years; range, 3 months to 45 years); only 28 (22%) cases were aged 18 years or older. Commotio cordis events occurred most commonly during organized sporting events (79 [62%]), such as baseball, but 49 (38%) occurred as part of daily routine and recreational activities. Fatal blows were inflicted with a wide range of velocities but often occurred inadvertently and under circumstances not usually associated with risk for sudden death in informal settings near the home or playground. Twenty-two (28%) participants were wearing commercially available chest barriers, including 7 in whom the projectile made direct contact with protective padding (baseball catchers and lacrosse/hockey goalies), and 2 in whom the projectile was a baseball specifically designed to reduce risk. Only 21 (16%) individuals survived their event, with particularly prompt cardiopulmonary resuscitation/defibrillation (most commonly reversing ventricular fibrillation) the only identifiable factor associated with a favorable outcome. The expanded spectrum of commotio cordis illustrates the potential dangers implicit in striking the chest, regardless of the intent or force of the blow. These findings also suggest that the safety of young athletes will be enhanced by developing more effective preventive strategies (such as chest wall barriers) to achieve protection from ventricular fibrillation following precordial blows.

[PMID: 18691236]
Commotio cordis, sudden cardiac death secondary to blunt nonpenetrating chest blows in sports, is reported with increasing frequency. In a swine model, ventricular fibrillation (VF) is induced by a baseball blow to the chest, and the initiation of VF is related to the peak left ventricular (LV) pressure produced by the blow. LV pressure changes likely result in cell membrane stretch and mechanical activation of ion channels. Disruption of cell cytoskeleton that anchors the cell membrane prior to precordial blows offers the opportunity to explore whether cell membrane deformation is critical to commotio cordis. Twelve juvenile swine (mean 12.7 +/- 1.6 kg) were randomized to intravenous normal saline (control, n = 6) or 10 mg of intravenous colchicine (n = 6), which is known to depolymerize microtubules. Animals were given up to six blows timed to the vulnerable portion of the cardiac cycle with a 30 mph baseball on the chest directly over the cardiac silhouette. VF was initiated by 14 of the 29 (48%) impacts in the colchicine-treated animals compared with only 3 of 28 (11%) in the controls (P = 0.002). The peak generated LV pressure did not differ between colchicine animals (405 +/- 61 mmHg) and controls (387 +/- 115) (P = 0.47). However, animals administered colchicine were more likely to have VF generated by the chest blow at all pressures. The initiation of VF by chest blows is significantly increased by selective disruption of the cytoskeleton, suggesting that mechanical deformation of the cell membrane is fundamental to the activation of ion channels and underlies the mechanism of VF in commotio cordis.

[PMID: 10338239]
Despite the use of protective gear, a 15-year-old hockey player died when he was struck in the chest by a puck. This is the fifth recorded hockey death related to so-called commotio cordis, that is, blunt chest injury without myocardial structural damage. In light of inadequacies of commercial chest protectors currently in use for hockey, the authors hope to educate players and coaches about the danger of blocking shots with the chest. Physicians should be aware that commotio cordis represents a distinctive pathological condition, in the event of which immediate recognition, precordial thump, CPR, and defibrillation are potentially lifesaving. Appropriate medical supervision at amateur hockey games, 911 telephone access, and on-site automated external defibrillators are issues that deserve careful consideration.

[PMID: 11555799]
Commotio cordis is the condition of sudden cardiac death or near sudden cardiac death after blunt, low-impact chest wall trauma in the absence of structural cardiac abnormality. Ventricular fibrillation is the most commonly reported induced arrhythmia in commotio cordis. Blunt impact injury to the chest with a baseball is the most common mechanism. Survival rates for commotio cordis are low, even with prompt CPR and defibrillation.

[PMID: 10498299]
Commotio cordis is a term used to describe cases of blunt thoracic impact causing fatality without gross structural damage of the heart and internal organs. Death is attributed to ventricular fibrillation or cardiac arrhythmia aggravated by traumatic apnea. The biomechanical response related to the risk of commotio cordis has not been determined. Reanalysis of previously published experimental data was performed to determine which biomechanical parameter predicts the occurrence of commotio cordis. Logistic regression was used to determine the risk for commotio cordis with the level of chest compression, rate of chest deformation, and viscous criterion. By using only cases without serious tissue injury (Abbreviated Injury Scale score < 4), viscous criterion was the best predictor of commotio cordis or ventricular fibrillation (chi2 = 7.69, p = 0.006). It was also the best predictor of heart rupture (chi2 = 13.19,p = 0.0003) and severe cardiac injury with Abbreviated Injury Scale score > or = 4 (chi2 = 25.03, p = 0.0001). Based on this in-depth analysis, the viscous criterion is the relevant biomechanical response to assess the risk of commotio cordis and more severe thoracic injury in high-speed blunt impact.

[PMID: 19749607]
Commotio cordis is a term used for cases of sudden cardiac death due to nonpenetrating chest trauma without evidence of underlying myocardial disease or injury. Contusio cordis has been reserved for cases of chest trauma where there is cardiac bruising. Three deaths due to blunt cardiac and chest trauma after vehicle accidents are presented where the only significant injuries were contusions of the heart and fractures of the sternum and ribs. One case had moderate coronary artery atherosclerosis and another had a blood alcohol level of 0.218%. Given that individuals with cardiac bruising, chest trauma, coronary atherosclerosis, and alcohol intoxication may still die of the same mechanisms as in classic commotio cordis, and that these entities represent a spectrum of findings after chest impact, it may be more useful to separate cases into related subcategories: (A) those with no evidence of injury or underlying cardiovascular disease, (B) those with chest wall fractures, chest wall contusions and/or cardiac contusions, and (C) those with underlying cardiovascular disease or the presence of substances such as alcohol or drugs that may reduce the threshold for cardiac arrhythmias. As there may be cases with a number of these factors, a fourth category (D) includes those with a combination of injuries and predisposing factors (ie, categories B and C). Including cases such as these under the diagnostic umbrella of commotio cordis may demonstrate that a wider range of individuals are at risk for death from blunt cardiac trauma than sports-playing adolescents.