[PMID: 8213473]
Until recently, only three calcium channel antagonists--verapamil, diltiazem and nifedipine--were available for managing cardiovascular disorders such as hypertension and ischemic heart disease. In the past few years, however, several dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists, including nicardipine, isradipine, felodipine, nimodipine, and amlodipine, have been marketed. Others are currently awaiting FDA approval. In addition, bepridil, which belongs to a new class of calcium channel antagonists, has recently been marketed for refractory angina pectoris. Clinical uses of calcium channel antagonists have been expanded since the 1970s to include management of cardiovascular disorders such as supraventricular arrhythmias, CHF secondary to diastolic dysfunction, and myocardial reinfarction in selected patients. Calcium channel antagonists are also being investigated for prevention of atherosclerosis. Calcium channel antagonists are a heterogeneous group of pharmacologic agents. Differences in tissue selectivity are largely responsible for the variations in hemodynamic and electrophysiologic properties of these agents. Thus, their clinical uses and side effect profiles differ. These differences must be taken into consideration in the selection of the most appropriate agent for a specific indication. Potential advantages of some of the newer dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists include less frequent dosing (amlodipine and isradipine) and little or no negative inotropic effect (nicardipine, felodipine, amlodipine, isradipine) compared with the prototype calcium channel antagonists. Additional clinical experience with these newer agents is required, however, before their role in the management of cardiovascular disorders can be fully delineated. The availability of sustained-release formulations of verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, felodipine, and nicardipine, as well as the recent marketing of calcium channel antagonists with relatively long half-lives (amlodipine and isradipine), makes once- or twice-daily dosing possible with most calcium channel blockers. However, selection of a particular agent will depend on several factors, including clinical efficacy, side effect profile, cost, and patient characteristics such as concomitant disease states and baseline hemodynamic status.

[PMID: 10728516]
Isradipine is a calcium channel blocker of the dihydropyridine class. It has limited effects on myocardial contractility; is available in a powder-filled capsule and has a half-life of 6 to 8 hours. Pharmacy records were reviewed to identify pediatric patients who had received isradipine. The following demographic data were obtained: age, weight, sex, underlying medical problems, and initial blood pressure values. Information concerning isradipine included the initial dose and its interval, subsequent dose escalations, blood pressure response to the medication, and duration of therapy. The study population comprised 12 patients, ranging in age from 10 days to 11 years. The etiology of the hypertension was renal in 9 cases and nonrenal in 3. Initial dosing with isradipine was 0.1 mg/kg/dose. Six patients had emergent hypertension, and their blood pressure had been controlled with intravenous nicardipine before oral isradipine. Six patients received initial therapy with oral isradipine. Isradipine was monotherapy in 7 patients and in combination with other agents in 5 patients. The dose of isradipine required for blood pressure control was 0.6 +/- 0.3 mg/kg/day (range, 0.3 to 1.2 mg/kg/day). Isradipine failed to provide effective blood pressure control in 2 patients. In 1 of these patients, isradipine was effective after peritoneal dialysis. Isradipine is an effective, orally administered agent for control of hypertension in children.

[PMID: 8963604]
The study covered influence of Isradipine (2.5 mg administered twice daily during 6 weeks) on blood circulation in the heart and occupationally important functions and traits among 30 drivers having mild and moderate arterial hypertension (AH). Systolic and diastolic pressure demonstrate reliable decrease in all the examinees with mild AH and in 93.8% of the examinees with moderate AH. Isradipine proved to influence positively decrease of hypertensive reactions and subclinical myocardial ischemia. Isradipine presented statistically significant improvement of the studied psychophysiologic parameters (quickness of latent and motor visual reaction, number of errors in color choice, exactness in following the mobile object). Thus, all above enables to recommend Isradipine (Lomir) as effective and safe method correcting arterial hypertension in drivers.

[PMID: 2150641]
The effects of isradipine in a rat model of embolic stroke [permanent occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA)] are reviewed. Isradipine, when present or given up to 4 hours after the onset of stroke, reduces the infarct size, determined by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 24 hours, and by histology 5 days, after MCA occlusion. These cytoprotective effects seem to be permanent and are paralleled by an improvement in the neurological deficit. Isradipine has proved to be the most potent and effective calcium antagonist for reducing the infarct size compared with other representatives of this class of drugs such as nimodipine, nicardipine and flunarizine. Isradipine is cytoprotective after a stroke when used as an antihypertensive: at doses which normalise high blood pressure in spontaneously hypertensive rats, isradipine reduces by more than 60% the infarct size caused by a subsequent stroke. Since the lowering of blood pressure, e.g. by a calcium antagonist that does not cross the blood-brain barrier, is ineffective in reducing the infarct size, normalisation of blood pressure alone cannot account for the reductions in infarct size observed with isradipine. The antihypertensive drug isradipine seems rather to offer the additional benefit of attenuating the consequences of an eventual stroke. If clinically confirmed, this will be of considerable therapeutic importance. Evidence is presented that isradipine has at least 2 mechanisms within the brain that might be responsible for cytoprotection in stroke.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 15257873]
As it was reported earlier that isradipine, a Ca superset 2+ antagonist of dihydropyridine derivative class, caused regression of nifedipine-induced hyperplasia of human gingiva, experiments were performed to examine whether or not isradipine would solely inhibit the proliferation of cultured gingival fibroblasts. Normal human gingival fibroblast Gin-1 cells were used to test the impact of this medication. Fibroblast proliferation in the presence of isradipine (10 microM) was examined by using the reagent water-soluble tetrazolium-1 (WST-1). The level of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in the cell-free supernatant of each well was determined by using an enzyme-linked immunosorvent assay (ELISA) kit. The production of type I collagen was assayed by ELISA. Isradipine significantly enhanced the cell proliferation from the second day of the culture period. Also, isradipine raised the level of bFGF in the culture medium. The same concentration, also significantly enhanced the production of type I collagen. In conclusion, we were able to prove that isradipine causes the proliferation of cultured gingival fibroblasts as well as other dihydropyridine-derivative Ca superset 2+ antagonists do. In order to prevent the gingival overgrowth, it is advisable to be very careful in the use of isradipine as a therapy for hypertension and other indications.

[PMID: 8466736]
To assess left ventricular (LV) structural and functional changes, 45 hypertensive patients were studied by echocardiography after 2 weeks of placebo and 6 months of isradipine monotherapy. Although LV cavity size did not change, LV wall thickness decreased dramatically (P < .0001), producing a significant decrease in LV mass index (from 158 g/m2 to 136 g/m2; P < .0001). In addition, LV fractional shortening (FS) did not change (1.2%; P = NS) whereas the cardiac index increased (6.4%; P = .0007) due to a modest tachycardia accompanied by a reduction in total peripheral resistance (-22.1%; P < .0001). The magnitude of the reduction of LV mass was related to the degree of FS increase (r = -0.70; P < .0001), an indication of beneficial LV remodeling. It can be concluded that isradipine antihypertensive therapy leads to regression of LV hypertrophy without depression of LV pump function.

[PMID: 7848351]
Antihypertensive Long-term Therapy with Isradipine/Improvement of coronary flow reserve in patients with arterial and microvascular angina In patients with arterial hypertension coronary flow reserve is often impaired due to left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and alterations of the coronary microcirculation. Experimental and clinical studies have shown that calcium channel blockers can induce regression of myocardial hypertrophy. Objective of the present study was to see whether chronic antihypertensive treatment with calcium channel blockers can improve the diminished coronary reserve in patients with arterial hypertension and microvascular angina pectoris. Fifteen hypertensive patients with microvascular angina (61 +/- 7 years, normal coronary angiogram, mild LV-hypertrophy) were treated with isradipine (CAS 75695-93-1) (5.3 +/- 0.9 mg/d) for 12 +/- 2 months. Before and after therapy (after a washout period of 1 week) coronary flow was quantitatively measured by the gas chromatographic Argon method. Coronary reserve was calculated as the quotient of coronary resistance under baseline conditions and after dipyridamole (0.5 mg/kg i.v.). Under isradipine therapy systolic blood pressure was lowered from 165 +/- 20 to 140 +/- 13 mmHg (p < 0.01) and diastolic blood pressure from 98 +/- 8 to 88 +/- 6 mmHg (p < 0.01). The LV muscle mass index decreased by 10% from 154 +/- 33 to 139 +/- 28 g/m2 (p < 0.05). Baseline coronary blood flow (81 +/- 13 versus 83 +/- 16 ml/min x 100 g, n.s.) was identical before and after therapy. There were also no differences in coronary perfusion pressure, heart rate, myocardial oxygen consumption and arterio-coronary venous oxygen difference before and after therapy.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 7918132]
Isradipine, a 1,4 dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist, is a potent coronary artery dilator that increases coronary blood flow with little effect on cardiac contractility. Isradipine is an approved antihypertensive agent, but its antianginal effects have not been well documented. In this placebo-controlled, double-blind, parallel-group design study we evaluated the duration of effects and safety of isradipine 10 mg bid in male patients with chronic stable angina pectoris. Seventy-two patients experiencing moderately severe angina between 3 and 7.5 minutes during a standard Bruce exercise test received placebo in a single-blind manner for 8-14 days. Sixty-one of these patients had reproducible treadmill exercise test results on three consecutive occasions and underwent further exercise tests at 3, 8, and 12 hours after a placebo period. Patients were then randomized (double blind) to either placebo or isradipine 10 mg bid for 2 weeks. Symptom-limited exercise tests were repeated predose and at 3, 8, and 12 hours after the 0800 hour dose dosing. Exercise duration increased significantly from baseline (last qualifying test during the single-blind placebo therapy, i.e., 0800 hours predose at visit 4) in the isradipine group compared to the placebo group prior to the administration of the 0800 hour dose (i.e., 12 hours after the 2000 hour dose) by 51 vs. 18 seconds, p = 0.04; and after the administration of the 0800 hour dose at 3 hours by 78 vs. 29 seconds, p = 0.005; and at 8 hours by 54 vs. 18 seconds, p = 0.04. Similarly, statistical significance was achieved when exercise data were analyzed using visit 4 (single-blind placebo therapy) corresponding time points as baseline. At 12 hours after the 0800 hour dose, exercise tolerance did not increase significantly after isradipine compared to placebo. Time to 1-mm ST-segment depression increased significantly after isradipine at 3 hours post 0800 hour dose compared to placebo (87 vs. 7 seconds, p < 0.01) but not at the 0, 8, or 12-hour postdose time points, regardless of which baseline was used. Isradipine therapy did not affect the rate-pressure double product. A significant correlation between the mean increase in total exercise time and mean plasma isradipine concentration was also present (p = 0.0295). During double-blind treatment, drug-related adverse events were experienced by four patients in the isradipine group and two patients in the placebo group. None of the patients experienced ischemic complications during the study.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

[PMID: 14727944]
Calcium channel antagonists (CCAs) may either be divided into the dihydropyridines (e.g. amlodipine, felodipine, isradipine, lacidipine, nilvadipine, nifedipine, nicardipine etc.), the phenylalkylamines (e.g. verapamil) and the benzothiazepines (e.g. diltiazem) according to their chemical structure, or into first generation agents (nifedipine, verapamil and diltiazem) and second generation agents (subsequently developed dihydropyridine-derivatives). Second generation CCAs are characterized by greater selectivity for calcium channels in vascular smooth muscle cells than the myocardium, a longer duration of action and a small trough-to-peak variation in plasma concentrations. Heart failure is characterized by decreased cardiac output resulting in inadequate oxygen delivery to peripheral tissues. Although the accompanying neurohormonal activation, leading to vasoconstriction and increased blood pressure, is initially beneficial in increasing tissue perfusion, prolonged activation is detrimental because it increases afterload and further reduces cardiac output. At the level of the myocyte, heart failure is associated with increased intracellular calcium levels which are thought to impair diastolic function. These changes indicate that the CCAs would be beneficial in patients with heart failure. There has been a strong interest and increasing experience in the use of CCAs in patients with heart failure. Despite potential beneficial effects in initial small trials, findings from larger trials suggest that CCA may have detrimental effects upon survival and cardiovascular events. However, this may not necessarily be a 'class b' effect of the CCAs as there is considerable heterogeneity in the chemical structure of individual agents. Clinical experience with different CCAs in patients with heart failure includes trials that evaluated their effects on hemodynamic parameters, exercise tolerance and on symptomatology. However, the most relevant results are those from randomized clinical trials that assessed mortality as the primary endpoint. First generation CCAs have direct negative inotropic effects and even sustained release formulations have not proved any beneficial effect upon survival. With second generation CCAs, some benefit on hemodynamic parameters has been observed but none on survival, alone or in combination with ACE inhibitors. It is noteworthy that although amlodipine had a neutral effect on morbidity and mortality in large, randomized, placebo-controlled trials in patients with heart failure, the drug was well tolerated. There is no specific indication for CCAs (first or second generation) in patients with systolic heart failure, alone or in combination with ACE inhibitors, but amlodipine may be a considered in the management of hypertension or coronary artery disease in patients with heart failure.

[PMID: 7738211]
In the treatment of hypertension in renally impaired patients, normalization of blood pressure alone may not be sufficient to prevent significant morbidity to the kidneys. Treatment must reduce pressure in the renal vasculature, otherwise glomerular filtration rate and renal plasma flow will continue to deteriorate. Isradipine a dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker, has been investigated as a suitable treatment in this setting. Isradipine maintains glomerular filtration rate, preserves or enhances renal plasma flow, decreases renal vascular resistance, maintains or reduces filtration fraction, and exerts a sustained natriuretic effect, all of which may enable isradipine to slow the rate of progression of renal deterioration. In addition, isradipine may decrease proteinuria and may decrease glomerular capillary pressure by dilating both the efferent and afferent arterioles. Unlike older calcium-channel blockers, isradipine exhibits minimal cardiodepressant activity and is not associated with any negative inotropic effects. It is metabolized in the liver and dosage adjustments may not be necessary when administered to patients with renal insufficiency. Isradipine has a favorable renal effect profile and also has several properties that meet the requirements of other patient populations where an extra measure of antihypertensive safety is required, such as diabetics, dialysis patients, and transplant recipients. Side effects with isradipine are usually mild and transient, occurring in a dose-dependent manner.

[PMID: 7789292]
Since the earlier review in Drugs substantial additional data have accumulated regarding the antihypertensive efficacy of isradipine in various clinical situations, as well as data on its clinical effects in atherosclerosis. Recent therapeutic trials confirm that the efficacy of isradipine in the treatment of patients with mainly mild to moderate hypertension, when administered orally as a conventional or modified release preparation, is similar to that of titrated dosages of amlodipine, felodipine, nifedipine, diltiazem, captopril, methyldopa, metoprolol, prazosin and hydrochlorothiazide. A further decrease in blood pressure can be expected when isradipine is combined with another antihypertensive drug in patients who have not responded adequately to monotherapy. Initial studies have shown that intravenous isradipine is effective in controlling hypertension following coronary artery bypass graft surgery and that it appears useful in the treatment of intraoperative hypertension and hypertensive crisis, and in hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, when administered orally or intravenously. A large study, the Multicentre Isradipine Diuretic Atherosclerosis Study (MIDAS), was designed to compare the efficacy of isradipine and hydrochlorothiazide in reducing the rate of progression of carotid artery wall thickness, measured by B-mode ultrasound, as a surrogate for early atherosclerosis. Results indicated that wall thickness increased significantly less with isradipine than hydrochlorothiazide after 6 months of therapy. Thereafter the rate of progression remained parallel for the remainder of the 3-year trial. The confirmation of its antihypertensive efficacy, along with its favourable haemodynamic profile and reversal of left ventricular hypertrophy, minimal effect on glucose and lipid metabolism, preservation of quality of life and good tolerability, makes isradipine a suitable drug for the treatment of most patients with mild to moderate hypertension.

[PMID: 2523644]
One hundred eighteen patients, aged between 65 and 87 years with mild-to-moderate hypertension were given placebo or isradipine (1.25 to 5 mg twice daily, or 2.5 to 10 mg once daily) following a three-week placebo period to evaluate its safety and efficacy in elderly patients. Dosage step-up was at three-week intervals. Blood pressure measurements were taken immediately before the morning dose (12 to 24 hours after the previous dose). At the end of the study, both supine and standing diastolic blood pressures were significantly lower with isradipine than with placebo. A 10-mm Hg reduction in supine diastolic blood pressure was achieved with once-daily isradipine in 65 percent and with twice-daily isradipine in 52 percent of patients, indicating sustained blood pressure control over the dose interval (12 to 24 hours). Adverse events were usually mild, transient, and typical for vasodilators. Isradipine did not produce more laboratory, clinical, or electrocardiographic abnormalities than did placebo. In conclusion, isradipine either once or twice daily at doses between 2.5 and 10 mg is an effective and well-tolerated treatment for mild-to-moderate hypertension in elderly patients.

[PMID: 2523646]
A total of 152 patients with essential hypertension (World Health Organization classification I/II) entered a multicenter randomized study to assess the safety and efficacy of isradipine compared with, and in combination with, the beta-blocker atenolol. After a three-week placebo treatment period, patients received either isradipine (2.5, 5, 7.5, or 10 mg twice daily) or atenolol (50 or 100 mg once daily) for seven weeks. Patients who did not have an adequate response (diastolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg) with the maximal doses of single-drug therapy were given a combination of both drugs for a further seven weeks. Both drugs resulted in significant and clinically relevant reductions in blood pressures. Although the reduction in diastolic blood pressure was the same for patients receiving the two drugs, there was a statistically significant greater reduction in systolic blood pressure in the isradipine group, suggesting that this drug has a more favorable effect on vascular impedance. Of the 14 patients who did not attain normal blood pressure levels (sitting diastolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg) receiving monotherapy, 12 patients reached this goal with a combination of the two drugs.

[PMID: 7921533]
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of dihydropyridine calcium antagonist isradipine on left ventricular (LV) structure and function in patients with essential hypertension. Cuff blood pressure and Doppler echocardiographic variables were assessed in 26 patients with mild to moderate hypertension (diastolic blood pressure range 95-110 mmHg) before and after 12 weeks of therapy with either isradipine 5 mg daily or enalapril 20 mg daily. The study was of double-blind, parallel design, with a placebo run-in period of 15 days. Three subjects withdrew from isradipine treatment because of flushing and 2 from enalapril treatment due to cough before completing the study. Both drugs significantly reduced cuff systolic and diastolic blood pressure (p < 0.001) without affecting heart rate. By virtue of the decrease in both septal wall (p < 0.01) and posterior wall thicknesses (p < 0.05), isradipine treatment produced a significant reduction in LV mass adjusted for height (p < 0.001) in comparison with placebo; also LV end-systolic dimension showed a slight decrease (p < 0.05). Enalapril induced a similar reduction in LV end-systolic dimension (p < 0.05) but the changes of wall thickness and LV mass did not reach statistical significance. In conclusion, our results indicate that isradipine treatment improves LV systolic function and causes a significant reduction in LV mass. This reduction is observed early in the course of antihypertensive treatment and is effective in both patients with and without LV hypertrophy.

[PMID: 7946181]
These are the preliminary data of an open multicenter trial of antihypertensive treatment with isradipine as monotherapy (dose, 4.55 +/- 0.56 mg twice daily; n = 11) or isradipine (7.5 +/- 0.63 mg twice daily) in combination with bopindolol (1.16 +/- 0.12 mg once daily; n = 30) administered for 3 years to patients with essential hypertension (WHO classification I or II). Blood pressure was significantly decreased in both treatment groups and there was no indication of resistance to therapy. Plasma levels of total cholesterol and triglycerides were decreased by the end of the second year of treatment, and there was a tendency toward increase in plasma levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL2 or HDL3). The atherogenic index (ratio between total cholesterol and HDL2 plus HDL3) was also decreased. Blood glucose levels remained unchanged in both normoglycemic patients and those with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) during 3 years of therapy. It is concluded that isradipine is safe and effective when administered long-term in the treatment of hypertensive patients with either hyperlipidemia or NIDDM.

[PMID: 12215829]
Many children with hypertension, particularly those with new-onset hypertension related to glomerulonephritis, organ transplantation, or other forms of secondary hypertension, require treatment with a short-acting antihypertensive in order to quickly achieve blood pressure (BP) control. We administered isradipine, a short-acting, second-generation calcium antagonist, to 72 such children. Retrospective data collection was undertaken to determine the effects of isradipine treatment. The mean age of children treated with isradipine was 74+/-55 months (mean+/-SD). Nearly all of these children had secondary hypertension and were initially treated as hospital inpatients for newly diagnosed hypertension. Mean isradipine dose was 0.36+/-0.17 mg/kg per day, with no significant variation in dose according to patient age. Isradipine was administered three times per day in most instances, but 21% of the time it was administered four times per day. An extemporaneous isradipine suspension was used in 62% of treatment courses. BP control was achieved with isradipine alone in 38 children; the remainder received isradipine in combination with additional antihypertensives. Comparison of pre-treatment BP with BP obtained 8+/-9 days later demonstrated a significant BP reduction with isradipine treatment, with a mean reduction of 14+/-13 mmHg for systolic BP and 13+/-15 mmHg for diastolic BP. There was no effect of isradipine treatment on heart rate. Adverse effects occurred in 9.5% of treatment courses, and included headache, flushing, dizziness, and tachycardia. We conclude that isradipine successfully lowers BP in hypertensive children with secondary forms of hypertension. Use of isradipine suspension allows infants and young children to be treated as readily as older children.

[PMID: 9544865]
The effects of two antihypertensive regimens (isradipine and hydrochlorothiazide-amiloride) on the ratio between media thickness and lumen diameter of subcutaneous arteries and on left ventricular mass in essential hypertension were compared. Fifty patients, aged 46.3+/-8 (mean+/-SD) years, with newly diagnosed or poorly controlled essential hypertension were randomized to treatment with either isradipine or hydrochlorothiazide-amiloride. Atenolol and hydralazine were added in both groups as secondary and tertiary drugs, respectively, when needed for normalization of diastolic blood pressure. A subcutaneous gluteal biopsy was taken surgically before medication and again after 9 months of successful antihypertensive treatment. Two small resistance arteries were isolated from each biopsy and mounted in a Mulvany-Halpem isometric small vessel myograph. The media thickness-to-lumen diameter ratio (percentage) of the vessels was measured under standardized conditions and meaned. Left ventricular mass (LVM) index was determined by echocardiography according to the Penn convention. Ten patients were treated with isradipine as monotherapy, whereas only one patient was well controlled on diuretics as monotherapy. Mean blood pressure was reduced equally with the two regimens, from 131+/-9 mm Hg to 101+/-10 mm Hg with the isradipine and from 128+/-9 mm Hg to 99+/-7 mm Hg with the thiazide/atenolol regimen. LVM decreased significantly in both groups by 130+/-75 g with the isradipine-based regimen and by 70+/-53 g with the hydrochlorothiazide/atenolol-based regimen. The reduction of LVM was significantly greater on the isradipine-based regimen than on the thiazide-based regimen (P < .01). There was a significant reduction of media thickness-to-lumen diameter ratio during treatment with the isradipine-based regimen from 10.9% to 8.8% (P < .01). The reduction in the thiazide regimen was from 9.7% to 8.5%, which was not significant (P = .07). The study demonstrated significant reduction of hypertensive changes in peripheral resistance artery structure during antihypertensive treatment with an isradipine-based regimen. The thiazide/betablocker-based regimen did not have a significant effect on the vessels. Significant reduction of LVM was achieved with both isradipine-based and thiazide/atenolol-based regimens. The reduction of LVM obtained with the isradipine-based regimen was significantly greater than that of the thiazide/atenolol-based regimen.

[PMID: 2137344]
Treatment with the new calcium antagonist isradipine significantly reduced diastolic blood pressure to less than 90 mm Hg in 64% of fourteen blacks with mild or moderately severe essential hypertension. There was a significant reduction in the echocardiographic measures of left ventricular wall thickness and mass in these patients. There was also an increase in fractional left ventricular mass index, shortening and ejection fraction per 100 g left ventricular mass and no indication in mean circumferential shortening. There was another indication of improved left ventricular performance. With the reduced left ventricular mass and diastolic blood pressure, there was a reduction in the ratio of peak systolic wall stress to fractional shortening per 100 g left ventricular mass. There was a significant relationship between peak systolic wall stress and fractional shortening per 100 g left ventricular mass index. The directional change after left ventricular mass reduction with isradipine indicated improved left ventricular function. There was an increase in left ventricular wall thickness and mass both in those patients not controlled on isradipine combined with those treated with placebo (n = 10), and in those treated with placebo (n = 5) there was an increase in wall thickness. These changes occurred in five weeks. There was no regression to a lower mean of left ventricular mass or wall thickness during placebo. There was reduction in electrocardiogram (ECG) ST-T changes of ischemia in those patients with diastolic blood pressure reduced to less than 90 mm Hg. Isradipine monotherapy was an effective antihypertensive drug in blacks with essential hypertension, resulting in regression of left ventricular wall thickness and mass and augmentation of fractional shortening per 100 g left ventricular mass.

[PMID: 11172743]
The peroxidation step in lipid transformation is considered to be essential in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Calcium antagonists (CA) appear to have antioxidant effects in addition to their potent vasorelaxant properties. In the present study, we compared the antioxidative efficacy of CA (amlodipine, lacidipine, nifedipine, isradipine, diltiazem, and semotiadil) in the copper-catalysed oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) with that of glycated(g)/glycoxidated(go) LDL. This issue is of great importance when considering the potential therapeutic use of antioxidant drugs in diabetes-associated vasculopathy. Oxidation of native LDL was inhibited most efficiently (>90%) by lacidipine and semotiadil in the concentration range 10(-4)-10(-3) M. We found, however, a dramatic decrease in antioxidant activity towards g/goLDL as compared to native LDL in all the CA tested. Only lacidipine significantly inhibited copper-mediated oxidation of g/goLDL in the whole concentration range tested (10(-5) M-10(-3) M). This probably resulted from the increased auto-oxidative potential introduced by early and advanced glycation end products (AGE) into the g/goLDL. We noted that coincubation of LDL with 10(-3) M CA and 0.5 M glucose under oxidative/non-oxidative conditions partially or fully restored the antioxidant capacity of the different CA to inhibit the subsequent copper-catalysed oxidation of the modified LDL. This is a clear indication that CA inhibit glycative or glycoxidative LDL changes during the preceding long-term glycation period. The notion that both oxidative changes and long-term glycation effects were reduced by CA was corroborated by fluorescence analysis, AGE-ELISA, quantitation of lipid peroxidation, and thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) measurement of long-term g/goLDL. The strongest antioxidative effects during long-term glycation of LDL were seen with isradipine, lacidipine, nifedipine, and semotiadil. Diltiazem was the only CA that could not prevent TBARS formation in LDL during the long-term glycation period. In contrast, Amadori product formation, as measured by the generation of fructosamines, was not significantly reduced by any CA tested. Thus CA, like other antioxidants, significantly retard AGE formation, while initial glycation reactions, such as Amadori product formation, are only weakly inhibited.

[PMID: 8205296]
The antihypertensive effect of isradipine was studied in 45 patients with mild-to-moderate hypertension (mean age 59 years) using casual and ambulatory 24-h blood pressure measurement. Patients were included into the study according to their casual blood pressure. Isradipine was started at a dose of 1.25 mg twice daily for 4 weeks, and increased to 2.5 mg twice daily if casual blood pressure was not normalized. If necessary, 3 mg of spirapril, a new angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, (n = 1) or 5 mg of pindolol (n = 1) was added. The active-treatment period lasted 24 weeks. At the end of the therapy, casual blood pressure was significantly decreased (p < 0.001) from 173/103 to 150/86 mmHg, and mean ambulatory blood pressure, from 146/87 to 140/83 mmHg (p < 0.05). When patients were divided into three groups according to initial whole-day ambulatory blood pressure values (group I: < 140/90 mmHg; group II: > or = 140/90 mmHg; group III: > or = 140/<90 mmHg), no effect of treatment was detected in group I. However, whole-day blood pressure fell significantly (p < 0.001) in group II (155/96 vs 143/88 mmHg) as did systolic blood pressure (p < 0.01) in group III (150/83 vs 142/81 mmHg), whereas diastolic blood pressure remained unchanged. Thus, ambulatory blood pressure measurement may be superior to casual measurement in the decision-making process to treat hypertension, avoiding not only the phenomenon of 'white-coat hypertension', but also ineffective treatment. This conclusion, however, should be confirmed by prospective studies.

[PMID: 2949585]
The safety and antihypertensive efficacy of PN 200-110 (isradipine), a novel calcium antagonist, are discussed in a preliminary report of double-blind, multicenter, controlled, phase III clinical trials for essential hypertension. Patients who qualified for entry after a 3 week placebo-washout period were enrolled in 1 of 5 studies; 2 studies were placebo controlled; 3 studies evaluated PN 200-110 against 1 of 3 active controls: hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) propranolol or prazosin. A separate study assessing the effects of PN 200-110 in combination with HCTZ versus propranolol plus HCTZ is also discussed. Compared with placebo, PN 200-110 decreased mean supine systolic and diastolic blood pressures by 20/16 mm Hg versus 4/6 mm Hg. Compared with placebo and active control drugs, PN 200-110 normalized supine diastolic blood pressure to less than or equal to 90 mm Hg in 72% of patients, versus 13% in the placebo group, 74% in the HCTZ group, 45% in the propranolol group and 69% in the prazosin group. In the ability to decrease diastolic blood pressure by greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg, PN 200-110 compared favorably to prazosin (81% vs 81%), and was superior to HCTZ (81% vs 61%) and propranolol (81% vs 36%). In combination with HCTZ, PN 200-110 exerted as great an antihypertensive effect as propranolol plus HCTZ. Long-term therapy with PN 200-110 was also effective. Supine systolic and diastolic blood pressures decreased a mean of 15/13 mm Hg at 3 months, and 18/20 mm Hg at 12 months. PN 200-110 is well tolerated with relatively few adverse effects reported.

[PMID: 1363224]
One-year open Multicentric Isradipine Study (MIS) performed in 7 centres in Czechoslovakia included 144 patients with mild and moderate hypertension. Isradipine was given at a dose of 2.5 mg daily. If normalization of diastolic blood pressure (BP) had not been reached, the dosage was increased to 5 mg. Monotherapy with isradipine normalized diastolic BP in 44% of patients. Isradipine (5 mg daily) was combined with bopindolol in patients in whom isradipine alone failed to normalize diastolic BP. These had higher mean systolic and diastolic BP, body weight, erythrocyte and platelet counts at the beginning of the study. The combination of isradipine with bopindolol normalized diastolic BP in 87% of the group at the end of 48 weeks' treatment. Tolerance was excellent in 82% of patients. Treatment was discontinued in 8% patients, undesirable effects being the reason in 2%, ineffective therapy in 2% and poor adherence to therapy in 4%. Isradipine in monotherapy or in combination with bopindolol did not exert an adverse effect on the metabolic risk factors of ischaemic heart disease (cholesterol, glycaemia).

[PMID: 7621840]
The incidence of vasodilation-related events (flushing, headache, dizziness and oedema) was determined in a total of 37,670 patients treated with diltiazem, nicardipine, isradipine or amlodipine and studied by Prescription-Event Monitoring between 1984 and 1991. Event rates are expressed as the percentage of patients who experienced these events during the six months after the first prescription. The rates for all these events with the newer vasoselective dihydropyridines (nicardipine, isradipine and amlodipine) were higher than those with diltiazem. Among the three dihydropyridines, there were large individual differences in the rates. With nicardipine, the frequency of each of the four vasodilation-related events were similar to one another (approximately 3%). With isradipine, the rates were also similar to one another but all were approximately twice those measured in the nicardipine study (approximately 6%). These differences may have been due to confounding factors such as the publicity about adverse drug reactions, the indication for use by individual patients or the doses actually being used at the time the event occurred. With amlodipine, in contrast, the rate for oedema was two to four times larger than the rates for flushing, headache or dizziness.

[PMID: 10854683]
A study was carried out to evaluate the influence of antihypertensive treatment with combined low doses of enalapril plus isradipine (5+5 mg daily) compared with those of either drug at a higher dose level (10 mg daily) by double-blind, three-way crossover study (balanced Latin square design) in 102 subjects (mean age 51.9 +/- 7.42 years) with essential hypertension. Left ventricular mass and function were evaluated by M-B mode echocardiography, renal function by glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and by serum and 24-h urinary Na+ and K+ during wash-out period and after 24 weeks of treatment. The supine blood pressure for subjects given placebo was 171/103 mmHg. After 24 weeks of treatment, systolic and diastolic supine blood pressure were significantly lower with 5 mg isradipine plus 5 mg enalapril (134/84 mmHg) than with 10 mg enalapril (137/84 mmHg) or with 10 mg isradipine (144/85 mmHg). Left ventricular posterior wall and septal thickness were significantly and similarly reduced in all groups. Left ventricular systolic and diastolic end diameters were not significantly changed. Left ventricular mass (LVM) was significantly reduced in E plus I group and enalapril group. GFR was not significantly altered. The 24-h urinary Na+ significantly increased with enalapril, more so than isradipine. The combination was tolerated better than either monotherapy. We observed no clinically significant changes in laboratory variables including blood lipoproteins. The combination of isradipine plus enalapril reduced blood pressure more effectively and was better tolerated than other drug alone. All three groups showed similar changes in echocardiographic indices and no change in renal function.

[PMID: 7955262]
Hypertension commonly occurs after cardiac surgery and requires therapy to prevent the potentially deleterious effects. After coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG), 177 patients with elevated blood pressure > or = 90 mm Hg during the initial 6-hour postsurgical period were selected for this random blinded, parallel study to receive intravenous infusions of either isradipine (n = 90) or sodium nitroprusside (n = 87). Isradipine produced a statistically significant decrease in mean arterial pressure (MAP, delta-23 mmHg) during a 90-minute treatment period. Target MAP (< or = 85 mmHg or a decrease of 10 mmHg, if baseline MAP was between 90 and 95 mmHg) was achieved in 94% of patients 30 minutes after initiation of isradipine infusion (total mean dose, 411 micrograms); target MAP was achieved in 75% of nitroprusside-treated patients (total mean dose, 1708 micrograms). The mean time to control MAP was 18 minutes for isradipine compared with 24 minutes for nitroprusside. Global smoothness in MAP control was graded on a scale of 0 (not controlled) to 5 (excellent). Approximately 76% of isradipine-treated patients received a rating of > or = 3 (mean score, 3.5); 40% of the sodium nitroprusside-treated patients achieved a score of > or = 3 (mean score, 2.0). Both isradipine and nitroprusside produced statistically significant reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressures, a decrease in systemic vascular resistance, and increases in heart rate, cardiac index, and stroke volume index. Isradipine produced no significant decreases in pulmonary artery occlusion wedge pressure compared with nitroprusside. Intravenous isradipine was effective and well tolerated in patients with hypertension after CABG and offers an additional therapeutic option to treat patients after cardiac surgery.