[PMID: 20442305]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common genetic disease affecting the nervous system. Patients typically develop many tumors over their lifetime, leading to increased morbidity and mortality. The NF1 gene, mutated in NF1, is also commonly mutated in sporadic glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Because both NF1 and GBM are currently incurable, new therapeutic approaches are clearly needed. Natural products represent an opportunity to develop new therapies, as they have been evolutionarily selected to play targeted roles in organisms. Schweinfurthin A is a prenylated stilbene natural product that has previously shown specific inhibitory activity against brain and hematopoietic tumor lines. We show that patient-derived GBM and NF1 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) lines, as well as tumor lines derived from the Nf1-/+;Trp53-/+ (NPcis) mouse model of astrocytoma and MPNST are highly sensitive to inhibition by schweinfurthin A and its synthetic analogs. In contrast, primary mouse astrocytes are resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of schweinfurthin A, suggesting that schweinfurthin A may act specifically on tumor cells. Stable transfection of the GTPase-activating protein related domain of Nf1 into Nf1-/-;Trp53-/- astrocytoma cells confers resistance to schweinfurthin A. In addition, the profound effect of schweinfurthin A on dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton led us to discover that schweinfurthin A inhibits growth factor-stimulated Rho signaling. In summary, we have identified a class of small molecules that specifically inhibit growth of cells from both central and peripheral nervous system tumors and seem to act on NF1-deficient cells through cytoskeletal reorganization correlating to changes in Rho signaling.

[PMID: 9326316]
Neurofibroma is a benign tumor that arises from small or large nerves. This neoplastic lesion is a common feature of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders. The NF1 gene codes for a protein called "neurofibromin." It possesses a region that shares a high homology with the family of GTPase-activating proteins, which are negative regulators of RAS function and thereby control cell growth and differentiation. The evidence points to the NF1 gene being a tumor-suppressor gene. NF1 patients also have an increased incidence of certain malignant tumors that are believed to follow the "two hit" hypothesis, with one allele constitutionally inactivated and the other somatically mutated. Recently, somatic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has been described for neurofibromas, and mutations in both copies of the NF1 gene have been reported for a dermal neurofibroma. The aim of our study was the analysis of the NF1 locus in benign neurofibromas in NF1 patients. We performed LOH analysis on 60 neurofibromas belonging to 17 patients, 9 of them with family history of the disease and 8 of them sporadic. We have analyzed five intragenic NF1 markers and six extragenic markers, and we have found LOH in 25% of the neurofibromas (corresponding to 53% of the patients). In addition, we found that in the neurofibromas of patients from familial cases the deletions occurred in the allele that is not transmitted with the disease, indicating that both copies of the NF1 gene were inactivated in these tumors. Therefore, the recent reports mentioned above, together with our findings, strongly support the double inactivation of the NF1 gene in benign neurofibromas.

[PMID: 7485153]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is caused by deletions, insertions, translocations, and point mutations in the NF1 gene, which spans 350 kb on the long arm of human chromosome 17. Although several point mutations have been described, large molecular abnormalities have rarely been characterized in detail. We describe here the molecular breakpoints of a 12-kb deletion of the NF1 gene, which is responsible for the NF1 phenotype in a kindred with two children affected because of germline mosaicism in the unaffected father, who has the mutation in 10% of his spermatozoa. The mutation spans introns 31-39, removing 12,021 nt and inserting 30 bp, of which 19 bp are a direct repetition of a sequence located in intron 31, just 4 bp before the 5' breakpoint. The 5' and 3' breakpoints contain the sequence TATTTTA, which could be involved in the generation of the deletion. The most plausible explanation for the mechanism involved in the generation of this 12-kb deletion is homologous/nonhomologous recombination. Since sperm of the father does not contain the corresponding insertion of the 12-kb deleted sequence, this deletion could have occurred within the NF1 chromosome through loop formation. RNA from lymphocytes of one of the NF1 patients showed similar levels of the mutated and normal transcripts, suggesting that the NF1-mRNA from mutations causing frame shifts of the reading frame or stop codons in this gene is not degraded during its processing. The mutation was not detected in fresh lymphocytes from the unaffected father by PCR analysis, supporting the case for true germ-line mosaicism.

[PMID: 8528106]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) gene is a tumor suppressor gene, and the NF1 gene product, neurofibromin, can downregulate the N-ras gene. Because the N-ras gene is often mutated in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), we wondered if the NF1 gene might be mutated in those AML samples not having N-ras mutations. We investigated the mutational status of the N-ras gene and the FLR exon of codons 1371-1423 of the open reading frame of the full-length NF1 cDNA, which has a strong homology with the mammalian ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP), especially for a stretch of three consecutive amino acids (F, L, R), by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing in samples from patients with AML. Of 48 AML patients, 10 (21%) had point (missense) mutations of the N-ras gene involving codons 12, 13 and 61. However, mutations in the FLR exon of the NF1 gene were not detected in any of the AML samples. We also examined the difference of clinical response to induction therapy between AML patients with and without N-ras mutation. A significantly lower rate of complete remission was noted in individuals with N-ras gene mutations. These results suggest that mutation of the NF1 gene, at least in the FLR exon, is very rare in AML and the NF1 gene probably is not a functional complement of the N-ras gene mutation. The presence of N-ras gene mutation may be associated with a lower clinical response to antileukemic therapy.

[PMID: 8699317]
The proto-oncogene ras is an essential gene for the growth and the differentiation for various types of cells. Ras, ras gene product, is a GTP binding protein which controls the signal transduction by GTP hydrolysis. The ras gene is frequently activated by point mutations in various types of human cancers, which results in a decrease in the GTPase activity of its product. A GTPase-activating protein p120 (p120GAP) was identified as a factor which stimulates the GTPase of normal ras gene product p21 but not of the mutated. An NF1 gene was identified as a gene whose loss of function causes an onset of human disorder, neurofibromatosis type I. The NF1 gene encodes a protein which contains a region with a similarity to the catalytic domain of p120GAP. We recently purified a novel Ras GAP whose molecular weight and immunogenecity are different from those of p120GAP and NF1. We named the novel mammalian Ras GAP as Gap1m. Isolation and sequencing of Gap1m cDNA revealed that Gap1m is indeed a novel Ras GAP. We also succeeded in isolation of another novel Ras GAP gene, GapIII/Gap1IP4BP, which is closely related to Gap1m. Recently, it is shown that GapIII/Gap1IP4BP binds inositol-tetrakis phosphate compounds. The overview of these Ras GAP molecules is described.

[PMID: 9190537]
Two forms of neurofibromatosis, type 1 (NF1) and type 2 (NF2) are connected with genes localized on chromosomes 17 and 22, respectively. The genes that are inactivated in neurofibromatosis code for the proteins neurofibromine and merline, respectively. Since inactivation leads to neoplasia, they are called tumour suppressor genes. Neurofibromine shows resemblances to proteins that serve to inactivate oncogenes. Merline has a relationship with proteins that connect the cytoskeleton and the cell membrane. The precise function of the proteins is still unknown. The NF1 gene is characterized by extraordinarily high sensitivity to mutation; half the NF1 patients have not inherited the disease. In the familial form of neurofibromatosis, a mutated gene is inherited and the normal allele in the tumour is inactivated, making tumour growth possible. In the sporadic form of neurofibromatosis, both normal alleles are inactivated locally in the tissue so that a tumour develops in that place.

[PMID: 17573495]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common disorder of dysregulated tissue growth secondary to mutations in the tumor suppressor gene NF1. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in patients with NF1 is hypothesized to be secondary to an underlying vasculopathy. We describe the entity we term NF1-associated PAH (NF1-PAH) in four new patients and update the data on four previously published reports of patients with PAH and NF1. We performed genetic testing of the bone morphogenic protein receptor 2 (BMPR2) gene, which mutated in 70% of patients with familial PAH and approximately 25% of patients with idiopathic PAH. We report, for the first time, pathologic findings in the autopsy-obtained lung of one patient with NF1-PAH. Patients with NF1-PAH have a generally poor long-term prognosis. In four patients, we observed the mosaic pattern of lung attenuation on a CT scan of the chest, a radiographic finding that can be consistent with an underlying vasculopathy. No mutations or rearrangements in the BMPR2 gene were found. We observed complex plexiform lesions in the one available autopsy specimen. Similar lesions are a hallmark of plexogenic pulmonary arteriopathy and are associated with several severe types of PAH. (Plexiform lesions should not be confused with plexiform neurofibromas, which are distinctive tumors seen in NF1.) Our findings suggest that NF1 should be considered as being "associated with PAH as outlined in the Revised Clinical Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension. Understanding the mechanism of PAH in NF1 may inform the pathogenesis of PAH, NF1-PAH itself, and other NF1-associated vasculopathies. The pulmonary vasculature should now be included among the arterial beds affected by NF1 vasculopathy.

[PMID: 17209131]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a neurocutaneous disorder resulting in the growth of a variety of tumours, and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are mesenchymal tumours that commonly harbour oncogenic mutations in KIT or PDGFRA and are thought to arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC; the pacemaker cells of the gut). To characterise two patients with NF1 and GISTs. Two patients were genotyped for germline mutations in NF1. GISTs from both patients were genotyped for somatic mutations in KIT and PDGFRA. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of NF1 in one GIST was assessed by genotyping seven microsatellite markers spanning 2.39 Mb of the NF1 locus in the tumour and in genomic DNA. The known germline mutation in NF1 was confirmed in GIST DNA by sequencing. The copy number of the mutated NF1 allele was determined by multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplification. GISTs from both patients were of wild type for mutations in KIT and PDGFRA. In the GIST with adequate DNA, all seven markers were informative and showed LOH at the NF1 locus; sequencing of NF1 from that GIST showed no wild-type sequence, suggesting that it was lost in the tumour. Multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplification analysis showed that two copies of all NF1 exons were present. This is the first evidence of mitotic recombination resulting in a reduction to homozygosity of a germline NF1 mutation in an NF1-associated GIST. We hypothesise that the LOH of NF1 and lack of KIT and PDGFRA mutations are evidence of an alternative pathogenesis in NF1-associated GISTs.

[PMID: 16741618]
Many mutations of the NF1 gene have been reported in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1); however, there have been no documented NF1 gene mutations in Japanese NF1 patients. In the present study, we used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing analysis to characterize the NF1 gene in a 53-year-old Japanese patient with NF1 who suffered from neurofibroma, pheochromocytoma, and gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Direct sequence analyses revealed a single base substitution in the splicing donor site of intron 6 (IVS6 888+1, G --> A) in one NF1 allele, resulting in an altered splice site (ss) in the mutated allele. Splicing at the cryptic 5' ss in the mutated allele generated mRNA with an insertion of 60 nucleotides. In addition, we screened for mutations in exons 9, 11, 13, and 17 of the c-kit gene in GIST and the succinate dehydrogenase subunit D (SDHD) gene in the pheochromocytoma, but we did not detect any somatic mutations. We report here the first case of an NF1 patient with four neoplasms: neurofibroma, pheochromocytoma, astrocytoma and GIST. Our results suggest that the molecular pathogenesis of GISTs in NF1 patients is different from that in non-NF1 patients.

[PMID: 10973261]
Astrocytomas are the leading cause of brain cancer in humans. Because these tumours are highly infiltrative, current treatments that rely on targeting the tumour mass are often ineffective. A mouse model for astrocytoma would be a powerful tool for dissecting tumour progression and testing therapeutics. Mouse models of astrocytoma have been designed to express oncogenic proteins in astrocytes, but have had limited success due to low tumour penetrance or limited tumour progression. We present here a mouse model of astrocytomas involving mutation of two tumour-suppressor genes, Nf1 and Trp53. Humans with mutations in NF1 develop neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) and have increased risk of optic gliomas, astrocytomas and glioblastomas. The TP53 tumour suppressor is often mutated in a subset of astrocytomas that develop at a young age and progress slowly to glioblastoma (termed secondary glioblastomas, in contrast to primary glioblastomas that develop rapidly de novo). This mouse model shows a range of astrocytoma stages, from low-grade astrocytoma to glioblastoma multiforme, and may accurately model human secondary glioblastoma involving TP53 loss. This is the first reported mouse model of astrocytoma initiated by loss of tumour suppressors, rather than overexpression of transgenic oncogenes.

[PMID: 16861979]
The tumorigenesis of sporadic endocrine tumors is still not fully understood. It is well known that patients with von Recklinghausen syndrome (NF-1) (OMIM 162200) carrying NF1 germline mutations are predisposed to endocrine tumors including pheochromocytomas and duodenal somatostatinomas. It is unclear, however, whether the rarely reported occurrence of pancreatic insulinomas in NF-1 patients represents a coincidental finding or whether insulinomas are a rare manifestation of the NF-1 syndrome. To determine the potential association between the NF-1 syndrome and pancreatic endocrine tumors, we analyzed a NF-1 patient with a well-differentiated pancreatic endocrine carcinoma for NF1 mutation, allelic loss of the NF1 gene and its expression in peripheral blood and tumor cells. The germline mutation c. 499 del TGTT known in the family was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing of exon 4 in DNA extracted from peripheral blood. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis of the NF1 gene was carried out using 3 intragenic microsatellite markers on 17q11.2. RNA expression was examined by reverse transcription and a consecutive PCR spanning intron 3 of the NF1 gene including the mutated site in exon 4. Immunohistochemistry was used to analyze NF-1 protein expression. Mutation analysis of peripheral blood leukocytes confirmed the 4 base pair deletion in exon 4 starting at codon 167 (499 del TGTT). LOH analysis of tumor tissue revealed retention of both NF1 alleles. While reverse transcriptase-PCR of peripheral blood showed bi-allelic expression of both the wild-type NF1 and the mutated form, reverse transcriptase-PCR of tumor extracts demonstrated expression of the mutated but not the wild-type NF1 allele. Additionally, neurofibromin, the NF1 gene product, was absent in the tumor tissue of the NF-1 patient. These results show that the wild-type NF1 transcrips and protein are reduced, in the reported insulinoma, supposedly by epigenetic mechanisms. This provides strong evidence that there is a relationship between von Recklinghausen disease and the patient's insulinoma. In this line, insulinomas may be viewed as a rare manifestation of the NF-1 syndrome. Furthermore, the NF1 gene must be considered as a candidate tumor suppressor gene for sporadic insulinomas and probably other pancreatic endocrine tumors.

[PMID: 8845843]
CpG dinucleotides provide hotspots for transitional mutations in a variety of genes, some leading to genetic diseases in humans. Although this phenomenon is attributed to cytosine methylation at such sites, direct and specific observations of CpG methylation at the sites of recurrent mutations are lacking. We have used a bisulfite genomic sequencing method to analyze DNA methylation within three representative exons from the neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) gene, well recognized for its high frequency of spontaneous mutations. We observed that the cytosine methylation within NF1 exons 28, 29, and 31 is restricted to CpG dinucleotides, including the CpG dinucleotide present at the site of the recurrent NF1 mutation (C5839T; also referred to as R1947X). At several sites, clone-specific methylation differences were also observed. Our results provide experimental evidence for the hypothesis that methylatable CpGs in the NF1 gene contribute to spontaneous germline mutations associated with this gene, by showing that DNA methylation does occur at all CpGs contained within these representative NF1 exons. As well, the DNA methylation seen at the common mutation site in exon 31 may explain why this site is frequently mutated. Methylation-dependent mutagenesis may also provide a basis for some somatic (second hit) mutations which disable the normal allele and result in the development of NF1 associated symptoms.

[PMID: 11257108]
The study of cancer predisposition syndromes presents unique opportunities to gain insights into the genetic events associated with tumor pathogenesis. Individuals with two inherited cancer syndromes, neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) and neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2), develop both benign and malignant tumors. The corresponding genes mutated in these two disorders encode tumor suppressor proteins, termed neurofibromin (NF1) and merlin (NF2), which function in novel ways to regulate cell growth and differentiation. Neurofibromin inhibits cell proliferation, at least in part, by modulating mitogenic pathway signaling through inactivation of p21-ras. In contrast, merlin may act as a membrane-associated molecular switch that regulates cell-cell and cell-matrix signals transduced by cell surface receptors. Significant progress in our understanding of the genetics and biology of NF1 and NF2 has elucidated the roles of these genes in tumor initiation and progression.

[PMID: 10874316]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder affecting one in 3,500 individuals. The mutation rate in the NF1 gene is one of the highest known for human genes. Compared to other methods, the protein truncation test (PTT) provides improved efficiency in detecting NF1 mutations which are dispersed throughout the gene which spans 350 kilobases of genomic DNA. We have applied the PTT and subsequent sequence analysis of cloned cDNA to identify mutations in NF1 patients. We report here the identification of two novel (W336X and Q315X), and one recurrent (R304X) mutation located in exon 7 and show that all three premature termination codons lead to skipping of exon 7 in a proportion of the transcripts derived from the mutated allele. Possible mutation-induced alterations of the RNA secondary structure and their impact on skipping of exon 7 of the NF1 gene are explored and discussed.

[PMID: 23578956]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is characterized primarily by tumor formation in the nervous system, but patients report other neurological complications including pain and itch. Individuals with NF1 harbor 1 mutated NF1 allele causing heterozygous expression in all of their cells. In mice, Nf1 heterozygosity leads to hyperexcitability of sensory neurons and hyperproliferation of mast cells, both of which could lead to increased hypersensitivity and scratching in response to noxious and pruritic stimuli. To determine whether Nf1 heterozygosity may increase pain and itch behaviors independent of secondary effects of tumor formation, we used mice with a targeted, heterozygous Nf1 gene deletion (Nf1±) that lack tumors. Nf1± mice exhibited normal baseline responses to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Moreover, similar to wild-type littermates, Nf1± mice developed inflammation-induced heat and mechanical hypersensitivity, capsaicin-induced nocifensive behavior, histamine-dependent or -independent scratching, and chronic constriction injury-induced cold allodynia. However, Nf1± mice exhibited an attenuated first phase of formalin-induced spontaneous behavior and expedited resolution of formalin-induced heat hypersensitivity. These results are not consistent with the hypothesis that Nf1 heterozygosity alone is sufficient to increase pain and itch sensation in mice, and they suggest that additional mechanisms may underlie reports of increased pain and itch in NF1 patients. This study assessed whether Nf1 heterozygosity in mice increased hypersensitivity and scratching following noxious and pruritic stimuli. Using Nf1± mice lacking tumors, this study finds no increases in pain or itch behavior, suggesting that there is no predisposition for either clinical symptom solely due to Nf1 heterozygosity.

[PMID: 10712197]
More than 500 unrelated patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) were screened for mutations in the NF1 gene. For each patient, the whole coding sequence and all splice sites were studied for aberrations, either by the protein truncation test (PTT), temperature-gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) of genomic PCR products, or, most often, by direct genomic sequencing (DGS) of all individual exons. A total of 301 sequence variants, including 278 bona fide pathogenic mutations, were identified. As many as 216 or 183 of the genuine mutations, comprising 179 or 161 different ones, can be considered novel when compared to the recent findings of Upadhyaya and Cooper, or to the NNFF mutation database. Mutation-detection efficiencies of the various screening methods were similar: 47.1% for PTT, 53.7% for TGGE, and 54.9% for DGS. Some 224 mutations (80.2%) yielded directly or indirectly premature termination codons. These mutations showed even distribution over the whole gene from exon 1 to exon 47. Of all sequence variants determined in our study, <20% represent C-->T or G-->A transitions within a CpG dinucleotide, and only six different mutations also occur in NF1 pseudogenes, with five being typical C-->T transitions in a CpG. Thus, neither frequent deamination of 5-methylcytosines nor interchromosomal gene conversion may account for the high mutation rate of the NF1 gene. As opposed to the truncating mutations, the 28 (10.1%) missense or single-amino-acid-deletion mutations identified clustered in two distinct regions, the GAP-related domain (GRD) and an upstream gene segment comprising exons 11-17. The latter forms a so-called cysteine/serine-rich domain with three cysteine pairs suggestive of ATP binding, as well as three potential cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) recognition sites obviously phosphorylated by PKA. Coincidence of mutated amino acids and those conserved between human and Drosophila strongly suggest significant functional relevance of this region, with major roles played by exons 12a and 15 and part of exon 16.

[PMID: 9668168]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common familial tumour syndrome with multiple clinical features such as neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots (CLS), iris Lisch nodules, axillary freckling, optic glioma, specific bone lesions and an increased risk of malignant tumours. It is caused by a wide spectrum of mutations affecting the NF1 gene. Most mutations result in the loss of one allele at the DNA, mRNA or protein level and thus in the loss of any function of the gene product neurofibromin. The idea of the simultaneous loss of several different neurofibromin functions has been postulated to explain the pleiotropic effects of its loss. However, we have identified a novel missense mutation in a family with a classical multi-symptomatic NF1 phenotype, including a malignant schwannoma, that specifically abolishes the Ras-GTPase-activating function of neurofibromin. In this family, Arg1276 had mutated into proline. Based on complex biochemical studies as well as the analysis of the crystal structure of the GTPase-activating protein (GAP) domain of p120GAP in the presence of Ras, we unequivocally identified this amino acid as the arginine finger of the neurofibromin GAP-related domain (GRD)-the most essential catalytic element for RasGAP activity. Here, we present data demonstrating that the mutation R1276P, unlike previously reported missense mutations of the GRD region, does not impair the secondary and tertiary protein structure. It neither reduces the level of cellular neurofibromin nor influences its binding to Ras substantially, but it does completely disable GAP activity. Our findings provide direct evidence that failure of neurofibromin GAP activity is the critical element of NF1 pathogenesis. Thus, therapeutic approaches aimed at the reduction of Ras.GTP levels in neural crest-derived cells can be expected to relieve most of the NF1 symptoms.

[PMID: 12695655]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common human genetic disorders and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. The gene responsible for this disorder, NF1, encodes neurofibromin, which can function to down-regulate ras activity. Mutations that inactivate NF7 result in elevated levels of ras signaling and increased cell proliferation in some tissues. NF7 functions as a tumor suppressor gene; patients inherit one mutated copy and are believed to acquire a "second hit" in tissues that go on to form benign or malignant tumors. NF7 is expressed widely, yet certain tissues are more susceptible to growth dysregulation in NF1 patients. Cardiovascular defects also contribute to NF1, though the cause remains unclear. In a recent study, we used tissue-specific gene inactivation in mice to study the role of neurofibromin in heart development. A further understanding of neurofibromin function will help to elucidate the pathophysiology of NF1 and will also lead to a better understanding of cell cycle regulation and ras pathways in specific cell types. Finally, we comment on how similar genetic strategies can be used in mice to study the role of additional signaling pathways involved in heart development.

[PMID: 18196300]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common genetic disease caused by haploinsufficiency of the NF1 tumor-suppressor gene. Different pathogenetic mechanisms have been identified, with the majority (95%) causing intragenic lesions. Single or multiexon NF1 copy number changes occur in about 2% of patients, but little is known about the molecular mechanisms behind these intragenic deletions. We report here on the molecular characterization of a novel NF1 multiexonic deletion. The application of a multidisciplinary approach including multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, allelic segregation analysis, and fluorescent in situ hybridization allowed us to map the breakpoints in IVS27b and IVS48. Furthermore, the breakpoint junction was characterized by sequencing. Using bioinformatic analysis, we identified some recombinogenic motifs in close proximity to the centromeric and telomeric breakpoints and predicted the presence of a mutated messenger ribonucleic acid, which was deleted between exons 28 and 48 and encodes a neurofibromin that lacks some domains essential for its function. Through reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, the expression of the mutated allele was verified, showing the junction between exons 27b and 49 and, as expected, was not subjected to nonsense-mediated decay. Multiexonic deletions represent 2% of NF1 mutations, and until now, the breakpoint has been identified in only a few cases. The fine characterization of multiexonic deletions broadens the mutational repertoire of the NF1 gene, allowing for the identification of different pathogenetic mechanisms causing NF1.

[PMID: 8264648]
Lysine 1423 of neurofibromin (neurofibromatosis type I gene product [NF1]) plays a crucial role in the function of NF1. Mutations of this lysine were detected in samples from a neurofibromatosis patient as well as from cancer patients. To further understand the significance of this residue, we have mutated it to all possible amino acids. Functional assays using yeast ira complementation have revealed that lysine is the only amino acid that produced functional NF1. Quantitative analyses of different mutant proteins have suggested that their GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity is drastically reduced as a result of a decrease in their Ras affinity. Such a requirement for a specific residue is not observed in the case of other conserved residues within the GAP-related domain. We also report that another residue, phenylalanine 1434, plays an important role in NF1 function. This was first indicated by the finding that defective NF1s due to an alteration of lysine 1423 to other amino acids can be rescued by a second site intragenic mutation at residue 1434. The mutation partially restored GAP activity in the lysine mutant. When the mutation phenylalanine 1434 to serine was introduced into a wild-type NF1 protein, the resulting protein acquired the ability to suppress activated phenotypes of RAS2Val-19 cells. This suppression, however, does not involve Ras interaction, since the phenylalanine mutant does not stimulate the intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS2Val-19 protein and does not have an increased affinity for Ras proteins.

[PMID: 15770836]
Tumors of the central nervous system are the most frequent solid tumors in childhood. With 30-40% of this heterogenous group, low-grade astrocytomas represent the most common subtype. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is strongly associated with the development of pilocytic astrocytoma (PA), frequently appearing as optic glioma. Neurofibromatosis 1 gene (NF1 ) fulfills the criteria of a tumor suppressor gene and is deleted or mutated heterozygously in patients with NF1. This suggests an involvement in the development of PA. To clarify whether silencing of NF1 by promoter methylation plays a role in PA and especially in optic glioma, the authors investigated the methylation status in 30 PA, 6 of which had optic glioma. However, no methylation was found at the NF1 promoter region in PA. To rule out that silencing of NF1 by promoter methylation is restricted to higher-grade astrocytomas, 15 pediatric WHO II degree and IV degree astrocytomas were analyzed: 12 astrocytomas II and 3 glioblastomas displayed no NF1 promoter methylation. The authors conclude that NF1 silencing by methylation plays no role in low-grade astrocytoma.

[PMID: 17019046]
Tumors of the nervous system most often occur in both children and adults as sporadic events with no family history of the disease, but they are also among the clinical manifestations of a significant number of familial cancer syndromes, including familial retinoblastoma, neurofibromatosis 1 and 2, tuberous sclerosis, and Cowden, Turcot, Li-Fraumeni and nevoid basal cell carcinoma (Gorlin) syndromes. All of these syndromes involve transmissible genetic risk resulting from loss of a functional allele, or inheritance of a structurally defective allele, of a specific gene. These genes include RB1, NF1, NF2, TSC1, TSC2, TP53, PTEN, APC, hMLH1, hPSM2, and PTCH, most of which function as tumor suppressor genes. The same genes are also observed in mutated and inactive forms, or are deleted, in tumor cells in sporadic cases of the same tumors. The nature of the mutational events that give rise to these inactivated alleles suggests a possible role of environmental mutagens in their causation. However, only external ionizing radiation at high doses is clearly established as an environmental cause of brain, nerve and meningeal tumors in humans. Transplacental carcinogenesis studies in rodents and other species emphasize the extraordinary susceptibility of the developing mammalian nervous system to carcinogenesis, but the inverse relationship of latency to dose suggests that low transplacental exposures to genotoxicants are more likely to result in brain tumors late in life, rather than in childhood. While not all neurogenic tumor-related genes in humans have similar effects in experimental rodents, genetically engineered mice (GEM) increasingly provide useful insights into the combined effects of multiple tumor suppressor genes and of gene-environment interactions in the genesis of brain tumors, especially pediatric brain tumors such as medulloblastoma.

[PMID: 17564507]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most frequent neurocutaneous disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance. Phenotype variability is high ranging from merely several café-au-lait spots to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors or severe disfigurement through plexiform neurofibromas. Identification of genetic factors that modify the NF1 phenotype would contribute to the understanding of NF1 pathophysiology and improve patient counselling. As even monozygotic (MZ) twins with NF1 may differ phenotypically, we wondered whether these variations might be inherited in a non-Mendelian fashion. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is inherited extrachromosomally through the cytoplasm of the oocyte and often harbours heteroplasmic sequence variations. At the time of blastomere separation, these variants may be skewedly distributed and effect phenotypic differences. Because of their co-localization with the tumor suppressor protein neurofibromin, which is mutated in NF1, mitochondria were particular attractive candidates for investigation. MtDNA was extracted from nucleated blood cells of four pairs of discordant MZ twins with NF1 and from cutaneous neurofibromas of one twin pair. We sequenced the entire mitochondrial genome and determined the state of heteroplasmy by investigating a microsatellite region of the mitochondrial D-loop (D310-tract). The clinical diagnosis was confirmed in all patients by detection of pathogenic mutations in the NF1 gene. Monozygosity was verified by genotyping. However, we did not detect evidence for mtDNA sequence differences or for different degrees of heteroplasmy between individuals of the same twin pair. The phenotypic discordance of MZ twins with NF1 cannot be explained by skewed distribution of mtDNA mutations or polymorphisms.

[PMID: 17295913]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 is one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders, affecting about 1:3,500 individuals. NF1 exon 7 displays weakly defined exon-intron boundaries, and is particularly prone to missplicing. In this study we investigated the expression of exon 7 transcripts using bioinformatic identification of splicing regulatory sequences, and functional minigene analysis of four sequence changes [c.910C>T (R304X), c.945G>A/c.946C>A (Q315Q/L316M), c.1005T>C (N335N)] identified in exon 7 of three different NF1 patients. Our results detected the presence of three exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and one putative exonic splicing silencer (ESS) element. The wild type minigene assay resulted in three alternative isoforms, including a transcript lacking NF1 exon 7 (NF1DeltaE7). Both the wild type and the mutated constructs shared NF1DeltaE7 in addition to the complete messenger, but displayed a different ratio between the two transcripts. In the presence of R304X and Q315Q/L316M mutations, the relative proportion between the different isoforms is shifted toward the expression of NF1DeltaE7, while in the presence of N335N variant, the NF1DeltaE7 expression is abolished. In conclusion, it appears mandatory to investigate the role of each nucleotide change within the NF1 coding sequence, since a significant proportion of NF1 exon 7 mutations affects pre-mRNA splicing, by disrupting exonic splicing motifs and modifying the delicate balance between aberrantly and correctly spliced transcripts.

[PMID: 21354044]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a hereditary disorder caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. Detecting mutation in NF1 is hindered by the gene's large size, the lack of mutation hotspots, the presence of pseudogenes, and the wide variety of possible lesions. We developed a method for detecting germline mutations by combining an original RNA-based cDNA-PCR mutation detection method and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The protocol was validated in a cohort of 56 blood samples from NF1 patients who fulfilled NIH diagnostic criteria, identifying the germline mutation in 53 cases (95% sensitivity). The efficiency and reliability of this approach facilitated detection of different types of mutations, including single-base substitutions, deletions or insertions of one to several nucleotides, microdeletions, and changes in intragenic copy number. Because mutational screening for minor lesions was performed using cDNA and the characterization of mutated alleles was performed at both the RNA and genomic DNA level, the analysis provided insight into the nature of the different mutations and their effect on NF1 mRNA splicing. After validation, we implemented the protocol as a routine test. Here we present the overall unbiased spectrum of NF1 mutations identified in 93 patients in a cohort of 105. The results indicate that this protocol is a powerful new tool for the molecular diagnosis of NF1.