[PMID: 22004765]
To investigate the use of tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits nerve growth factor, for the treatment of moderate to severe osteoarthritis in Japanese patients. Patients received tanezumab 10, 25, 50, 100, 200 μg/kg, or placebo and were followed for 92 or 120 days. Endpoints included the incidence of adverse events (AEs) and the change from baseline to week 8 in pain intensity and the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis (WOMAC) subscales. Patients (n = 83) were 69% female, age 44-73 years, with a Kellgren-Lawrence X-ray grade of 2-4. At week 8, compared with placebo, tanezumab 25, 100, and 200 μg/kg improved index knee pain during walking (-18.5, -14.3, and -27.6, respectively), index knee pain in the past 24 h (-19.1, -14.6, and -24.2, respectively), current index knee pain (-16.5, -10.9, and -22.8, respectively), and the WOMAC pain (-11.5, -9.6, and -18.8, respectively), physical function (-8.7, -9.5, and -17.6, respectively), and stiffness (-20.4, -11.2, and -10.2, respectively) subscales. Overall, seven patients reported AEs of abnormal peripheral sensation: allodynia (two in the tanezumab 200 μg/kg group); paresthesia (two in the tanezumab 200 μg/kg group), dysesthesia (one in the tanezumab 200 μg/kg group); thermohypoesthesia (one in the tanezumab 100 μg/kg group), and decreased vibratory sense (one in the placebo group). All of these AEs were mild to moderate in severity and transient in nature. Tanezumab was safe and generally well tolerated and may improve pain symptoms in Japanese patients with moderate to severe osteoarthritis of the knee. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT00669409.

[PMID: 18505735]
We describe the use of four complementary biosensors (Biacore 3000, Octet QK, ProteOn XPR36, and KinExA 3000) in characterizing the kinetics of human nerve growth factor (NGF) binding to a humanized NGF-neutralizing monoclonal antibody (tanezumab, formerly known as RN624). Tanezumab is a clinical candidate as a therapy for chronic pain. Our measurements were consistent with the NGF/tanezumab binding affinity being tighter than 10 pM due to the formation of an extremely stable complex that had an estimated half-life exceeding 100 h, which was beyond the resolution of any of our methods. The system was particularly challenging to study because NGF is an obligate homodimer, and we describe various assay orientations and immobilization methods that were used to minimize avidity in our experiments while keeping NGF in as native a state as possible. We also explored the interactions of NGF with its natural receptors, TrkA and P75, and how tanezumab blocks them. The Biacore blocking assay that we designed was used to quantify the potency of tanezumab and is more precise and reproducible than the currently available cell-based functional assays.

[PMID: 24452657]
Low back pain with or without radiculopathy is an important cause of disability and economic expenditure. However, many patients are not meeting optimal pain control through existing treatments. Recent studies have linked nerve growth factor (NGF) and the pathophysiology of persistent pain. Anti-NGF could be an alternative drug treatment for low back pain. Systematically review the efficacy and safety of anti-NGF in the treatment of low back pain. A systematic review of the literature with no language, date or publication status restriction, using Medline, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and the clinicaltrials.gov database. Additional literature was retrieved by conferring with experts in the field or reviewing bibliographies and annals of meetings and congresses. Search terms included "monoclonal antibodies," "nerve growth factor," "anti-ngf," "fulranumab," "tanezumab," "sciatica," "back pain," and "spine." Inclusion criteria were observational studies with safety as an outcome and randomized or nonrandomized controlled trials studying the efficacy and/or the safety of anti-NGF drugs on low back pain. Exclusion criteria included patients with autoimmune conditions or osteoporosis. Studies were assessed independently by 2 authors regarding inclusion/exclusion criteria, risk of bias, clinical relevance, and quality of evidence (GRADE approach). 1,168 studies were retrieved. After excluding duplicates and applying the inclusion/exclusion criteria, 4 RCTs remained (n = 2,109): 2 for tanezumab, one for REGN475, and one for fulranumab. Only the tanezumab studies showed any significant difference over placebo (n = 1,563) for both pain relief and functional improvement. There is very low evidence that systemically administered anti-NGF therapy has a small positive effect compared to placebo for both pain relief (standarized mean difference [SMD] = -0.29, 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.58 to 0.00) and functional improvement (SMD = -0.21, 95%CI -0.37 to -0.05 ) of low back pain. There was low evidence of adverse effects (AEs) compared to placebo and low evidence of neurological AEs than placebo (relative risk = 1.93, 95%CI 1.41 to 2.64).Tanezumab, as a specific anti-NGF treatment, showed low evidence of a small to moderate effect for pain relief of low back pain (SMD = -0.44, 95%CI -0.81 to -0.07); and low evidence of a small effect for functional improvement (SMD = -0.26, 95%CI -0.40 to -0.12) with systemic administration, although not clinically significant. Tanezumab and anti-NGFs overall had, respectively, moderate and low evidence of overall AEs and serious AEs and a higher risk of developing neurological AEs when compared with placebo. Although anti-NGF, specifically tanezumab, showed a low-to-moderate effect on pain relief and functional improvement, it cannot be recommended for low back pain treatment. Without more research on the pathophysiology of anti-NGFs and adverse effects, its use is not safe in the overall population. However, as corroborated by the US Food and Drug Administration, this meta-analysis underscores a role for greater insight into anti-NGF therapy for painful conditions that are refractory to current drugs, such as oncologic pain, chronic pancreatitis, and phantom-limb pain. Given the pathophysiology of axial pain involving inflammatory mediators and the adverse effects of systemic anti-NGF use, consideration of local therapies may warrant further exploration.

[PMID: 27936977]
The management of pain associated with chronic musculoskeletal conditions represents a significant challenge for the clinician. There remains a need for novel medications that have a significant analgesic benefit and are also safe and well tolerated. Both pre-clinical and clinical data have provided evidence of the role of nerve growth factor (NGF) in a multitude of pain eliciting conditions. Therefore, the development of monoclonal antibodies to NGF for chronic painful musculoskeletal conditions has generated interest. Areas covered: This manuscript is a review that examines both the pharmacological properties and clinical studies of tanezumab, the most widely studied antibody to NGF, for management of osteoarthritis (OA) and low back pain. In addition, the safety and tolerability profile and development history of tanezumab are also discussed. Expert opinion: Most studies provide strong support for the ability of tanezumab to provide clinically meaningful pain relief in individuals with these conditions, with longer-term studies suggesting durability of effect. The adverse event profile appears favorable, assuming the risk mitigation strategies are effective at reducing the incidence of joint-related side effects. Further data are being collected to define the optimal dose and dosing strategy in both OA and chronic low back pain.

[PMID: 25326242]
Tanezumab, an antibody to nerve growth factor, was administered to pregnant cynomolgus monkeys at 0, 0.5, 4, and 30 mg/kg weekly, beginning gestation day (GD) 20 through parturition (∼GD165). Maternal tanezumab administration appeared to increase stillbirths and infant mortality, but no consistent pattern of gross and/or microscopic change was detected to explain the mortality. Offspring exposed in utero were evaluated at 12 months of age using light microscopy (all tissues), stereology (basal forebrain cholinergic and dorsal root ganglia neurons), and morphometry (sural nerve). Light microscopy revealed decreased number of neurons in sympathetic ganglia (superior mesenteric, cervicothoracic, and ganglia in the thoracic sympathetic trunk). Stereologic assessment indicated an overall decrease in dorsal root ganglion (thoracic) volume and number of neurons in animals exposed to tanezumab 4 mg/kg (n = 9) and 30 mg/kg (n = 1). At all tanezumab doses, the sural nerve was small due to decreases in myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Existing axons/myelin sheaths appeared normal when viewed with light and transmission electron microscopy. There was no indication of tanezumab-related, active neuron/nerve fiber degeneration/necrosis in any tissue, indicating decreased sensory/sympathetic neurons and axonal changes were due to hypoplasia or atrophy. These changes in the sensory and sympathetic portions of the peripheral nervous system suggest some degree of developmental neurotoxicity, although what effect, if any, the changes had on normal function and survival was not apparent. Overall, these changes were consistent with published data from rodent studies.

[PMID: 21130822]
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is an important mediator of pain and hyperalgesia and has become a target of novel analgesic therapeutics. Tanezumab is a humanized IgG(2) antibody that binds NGF with high affinity and specificity. In a study to assess the toxicity and pharmacokinetic properties of tanezumab in adult, male and female, cynomolgus monkeys following weekly intravenous administration of 1, 10, or 30 mg/kg for up to 26 weeks (followed by an 8-week recovery period), tanezumab was well tolerated with no macroscopic or microscopic effects on those brain, spinal cord, nerve, or ganglia sections evaluated. One fifth of tanezumab-treated monkeys developed an antibody response to tanezumab that prevented maintenance of tanezumab exposure between dosing. In the antibody-negative animals, accumulation of tanezumab was observed; steady state was achieved approximately 8 weeks after the first dose of study drug, and exposure to tanezumab was approximately dose proportional with no observed difference between male and female animals. One monkey died during the study; this monkey had findings suggestive of hypersensitivity reaction. The favorable toxicity and pharmacokinetic profile of tanezumab seen in this study supports its further evaluation for the treatment of pain in clinical practice.

[PMID: 23628600]
Tanezumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that specifically inhibits nerve growth factor as a treatment for chronic pain. This phase IIB study investigated the efficacy and safety of tanezumab for chronic low back pain vs placebo and naproxen. Patients (N=1347) received intravenous tanezumab (5, 10, or 20mg every 8weeks), naproxen (500mg twice daily), or placebo. The primary efficacy end point was mean change in daily average low back pain intensity (LBPI) from baseline to week 16. Secondary end points included mean change from baseline to week 16 in the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire and Patient's Global Assessment (PGA) of low back pain. Tanezumab 10 and 20mg had similar efficacy profiles and significantly improved LBPI, Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire, and PGA scores vs both placebo and naproxen (P⩽.05). Tanezumab 5mg provided improvement of PGA scores vs placebo (P⩽.05), and naproxen resulted in significant improvement of LBPI vs placebo (P⩽.05). Adverse event incidence was comparable across tanezumab doses but higher than with placebo or naproxen. Arthralgia, pain in extremity, headache, and paresthesia were the most commonly reported adverse events by tanezumab-treated patients. The most frequently reported adverse events resulting in discontinuation of tanezumab treatment were arthralgia and paresthesia; the highest frequency was observed with tanezumab 20mg (both 1.4%). Serious adverse event incidence was similar across treatments. In conclusion, tanezumab provided significantly greater improvement in pain, function, and global scores vs placebo and naproxen in patients with chronic low back pain.

[PMID: 21696889]
Increased nerve growth factor levels are associated with chronic pain conditions, including chronic low back pain (LBP). This study examined safety and analgesic efficacy of tanezumab, a humanized anti-nerve growth factor antibody, in adults with chronic LBP. Patients received intravenous tanezumab 200 μg/kg plus oral placebo (n=88), intravenous placebo plus oral naproxen 500 mg twice a day (n=88), or intravenous placebo plus oral placebo (n=41). Primary outcome was average LBP intensity (aLBPI) at Week 6. Secondary outcomes were proportion of patients with ≥30% or ≥50% reduction in aLBPI, Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire and Brief Pain Inventory-short form scores, Patients' Global Assessment of LBP, Patients' Global Evaluation of study medication, and rescue medication use. Mean aLBPI change from baseline to Week 6 was greater with tanezumab vs naproxen (P=0.004) and placebo (P<0.001). Greater proportions of patients reported ≥30% and ≥50% reduction in aLBPI with tanezumab vs naproxen (P≤0.013) and placebo (P<0.001), and greater improvements in Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (P<0.001) and other secondary outcomes except rescue medication use. Tanezumab was associated with adverse events (AEs) of abnormal peripheral sensation that were generally mild and resolved before study completion; however, there were no serious AEs. Nine patients (4 of whom were tanezumab-treated) discontinued due to AEs. In conclusion, tanezumab resulted in analgesic efficacy that was clinically and statistically superior to placebo and naproxen in patients with chronic LBP. Tanezumab clinical development is on regulatory hold due to AEs in osteoarthritis patients.

[PMID: 21420111]
In this randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled phase 2 study we investigated tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that specifically inhibits nerve growth factor as a treatment for interstitial cystitis pain. Patients with interstitial cystitis received a single intravenous dose of 200 μg/kg tanezumab or placebo. Patients recorded daily pain scores (on an 11-point numerical rating scale) 7 days before attending study visits and completed a urinary symptom diary for 3 of those days. Patients also completed the Interstitial Cystitis Symptom Index questionnaire and a global response assessment. The primary end point was change in average daily numerical rating scale pain score from baseline to week 6. Secondary end points included global response assessment, Interstitial Cystitis Symptom Index score, micturition and urgency episode frequency per 24 hours, and mean voided volume per micturition. The incidence of adverse events was also assessed. A total of 34 patients received tanezumab and 30 received placebo. At week 6 tanezumab produced a significant reduction from baseline in average daily pain score vs placebo (treatment difference [LS mean, 90% CI] was -1.4 [-2.2, -0.5]). A significantly higher proportion of patients on tanezumab responded as improved in the global response assessment and tanezumab also significantly reduced urgency episode frequency vs placebo. Tanezumab had no significant effect on Interstitial Cystitis Symptom Index score, micturition frequency or mean voided volume per micturition. The most common adverse events were headache (tanezumab 20.6%, placebo 16.7%) and paresthesia (tanezumab 17.6%, placebo 3.3%). Tanezumab has shown preliminary efficacy in the treatment of pain associated with interstitial cystitis.

[PMID: 24830649]
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is indispensable during normal embryonic development and critical for the amplification of pain signals in adults. Intervention in NGF signaling holds promise for the alleviation of pain resulting from human diseases such as osteoarthritis, cancer and chronic lower back disorders. We developed a fast, high-fidelity method to convert a hybridoma-derived NGF-targeted mouse antibody into a clinical candidate. This method, termed Library Scanning Mutagenesis (LSM), resulted in the ultra-high affinity antibody tanezumab, a first-in-class anti-hyperalgesic specific for an NGF epitope. Functional and structural comparisons between tanezumab and the mouse 911 precursor antibody using neurotrophin-specific cell survival assays and X-ray crystal structures of both Fab-antigen complexes illustrated high fidelity retention of the NGF epitope. These results suggest the potential for wide applicability of the LSM method for optimization of well-characterized antibodies during humanization.

[PMID: 24809946]
Tropomyosin receptor kinases (Trks) are a family of three similar tyrosine kinases activated by peptide hormones of the neurotrophin family. The nerve growth factor antibody tanezumab has provided clinical proof of concept for inhibition of the TrkA pathway in pain. As an alternative modality, small-molecule inhibitors of the Trks have been pursued in recent years to probe the role of these neurotrophin pathways in pain, cancer and other indications. This paper reviews the patent literature between mid-2009 and 2013, claiming inhibitors of Trk family members as the primary biological targets. Additional patents have been reviewed where Trk is not the main kinase of interest but in which high Trk potency is observed and the chemical matter is particularly noteworthy. Patents pre-dating this period have been reviewed previously. Scifinder and Google were used to find relevant patents and clinical information using Trk or Tropomyosin as the search term. Considerable recent progress has been made in the identification of selective pan Trk inhibitors with pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties appropriate for clinical evaluation. Inhibitors of both active and inactive conformations of the Trks as well as peripherally restricted molecules have been identified. Furthermore, TrkA-selective allosteric inhibitors have recently been disclosed, which enables the biology of this isoform to be probed. The recent identification of a TrkA gene fusion in a subset of lung cancer patients will increase further the attraction of Trk inhibition to the pharmaceutical industry.

[PMID: 27381034]
To investigate whether the effects of nerve growth factor (NGF) inhibition with tanezumab on rats with medial meniscal tear (MMT) effectively model rapidly progressive osteoarthritis (RPOA) observed in clinical trials. Male Lewis rats underwent MMT surgery and were treated weekly with tanezumab (0.1, 1 or 10 mg/kg), isotype control or vehicle for 7, 14 or 28 days. Gait deficiency was measured to assess weight-bearing on the operated limb. Joint damage was assessed via histopathology. A second arm, delayed onset of treatment (starting 3-8 weeks after MMT surgery) was used to control for analgesia early in the disease process. A third arm, mid-tibial amputation, evaluated the dependency of the model on weight-bearing. Gait deficiency in untreated rats was present 3-7 days after MMT surgery, with a return to normal weight-bearing by days 14-28. Prophylactic treatment with tanezumab prevented gait deficiency and resulted in more severe cartilage damage. When onset of treatment with tanezumab was delayed to 3-8 weeks after MMT surgery, there was no increase in cartilage damage. Mid-tibial amputation completely prevented cartilage damage in untreated MMT rats. These data suggest that analgesia due to NGF inhibition during the acute injury phase is responsible for increased voluntary weight-bearing and subsequent cartilage damage in the rat MMT model. This model failed to replicate the hypotrophic bone response observed in tanezumab-treated patients with RPOA.

[PMID: 23707270]
Tanezumab is a humanized monoclonal antinerve growth factor antibody in development for treatment of chronic pain. In a phase III, placebo- and active-controlled study, we investigated the efficacy and safety of tanezumab for osteoarthritis (OA) hip or knee pain. Patients (N=610) received up to 2 doses of intravenous tanezumab (5 or 10mg in 8-week intervals), controlled-release oral oxycodone (10 to 40 mg every 12 hours), or placebo. The primary endpoint was mean change from baseline to week 8 in Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) Pain score for tanezumab versus placebo and oxycodone. Secondary endpoints included change from baseline in WOMAC Physical Function and Stiffness scores, Patient's Global Assessment (PGA) of OA, and patient response, defined as ≥ 30%, ≥ 50%, ≥ 70%, and ≥ 90% improvement from baseline in WOMAC Pain score. Tolerability and safety also were assessed. Both tanezumab groups demonstrated significant improvements in WOMAC Pain score versus placebo (P<.001) and oxycodone (P ≤.018). Tanezumab also provided significant improvements versus placebo and oxycodone for WOMAC Physical Function and Stiffness scores and PGA of OA (P ≤.002 for all) at week 8. For all analyses, oxycodone did not differ from placebo. Adverse event frequency was higher with oxycodone (63.3%) than tanezumab (40.7% to 44.7%) or placebo (35.5%); serious adverse event frequency was similar among treatments. The adverse event profile for tanezumab was similar to previous tanezumab studies. Results indicate that tanezumab is efficacious in the treatment of OA pain; no new safety signals were identified.

[PMID: 24691709]
It is unanimously accepted that there is an unmet need for pain medications that are both effective and safe. Unfortunately, no really novel analgesics have been approved over the past three decades. In view of both experimental and clinical evidence of a major role for nerve growth factor (NGF) in the generation and maintenance of a wide range of pain states, drug discovery efforts focusing on the development of anti-NGF agents have aroused particular interest. Several humanized anti-NGF monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have entered clinical trials as potential analgesics. In this respect, tanezumab is at an advanced stage of clinical development while fulranumab, fasinumab and ABT-110, previously known as PG110, are in early phases of clinical development. This Current Opinion article aims at describing the rationale for targeting NGF for pain, reviewing the analgesic efficacy and safety of anti-NGF agents based on data from fully published studies, conference abstracts, and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website, and discussing the possible future of these agents in managing chronic pain. Anti-NGF mAbs produced significant pain relief and functional improvement in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee and/or hip. Conversely, studies in non-specific lower back pain generated mixed results; overall, this condition appeared to be less responsive to anti-NGF agents than osteoarthritis. Finally, there was no conclusive evidence of the effectiveness of anti-NGF mAbs in some types of chronic visceral or neuropathic pain. Furthermore, these studies raised safety concerns about anti-NGF mAbs. As a class, these drugs may cause or worsen peripheral neuropathies. But the most problematic issue-which prompted the FDA to place studies of these compounds on clinical hold in 2010-was rapid joint destruction leading to joint replacement surgery. The aetiologies of these side effects have been much debated and their pathophysiology is poorly understood. After an Arthritis Advisory Committee meeting held in March 2012, pharmaceutical companies negotiated with the FDA on the conditions for restarting clinical studies. Although the FDA lifted its clinical hold, there remain many unresolved issues about the long-term efficacy and safety of anti-NGF mAbs. While acknowledging that the future of these drugs is unforeseeable, it appears that they may not be the safe and effective painkillers that have been awaited for decades.

[PMID: 21802499]
Nerve growth factor (NGF) antagonism has long been proposed as a chronic pain treatment. In 2010, the FDA suspended clinical trials using tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal anti-NGF antibody, to treat osteoarthritis due to worsening joint damage in 16 patients. Increased physical activity in the absence of acute pain which normally prevents self-harm was purported as a potential cause. Such an adverse effect is consistent with an extension of tanezumab's primary mechanism of action by decreasing pain sensitivity below baseline levels. In animal inflammatory pain models, NGF antagonism decreases intraepidermal nerve fiber (IENF) density and attenuates increases in expression of nociception-related proteins, such as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and substance P (SP). Little is known of the effects of NGF antagonism in noninflamed animals and the hypoalgesia that ensues. In the current study, we immunized rats with NGF or cytochrome C (cytC) and examined (1) nocifensive behaviors with thermal latencies, mechanical thresholds, the hot plate test, and the tail flick test, (2) IENF density, and (3) expression of CGRP, SP, voltage-gated sodium channel 1.8 (Nav1.8), and glutaminase in subpopulations of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons separated by size and isolectin B4 (IB4) labeling. Rats with high anti-NGF titers had delayed responses on the hot plate test but no other behavioral abnormalities. Delayed hot plate responses correlated with lower IENF density. CGRP and SP expression was decreased principally in medium (400-800 μm(2)) and small neurons (<400 μm(2)), respectively, regardless of IB4 labeling. Expression of Nav1.8 was only decreased in small and medium IB4 negative neurons. NGF immunization appears to result in a more profound antagonism of NGF than tanezumab therapy, but we hypothesize that decreases in IENF density and nociception-related protein expression are potential mechanisms for tanezumab-induced hypoalgesia.

[PMID: 25527221]
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of anti-NGF antibody treatment in hip and knee osteoarthritis (OA), a systematic review and meta-analysis was undertaken utilizing the criteria described by the Cochrane collaboration. Both published and unpublished trials were identified for tanezumab, fulranumab and fasinumab in hip and knee OA; sponsors were contacted to provide and confirm data. Study quality was assessed by Jadad criteria; efficacy and safety data were extracted independently by two individuals and meta-analyses were performed using Revman 5.2. 13 randomized, controlled trials were identified: 10 of tanezumab, two of fulranumab and one with fasinumab. All agents demonstrated superiority in efficacy compared to placebo. The highest doses in the phase II studies of tanezumab had a standardized effect size for WOMAC pain of 0.73 (CI, 0.51, 0.95). Subsequent phase III studies of tanezumab and phase II studies of fulranumab and fasinumab reported standardized effect sizes for WOMAC pain of -0.15-0.5, with no clear distinction among dose levels. Tanezumab compared to NSAIDs and opioids showed greater efficacy with a standardized effect size for WOMAC pain of 0.23 (CI 0.17-0.29). WOMAC function and PGA results were similar to WOMAC pain. Safety, determined by odds ratios of withdrawals from studies due to adverse events (AEs), was better at the lower doses than higher doses and similar among all agents. These results demonstrate that antibodies to NGF provide efficacy in OA and that general safety at the lower doses appears similar to placebo. Additional data on both efficacy and safety of these antibodies are needed to define the optimal dose to maximize benefit to risk.

[PMID: 25073573]
To evaluate peripheral nerve safety and clinical efficacy of tanezumab in patients with painful osteoarthritis. Patients received intravenous tanezumab 5mg, tanezumab 10mg, or placebo every 8 weeks for 24 weeks. Neurological safety was evaluated via a composite score (nerve conduction attributes and heart rate variability with deep breathing; Σ5NC + HRdb), intraepidermal nerve fiber (IENF) density, and clinical assessments. Efficacy and general safety were also evaluated. The study was stopped prematurely by an FDA partial clinical hold (joint safety issues in other studies). Differences in change from baseline to Week 24 in Σ5NC + HRdb were not significant. Tanezumab 5mg vs placebo exceeded the prespecified clinically important difference using last observation carried forward imputation, but not with observed data or when patients with evidence of neuropathy at baseline were excluded. No significant differences were found in individual nerve conduction measures. No treatment exceeded the prespecified clinically important decrease in IENF. Tanezumab resulted in significant improvement in pain, physical function, and Patient's Global Assessment. Safety was similar to previous tanezumab clinical trials. Tanezumab has a modulating effect on pain, does not appear to increase neurological safety signals, and offers a potentially promising, novel approach in treatment of pain.

[PMID: 20942668]
Increased expression of nerve growth factor in injured or inflamed tissue is associated with increased pain. This proof-of-concept study was designed to investigate the safety and analgesic efficacy of tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds and inhibits nerve growth factor. We randomly assigned 450 patients with osteoarthritis of the knee to receive tanezumab (administered at a dose of 10, 25, 50, 100, or 200 μg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo on days 1 and 56. The primary efficacy measures were knee pain while walking and the patient's global assessment of response to therapy. We also assessed pain, stiffness, and physical function using the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC); the rate of response using the criteria of the Outcome Measures for Rheumatology Committee and Osteoarthritis Research Society International Standing Committee for Clinical Trials Response Criteria Initiative (OMERACT-OARSI); and safety. When averaged over weeks 1 through 16, the mean reductions from baseline in knee pain while walking ranged from 45 to 62% with various doses of tanezumab, as compared with 22% with placebo (P<0.001). Tanezumab, as compared with placebo, was also associated with significantly greater improvements in the response to therapy as assessed with the use of the patients' global assessment measure (mean increases in score of 29 to 47% with various doses of tanezumab, as compared with 19% with placebo; P≤0.001). The rate of response according to the OMERACT-OARSI criteria ranged from 74 to 93% with tanezumab treatment, as compared with 44% with placebo (P<0.001). The rates of adverse events were 68% and 55% in the tanezumab and placebo groups, respectively. The most common adverse events among tanezumab-treated patients were headache (9% of the patients), upper respiratory tract infection (7%), and paresthesia (7%). In this proof-of-concept study, treatment with tanezumab was associated with a reduction in joint pain and improvement in function, with mild and moderate adverse events, among patients with moderate-to-severe osteoarthritis of the knee. (Funded by Rinat Neuroscience; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00394563.).

[PMID: 20140821]
Persistent pain represents a major health problem, and most current therapeutic approaches are associated with unwanted effects and unsatisfactory pain relief. Therefore, an urgent need exists to develop more effective drugs that are directed toward new molecular targets. Nerve growth factor (NGF) is involved in pain transduction mechanisms, playing a key role as a master switch in many chronic and inflammatory pain states; the NGF ligand and its receptor TrkA constitute well-validated targets for pain therapy. Tanezumab (RN-624), a first-in-class recombinant humanized mAb targeting NGF, is being developed by Pfizer Inc for the potential treatment of pain associated with several conditions. In preclinical studies, tanezumab, and its murine precursor muMab-911, effectively targeted the NGF pathway in various chronic and inflammatory pain models. Phase I and II clinical trials in osteoarthritic pain and chronic lower back pain demonstrated good efficacy for the compound, as well as a good safety and tolerability profile. Given that tanezumab is an antibody, the drug demonstrates the general advantages of this class of products (including good specificity and favorable pharmacokinetics), and also appears to be particularly well suited for targeting the chronic and inflammatory-mediating pain actions of NGF and its receptor system.

[PMID: 23010344]
To assess the efficacy and safety of tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the pain-mediating neurotrophin, nerve growth factor, to treat pain and other symptoms of chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome in a Phase IIa, proof-of-concept clinical trial powered to provide 2-sided 90% confidence interval around the primary endpoint. Patients received a single intravenous dose of tanezumab (20 mg) or placebo. The primary efficacy endpoint was the change from baseline to week 6 in average daily numerical rating scale pain score. The secondary endpoints included the change from baseline to week 6 in the National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index and urinary symptoms. Safety was also assessed. Overall, 62 patients were randomized (30 to tanezumab and 32 to placebo). At week 6, tanezumab marginally improved the average daily pain (least-squares mean difference from placebo -0.47, 90% confidence interval -1.150-0.209) and urgency episode frequency (least-squares mean difference from placebo -1.37, 90% confidence interval -3.146-0.401). No difference was seen in the National Institutes of Health chronic prostatitis symptom index total score or micturition frequency at week 6. The most common adverse events were paresthesia and arthralgia. The odds of having a ≥ 30% reduction in pain were 1.75-fold greater (90% confidence interval 0.65-4.69) for patients receiving tanezumab versus placebo. Tanezumab might improve symptoms for some patients with chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome. Although proof of concept was not demonstrated in the present study, additional studies with larger populations and stricter inclusion criteria according to patient phenotype might identify populations in which antinerve growth factor treatment will provide clinical benefit.

[PMID: 26962464]
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disorder commonly encountered in clinical practice, and is the leading cause of disability in elderly people. Due to the poor self-healing capacity of articular cartilage and lack of specific diagnostic biomarkers, OA is a challenging disease with limited treatment options. Traditional pharmacologic therapies such as acetaminophen, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and opioids are effective in relieving pain but are incapable of reversing cartilage damage and are frequently associated with adverse events. Current research focuses on the development of new OA drugs (such as sprifermin/recombinant human fibroblast growth factor-18, tanezumab/monoclonal antibody against β-nerve growth factor), which aims for more effectiveness and less incidence of adverse effects than the traditional ones. Furthermore, regenerative therapies (such as autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI), new generation of matrix-induced ACI, cell-free scaffolds, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells or iPSCs), and endogenous cell homing) are also emerging as promising alternatives as they have potential to enhance cartilage repair, and ultimately restore healthy tissue. However, despite currently available therapies and research advances, there remain unmet medical needs in the treatment of OA. This review highlights current research progress on pharmacologic and regenerative therapies for OA including key advances and potential limitations.

[PMID: 26940379]
Bladder pain syndrome (BPS)/interstitial cystitis (IC) is associated with sensory lower urinary tract symptoms. Unfortunately, many of the existing oral treatments are ineffective in most patients of BPS/IC, which is the motivation for developing new drugs and therapeutic approaches. This review covers the latest drugs that have been investigated in BPS/IC patients. Intravesical treatments offer the opportunity to directly target the painful bladder with less systemic side effects. In this review, the authors analyze the existing literature supporting the treatment of BPS/IC with conventional drugs including heparin, hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfate, and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). Furthermore, investigational drugs such as tanezumab and adalimumab, capable of sequestering nerve growth factor (NGF), and Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF- α) are discussed. Investigational treatments such as liposomes, botulinum toxin (BTX), liposomal BTX, PD-0299685 (a Ca(2+) channel ɑ2δ ligand), continuous intravesical lidocaine, and AQX-1125 (a novel SHIP1 activating compound) are also covered. New investigational drugs offer promising improvements in clinical outcomes for BPS/IC patients; however, BPS/IC is a chronic pain disorder that is very vulnerable to a strong placebo effect. In addition, BPS/IC is a heterogeneous disorder that can be classified into several phenotypes. Since different phenotypes of BPS/IC respond differently to systemic and intravesical treatments, the authors believe that new drugs developed for BPS/IC are more likely to meet their predetermined clinical endpoints if the inclusion/exclusion criterion is tailored to specific phenotype of BPS/IC patients.

[PMID: 25594611]
Evaluate efficacy and safety of tanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against nerve growth factor, in neuropathic pain. Two randomized controlled trials. Patients with pain due to diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) or postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). In the DPN study, patients received subcutaneous tanezumab 20 mg or placebo on Day 1 and Week 8. Evaluations included change from baseline in average DPN pain (primary endpoint), Patient's Global Assessment of DPN, and safety (including neuropathy assessments). Due to a partial clinical hold limiting enrollment and treatment duration, the prespecified landmark analysis was modified post hoc from Week 16 to Week 8. In the PHN study, patients received intravenous tanezumab 50 μg/kg, tanezumab 200 μg/kg, or placebo on Day 1. Evaluations included change from baseline in average daily pain (primary endpoint), Brief Pain Inventory-short form, Patient's Global Assessment of pain from PHN, and safety. Mean DPN pain reduction from baseline to Week 8 was greater with tanezumab vs placebo (P = 0.009); differences in Patient's Global Assessment of DPN were not significant (P > 0.05). Neither tanezumab dose resulted in significant differences vs placebo in efficacy in PHN (P > 0.05), although tanezumab 200 μg/kg provided some benefit. Neuropathy assessments showed no meaningful changes. Tanezumab provided effective pain reduction in DPN. In PHN, only the highest tanezumab dose reduced pain; treatment differences were not significant. No new safety concerns were observed despite preexisting neuropathy.

[PMID: 23028238]
Chronic pain arising from various pathological conditions such as osteoarthritis, low back or spinal injuries, cancer, and urological chronic pelvic pain syndromes presents significant challenges in diagnosis and treatment. Specifically, since the underlying cause of these pain syndromes is unknown or heterogeneous, physicians diagnose and treat patients based on the symptoms presented. Nerve growth factor (NGF) has been recognized as an important mediator of chronic pain in many pathological conditions, and has been shown to be upregulated in a subset of individuals suffering from such pain syndromes. These findings have led to the development of anti-NGF monoclonal antibodies such as tanezumab as potentially effective therapeutics for chronic pain. Although tanezumab has reached Phase II and III clinical trials, the trials of anti-NGF antibodies were halted due to safety concerns. Some of these trials of anti-NGF treatment have had statistically significant decreases in pain, while others have yielded inconclusive results. These findings are suggestive of, though do not prove, target (NGF) neutralization in chronic pain syndromes. A biomarker-driven anti-NGF clinical study layout is proposed that incorporates NGF measurements in the relevant samples before and after treatment, in addition to collecting the pain scores. This approach might not only confirm the mechanism of tanezumab's action in these chronic pain patients, but should establish NGF levels as a predictive biomarker for patients who can benefit from anti-NGF treatment, thereby creating a personalized approach to pain treatment.

[PMID: 23852695]
Tanezumab, a monoclonal antibody, inhibits nerve growth factor and reduces chronic pain. This randomised, double-blind, controlled multicentre study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of tanezumab added to oral diclofenac sustained release (DSR) in patients with hip or knee osteoarthritis (OA) pain. Patients (N=604) with moderate to severe knee or hip OA tolerating stable DSR were randomised and treated with DSR 75 mg twice daily combined with intravenous tanezumab 10, 5 or 2.5 mg or placebo at weeks 0, 8 and 16. Co-primary efficacy endpoints (Western Ontario and McMaster Universities OA Index (WOMAC) Pain and Physical Function subscales and patient's global assessment of OA) were assessed at week 16. All co-primary endpoints were significantly improved for all tanezumab+DSR groups versus placebo+DSR (p≤0.039). The incidence of adverse events of abnormal peripheral sensation was lower than in previous tanezumab trials. No new safety signals emerged. Overall incidence of adverse events was higher with tanezumab+DSR (45.2%-49.7%) than with placebo+DSR (34.9%); serious adverse event rates were similar across treatments (5.3%-7.6%). Osteonecrosis was reported in six of 452 patients with tanezumab+DSR (1.3%), but an external adjudication committee did not confirm osteonecrosis in any patient. Addition of tanezumab to DSR resulted in significant improvements in pain, function and global assessments in patients with OA. Although no new safety signals were observed, the higher incidence of adverse events in the tanezumab+diclofenac group suggests that combination therapy is unfavourable. Further investigations of tanezumab monotherapy for OA pain treatment are required. NCT00864097.