[PMID: 16390992]
Infection with molluscum contagiosum virus, a poxvirus, normally has a typical clinical presentation; therefore, laboratory confirmation is infrequently sought and the virus is rarely isolated in culture. As reported herein, viral culture of specimens from atypical lesions may produce an abortive infection in limited cell lines and a cytopathic effect suggestive of herpes simplex virus.

[PMID: 23372568]
In recent years, our understanding of the role of natural killer (NK) cells in the response to viral infection has grown rapidly. Not only do we realize viruses have many immune-evasion strategies to escape NK cell responses, but that stimulation of NK cell subsets during an antiviral response occurs through receptors seemingly geared directly at viral products and that NK cells can provide a memory response to viral pathogens. Tremendous knowledge has been gained in this area through the study of herpes viruses, but appreciation for the significance of NK cells in the response to other types of viral infections is growing. The function of NK cells in defense against poxviruses has emerged over several decades beginning with the early seminal studies showing the role of NK cells and the NK gene complex in susceptibility of mouse strains to ectromelia, a poxvirus pathogen of mice. More recently, greater understanding has emerged of the molecular details of the response. Given that human diseases caused by poxviruses can be as lethal as smallpox or as benign as Molluscum contagiosum, and that vaccinia virus, the prototypic member of the pox family, persists as a mainstay of vaccine design and has potential as an oncolytic virus for tumor therapy, further research in this area remains important. This review focuses on recent advances in understanding the role of NK cells in the immune response to poxviruses, the receptors involved in activation of NK cells during poxvirus infection, and the viral evasion strategies poxviruses employ to avoid the NK response.

[PMID: 24155912]
Molluscum contagiosum is a common superficial skin infection caused by the poxvirus, Molluscum Contagiosum virus. The study objective is to obtain a better understanding of physician practices and experiences with molluscum contagiosum in order to focus informational and guidance material. A cross-sectional survey to assess medical practitioners' knowledge and practices with molluscum contagiosum was conducted using the 2009 DocStyles survey. Questions regarding category and number of molluscum contagiosum patients seen, treatments used and advice given to patients were included in the survey. Dermatologists saw the most cases, with the majority seeing 51-100 molluscum contagiosum cases/year. The most common cases seen were children with multiple lesions and adults with genital lesions. Respondents were most likely to recommend treatment to immunocompromised individuals, HIV patients, adults with genital lesions and children with multiple lesions. Cryotherapy was the top choice for all specialties with the exception of OB/GYNs, whose top choice was curettage. "Avoid intimate contact until lesions resolve", "Avoid touching lesions to reduce further spread", and "Don't be concerned, this will go away" were the top advice choices. Most survey respondents have dealt with molluscum contagiosum in their practice during the previous year. Overall, respondents picked appropriate choices for treatment and advice given; however some ineffective or unnecessary treatments were chosen and recommendations to prevent spread were chosen infrequently. Knowledge gaps for appropriate transmission precaution advice might cause unnecessary spread or autoinoculation. This survey has demonstrated that molluscum contagiosum is a common infection seen by many types of practitioners and therefore guidance on treatment considerations and infection control is valuable.

[PMID: 18950398]
Molluscum contagiosum is a viral infection of the skin and mucous membranes that is caused by infection with the molluscum contagiosum virus. Molluscum contagiosum can be acquired from skin to skin contact which may be during play, in a swimming pool, or through sexual contact. Sexually acquired molluscum is rare in younger children, but becomes quite common during adolescence and young adulthood, after the sexual debut. It has been long known that the human papillomavirus, which causes genital warts, i.e., condyloma accuminatum, can be vertically transmitted through an infected genital tract. Children may not manifest condyloma lesions for a few years. The entity of congenital molluscum has been debated in the literature and only three cases of suspected congenital molluscum have been reported. We report on four more infants with congenital molluscum, two children with congenital lesions, and two children with onset of lesions at 6 weeks of age. Two children had single cutaneous lesions on the extremities and two had lesions of the scalp consistent with the site of cervical pressure. Congenital molluscum appears to be a more common entity than previously reported. Vertical transmission of molluscum should be considered for all infantile cases of molluscum.

[PMID: 18616033]
Molluscum contagiosum is a virus that causes characteristic pearly lesions on the surface of the skin. Small clusters of mollusca are a nuisance rather than a serious health problem. However, the mollusca can be more widespread and disfiguring in people with impaired cell-mediated immunity. Molluscum contagiosum virus is common in children. In adults it can also be contracted during sexual activity and might indicate a need for diagnostic testing for other, more serious sexually transmitted infections in young, sexually active adults.

[PMID: 9275219]
Many viruses have evolved mechanisms for evading the host immune system by synthesizing proteins that interfere with the normal immune response. The poxviruses are among the most accomplished at deceiving their hosts' immune systems. The nucleotide sequence of the genome of the human cutaneous poxvirus, molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) type 1, was recently reported to contain a region that resembles a human chemokine. We have cloned and expressed the chemokine-like genes from MCV type 1 and the closely related MCV type 2 to determine a potential role for these proteins in the viral life cycle. In monocyte chemotaxis assays, the viral proteins have no chemotactic activity but both viral proteins block the chemotactic response to the human chemokine, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha. Like MIP-1alpha, both viral proteins also inhibit the growth of human hematopoietic progenitor cells, but the viral proteins are more potent in this activity than the human chemokine. These viral chemokines antagonize the chemotactic activity of human chemokines and have an inhibitory effect on human hematopoietic progenitor cells. We hypothesize that the inhibition of chemotaxis is an immune evasion function of these proteins during molluscum contagiosum virus infection. The significance of hematopoietic progenitor cell inhibition in viral pathogenesis is uncertain.

[PMID: 25186152]
Molluscum contagiosum (MC) is caused by a DNA virus of the poxvirus group. It is common in children, and is also found in sexually active adults and HIV-seropositive patients. Cellular immunity is essential to controlling MC virus infection. We report the first observation of a patient with stage IV Sezary syndrome, who presented multiple molluscum contagiosum, spread and surrounded by a pale halo. A woman aged 70 presented with aggravation of Sezary syndrome diagnosed in 2009 and treated with topical corticosteroids. The examination showed a generalized pruritic exanthem and multiple flesh-coloured papules from 1 to 3 mm, spread over the entire skin surface and surrounded by a white halo. Histological examination of a lesion showed the presence of infected cells with intracytoplasmic inclusions infected in an acanthotic epidermis, surrounded by a melaninopenic hypomelanosis with a normal melanocyte density. There was no inflammatory character. The diagnosis of multiple molluscum contagiosum was given, the application of clobetasol propionate was suspended and treatment with chlorambucil 4 mg/day and prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day was started. The evolution of the rash and pruritus was rapidly favourable. After 3 months, the rash and pruritus had regressed. There was no molluscum contagiosum or clear halo. We report the original observation of a patient with stage IV Sezary syndrome, who presented multiple molluscum contagiosum, spread and surrounded by a pale halo, without inflammation, eczema or disappearance of melanocytes. This halo could be due to the secretion of a protein by molluscum contagiosum inhibiting inflammation around this MC. To our knowledge, this phenomenon reported in a patient with severe atopic dermatitis associated with Sezary syndrome has not previously been described.

[PMID: 9525670]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV), the only member of the Molluscipoxvirus genus, causes benign papules in healthy people but disfiguring lesions in immunocompromised patients. The sequence of MCV has been completed, revealing that MCV encodes a probable type I topoisomerase enzyme. All poxviruses sequenced to date also encode type I topoisomerases, and in the case of vaccinia virus the topoisomerase has been shown to be essential for replication. Thus, inhibitors of the MCV topoisomerase might be useful as antiviral agents. We have cloned the gene for MCV topoisomerase, overexpressed and purified the protein, and begun to characterize its activities in vitro. Like other eukaryotic type I topoisomerases, MCV topoisomerase can relax both positive and negative supercoils. An analysis of the cleavage of plasmid and oligonucleotide substrates indicates that cleavage by MCV topoisomerase is favored just 3' of the sequence 5' (T/C)CCTT 3', resulting in formation of a covalent bond to the 3' T residue, as with other poxvirus topoisomerases. We identified solution conditions favorable for activity and measured the rate of formation and decay of the covalent intermediate. MCV topoisomerase is sensitive to inhibition by coumermycin A1 (50% inhibitory concentration, 32 microM) but insensitive to five other previously reported topoisomerase inhibitors. This work provides the point of departure for studies of the mechanism of function of MCV topoisomerase and the development of medically useful inhibitors.

[PMID: 3814509]
We report here the clinical and immunological findings in two patients with molluscum contagiosum poxvirus infection and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). These cases support earlier evidence that the molluscum contagiosum virus may act as cases support earlier evidence that the molluscum contagiosum virus may act as an opportunistic pathogen. There is now evidence that members of all five families of double stranded DNA-containing human viruses have been associated with unusual clinical manifestations in AIDS patients, and the significance of DNA virus infections in patients with AIDS is discussed.

[PMID: 22688765]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV), a poxvirus pathogenic for humans, replicates well in human skin in vivo, but not in vitro in standard monolayer cell cultures. In order to determine the nature of the replication deficiency in vitro, the MCV infection process in standard culture has to be studied step by step. The method described in this chapter uses luciferase and GFP reporter constructs to measure poxviral mRNA transcription activity in cells in standard culture infected with known quantities of MCV or vaccinia virus. Briefly, MCV isolated from human tissue specimen is quantitated by PCR and used to infect human HEK293 cells, selected for ease of transfection. The cells are subsequently transfected with a reporter plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of a synthetic early/late poxviral promoter and a control plasmid encoding a renilla luciferase reporter under the control of a eukaryotic promoter. After 16 h, cells are harvested and tested for expression of luciferase. MCV genome units are quantitated by PCR targeting a genome area conserved between MCV and vaccinia virus. Using a GFP reporter plasmid, this method can be further used to infect a series of epithelial and fibroblast-type cell lines of human and animal origin to microscopically visualize MCV-infected cells, to assess late promoter activation, and, using these parameters, to optimize MCV infectivity and gene expression in more complex eukaryotic cell culture models.

[PMID: 22301546]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) causes persistent neoplasms in healthy and immunocompromised people. Its ability to persist likely is due to its arsenal of viral immunoevasion proteins. For example, the MCV MC159 protein inhibits TNF-R1-induced NF-κB activation and apoptosis. The MC159 protein is a viral FLIP and, as such, possesses two tandem death effector domains (DEDs). We show in this article that, in human embryonic kidney 293 T cells, the expression of wild-type MC159 or a mutant MC159 protein containing the first DED (MC159 A) inhibited TNF-induced NF-κB, or NF-κB activated by PMA or MyD88 overexpression, whereas a mutant protein lacking the first DED (MC159 B) did not. We hypothesized that the MC159 protein targeted the IκB kinase (IKK) complex to inhibit these diverse signaling events. Indeed, the MC159 protein, but not MC159 B, coimmunoprecipitated with IKKγ. MC159 coimmunoprecipitated with IKKγ when using mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lack either IKKα or IKKβ, suggesting that the MC159 protein interacted directly with IKKγ. MC159-IKKγ coimmunoprecipitations were detected during infection of cells with either MCV isolated from human lesions or with a recombinant MC159-expressing vaccinia virus. MC159 also interacts with TRAF2, a signaling molecule involved in NF-κB activation. However, mutational analysis of MC159 failed to reveal a correlation between MC159-TRAF2 interactions and MC159's inhibitory function. We propose that MC159-IKK interactions, but not MC159-TRAF2 interactions, are responsible for inhibiting NF-κB activation.

[PMID: 8938977]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a member of the family Poxviridae and pathogenic to humans. MCV causes benign epidermal tumors mainly in children and young adults and is a common pathogen in immunecompromised individuals. The viral DNA polymerase is the essential enzyme involved in the replication of the genome of DNA viruses. The identification and characterization of the gene encoding the DNA polymerase of molluscum contagiosum virus type 1 (MCV-1) was carried out by PCR technology and nucleotide sequence analysis. Computer-aided analysis of known amino acid sequences of DNA polymerases from two members of the poxvirus family revealed a high amino acid sequence homology of about 49.7% as detected between the DNA polymerases of vaccinia virus (genus Orthopoxvirus) and fowlpoxvirus (genus Avipoxvirus). Specific oligonucleotide primers were designed and synthesized according to the distinct conserved regions of amino acid sequences of the DNA polymerases in which the codon usage of the MCV-1 genome was considered. Using this technology a 228 bp DNA fragment was amplified and used as hybridization probe for identifying the corresponding gene of the MCV-1 genome. It was found that the PCR product was able to hybridize to the BamHI MCV-1 DNA fragment G (9.2 kbp, 0.284 to 0.332 map units). The nucleotide sequence of this particular region of the MCV-1 genome (7267 bp) between map coordinates 0.284 and 0.315 was determined. The analysis of the DNA sequences revealed the presence of 22 open reading frames (ORFs-1 to -22). ORF-13 (3012 bp; nucleotide positions 6624 to 3612) codes for a putative protein of a predicted size of 115 kDa (1004 aa) which shows 40.1% identity and 35% similarity to the amino acid sequences of the DNA polymerases of vaccinia, variola, and fowlpoxvirus. In addition significant homologies (30% to 55%) were found between the amino acid sequences of the ORFs 3, -5, -9, and -14 and the amino acid sequences of the E6R, E8R, E10R, and a 7.3 kDa protein of vaccinia and variola virus, respectively. Comparative analysis of the genomic positions of the loci of the detected viral genes including the DNA polymerases of MCV-1, vaccinia, and variola virus revealed a similar gene organization and arrangement.

[PMID: 21802105]
Molluscum contagiosum poxvirus (MCV) type 1 and type 2 encode two chemokine-like proteins MC148R1 and MC148R2. It is believed that MC148R proteins function by blocking the inflammatory response. However, the mechanism of the proposed biological activities of MC148R proteins and the role of the additional C-terminal cysteines that do not exist in other chemokines are not understood. Here, we demonstrated in two different assay systems that His-tagged MC148R1 displaces the interaction between CXCL12α and CXCR4. The N-terminal cysteines but not the additional C-terminal cysteines modulate this displacement. His-tagged MC148R1 blocked both CXCL12α-mediated and MIP-1α-mediated chemotaxis. In contrast, MC148R2 blocked MIP-1α-mediated but not CXCL12α-mediated chemotaxis. Immunoprecipitation by antibodies to MC148R1 or CXCL12α followed by immunoblotting and detection by antibodies to the other protein demonstrated physical interaction of His-tagged CXCL12α and His-tagged MC148R1. Interaction with chemokines might mask the receptor interaction site resulting in decreased binding and impairment of the biological activities.

[PMID: 26672647]
Molluscum contagiosum (MC) is a very common benign self-limiting cutaneous viral infection caused by molluscum contagiosum virus. Disease is self-limiting in immunocompetent individuals, while it is severe and prolonged when associated with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection. The widespread and refractory mollusca of HIV disease occur especially on the face. In advanced stages of immunosuppression, giant or verrucous forms of MC may occur. Molluscum contagiosum tends to take a chronic course and is usually not responsive to various treatments in immunocompromised patients. Here, we present a HIV positive male patient with extensive papulonodular lesions over face, neck, bilateral upper limbs since 2 months, diagnosed as giant molluscum contagiosum, treated with cryotherapy with little improvement for few weeks after which patient did not turn up.

[PMID: 24491904]
Molluscum contagiosum virus is a human and animal dermatotropic pathogen, which causes a severe disease in immunocompromised individuals. MCV belongs to the Poxviridae family whose members exert immunomodulatory effects on the host antiviral response. Poxviruses interfere with cell signaling pathways that lead to the activation of nuclear factor кB, a pleiotropic transcription factor which is crucial for regulation of the immune response, the cell cycle and apoptosis. In resting cells, NF-κB is present in the cytoplasm, where it is associated with inhibitor κB. Upon stimulation by activators, such as proinflammatory cytokines and bacterial or viral products, the inhibitory protein undergoes phosphorylation and proteasomal degradation. NF-κB, in turn, translocates to the nucleus, where it regulates the transcription of various genes that are essential for processes mentioned above. Since poxviruses replicate exclusively in the cell cytoplasm, NF-кB became a good target for poxviral immunomodulation. MCV encodes various proteins which interfere with the signaling pathways that lead to the activation of NF-κB. Ligand inhibitor encoded by MCV, MC54, binds interleukin-18 and inhibits interferon-γ production. Other MCV proteins, MC159 and MC160, belong to intracellular inhibitors of NF-κB and are members of viral FLICE-inhibitory proteins (vFLIPs). MC159 protein encoded by MCV was shown to inhibit apoptosis of virus-infected cells. Such interactions serve immune evasion and are responsible for the persistence of MCV.

[PMID: 881573]
Basal and suprabasal layers of human epidermis infected with the poxvirus Molluscum contagiosum have been examined with the technique of serial sectioning. Phagocytic vacuoles, formerly not observed in human epidermis, were found exclusively in the basal region. They did not fuse with other virus-containing vacuoles or with lysosomes to form digestive vacuoles. Various stages of uncoating, preceding ejection of the virus core into the cytoplasm, were observed in the virus-containing vacuole. Clusters of cores were commonly found close to or even associated with centriolar structures. Their possible interference with mitosis is discussed in relation to alterations observed in the plasma membrane. It is assumed that excision of gap junction elements precedes the induction of mitosis.

[PMID: 23598933]
Molluscum contagiosum is a common skin and mucosal disease of viral origin, caused by molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) virus of poxvirus family. With the eradication of smallpox, MCV is now the only member of the poxvirus family that causes substantial disease in humans. Though frequently reported, its unusual clinical presentation makes its diagnosis a challenging task. We discuss a case of molluscum contagiosum in a 30-year-old woman along with a review of aetiology, histopathology and different possible treatment modalities.

[PMID: 8850036]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) causes molluscum contagiosum (MC) in both children and adults. Recent studies have revealed that the DNA of MCV can be classified into two major types by restriction enzyme cleavage patterns; however, the relationship between MCV types and the clinical features has not been fully understood. Our study was conducted to examine whether there are geographic differences in the incidence of MCV types and whether a correlation exists between MCV types and the age, sex, and clinical status of the patients. Specimens were obtained from 171 Japanese patients. The total DNA was extracted and digested with the restriction enzymes, BamH I, Hind III, and Cla I, respectively. Specimens were then electrophoresed in agarose gels. The gels were stained with ethidium bromide and photographs were taken under transillumination. Six different cleavage patterns were observed; they were classified into two major types, MCV 1 and MCV 2, consisting of two MCV 1-variants, and MCV 2 prototype, and three MCV 2-variants. The ratio of MCV 1 to MCV 2 was 13:1. MCV 1 was commonly detected in children (98%) and adult women (92%). MCV 2 was more frequently isolated from adult men (44%) and from patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection (75%). MCV types found in Japanese children and adult women were predominantly MCV 1 and less frequently MCV 2. This pattern is similar to that observed in European countries and Australia, suggesting a high frequency and world-wide distribution of MCV 1. The higher incidence of MCV 2 among adult men and HIV-positive patients may indicate that transmission routes of MCV 1 and MCV 2 is somewhat different, of which the latter may be in part by sexual contact.

[PMID: 24155550]
Molluscum contagiosum is caused by the molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) and is a very common skin disorder mainly involving young children Cryotherapy, curettage or some topical therapies have been applied for MC, but all of these treatments need several sessions, can be somewhat ineffective, and very painful. The present study assessed the impact of a single session of pulsed dye laser treatment of MC lesions which had proved resistant to other approaches Subjects and methods: Fifteen children comprised the study subjects, 11 boys and 4 girls, 3-5 years of age (mean 4.2 yr) with recalcitrant MC. Lesions were counted at baseline, and a single shot from a 585 nm pulsed dye laser was applied to each lesion (3 mm, 300 ms, 8.0 J/cm(2)). Lesions were counted again at 1 week post-treatment and followed for up to 3 months thereafter. All patients completed the study and no patient dropped out through pain or discomfort. Purpura was seen at each treated lesion immediately after irradiation, but at 1 week after treatment, lesion clearance was virtually complete which was maintained for 1 month, and no recurrence was seen at 3 months in 8 of the 15 patients who remained available for followup. A single treatment of MC lesions with the pulsed dye laser successfully cured even recalcitrant lesions with no recurrence on follow up, and was well tolerated by the young subjects.

[PMID: 15284701]
Molluscum contagiosum is a benign contagious disease caused by a poxvirus. The virus proliferates within keratinocytes and forms intracytoplasmic Molluscum bodies. Though it is a common clinical condition, histologically is not yet reported from this region of Mymensingh. We received a skin biopsy specimen in a pathology laboratory for histological examination. The Haematoxylin and Eosin stained sections revealed typical intracytoplasmic Molluscum bodies in keratinocytes. The lesions were in the trunk, which is a common site for Molluscum Contagiosum (MC). As the diagnosis of Molluscum contagiosum is easy by histological examination, every patient suspected to be this disease is recommended to be examined histologically to exclude other similar types of lesions.

[PMID: 21228810]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a poxvirus that causes tumor-like skin lesions. New evidence indicates that plasmacytoid dendritic cells, type I interferon production, and interferon-induced dendritic cells have prominent roles in anti-MCV responses, and these features characterize the inflammatory response in lesions that will likely undergo spontaneous regression.

[PMID: 22262788]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a poxvirus that causes localized papules in healthy persons. We evaluated a woman with severe immunodeficiency and disseminated MCV. During treatment with CMX-001, an antiviral with activity against other poxviruses, MCV DNA was detected in 20% of plasma samples. When the patient was not receiving CMX-001, MCV DNA was detected in 50% of samples. We also noted improvement in warts on her fingers during CMX-001 therapy. Although MCV is caused by direct inoculation of virus into skin in healthy persons, in a severely immunocompromised person MCV DNA was present in blood and may spread by viremia.

[PMID: 10500212]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a common, human poxvirus that causes small papular skin lesions that persist for long periods without signs of inflammation. Previous studies revealed that MCV encodes a family of proteins with homology to mammalian IL-18 binding proteins. IL-18 is a proinflammatory cytokine that induces synthesis of interferon gamma, activates NK cells, and is required for a T-lymphocyte helper type 1 response. We expressed and purified the proteins encoded by the MC53L and MC54L genes of MCV, as well as their human and murine homologs. All four recombinant proteins were able to bind with high affinity to human and murine IL-18 molecules and inhibited IL-18 mediated interferon gamma production in a dose-dependent manner. The pirating of IL-18 binding proteins by poxviruses and their use as decoy receptors is consistent with the critical role of IL-18 in defense against virus infections and provides a mechanism for evasion of the immune system by MCV.

[PMID: 10502526]
All poxviruses studied encode a type 1B topoisomerase that introduces transient nicks into DNA and thereby relaxes DNA supercoils. Here we present a study of the protein domains of the topoisomerase of the poxvirus molluscum contagiosum (MCV), which allows us to specify DNA contacts made by different domains. Partial proteolysis of the enzyme revealed two stable domains separated by a protease-sensitive linker. A fragment encoding the linker and carboxyl-terminal domain (residues 82-323) was overexpressed in Escherichia coli and purified. MCV topoisomerase (MCV-TOP)(82-323) could relax supercoiled plasmids in vitro, albeit with a slower rate than the wild-type enzyme. MCV-TOP(82-323) was sensitive to sequences in the favored 5'-(T/C)CCTT-3' recognition site and also flanking DNA, indicating that some of the sequence-specific contacts are made by residues 82-323. Assays of initial binding and covalent catalysis by MCV-TOP(82-323) identified the contacts flanking the 5'-CCCTT-3' sequence at +10, +9, -2, and -3 to be important. Tests with substrates containing a 5-bridging phosphorothiolate that trap the cleaved complex revealed that correct contacts to the flanking sequences were important in the initial cleavage step. MCV-TOP(82-323) differed from the full-length protein in showing reduced sensitivity to mutations at a position within the 5'-(T/C)CCTT-3' recognition site, consistent with a model in which the amino-terminal domain contacts this region. These findings provide insight into the division of labor within the MCV-TOP enzyme.

[PMID: 25072249]
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) causes an innocuous yet persistent skin infection in immunocompetent individuals and is spread by contact with lesions. Studies point to atopic dermatitis (AD) as a risk factor for MCV infection; however, there are no longitudinal studies that have evaluated this hypothesis. Outpatient visit data from fiscal years 2001-2009 for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) children were examined to describe the incidence of molluscum contagiosum (MC). We conducted a case-control study of patients <5 years old at an Indian Health Service (IHS) clinic to evaluate dermatological risk factors for infection. The incidence rate for MC in children <5 years old was highest in the West and East regions. MC cases were more likely to have a prior or co-occurring diagnosis of eczema, eczema or dermatitis, impetigo, and scabies (p<0.05) compared to controls; 51.4% of MC cases had a prior or co-occurring diagnosis of eczema or dermatitis. The present study is the first demonstration of an association between AD and MC using a case-control study design. It is unknown if the concurrent high incidence of eczema and MC is related, and this association deserves further investigation.

[PMID: 12552001]
Some poxviruses and their mammalian hosts encode homologous proteins that bind interleukin-18 (IL-18) with high affinity and inhibit IL-18-mediated immune responses. MC54L, the IL-18 binding protein of the human poxvirus that causes molluscum contagiosum, is unique in having a C-terminal tail of nearly 100 amino acids that is dispensable for IL-18 binding. When recombinant MC54L was expressed and purified via a C-terminal six-histidine tag, a shorter fragment was detected in addition to the full-length protein. This C-terminal fragment resulted from the cleavage of MC54L by cellular furin, as it was greatly diminished when furin was specifically inhibited or when a furin-deficient cell line was used for expression. Furthermore, the N- and C-terminal fragments of MC54L were generated by cleavage of the recombinant protein with furin in vitro. The furin cleavage site was mapped within a 32-amino-acid segment that is C terminal to the IL-18 binding domain. Full-length MC54L, but not the N-terminal IL-18 binding fragment, bound to cells and to purified heparin and other glycosaminoglycans that are commonly found on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix. MC54L bound to heparin with a nanomolar K(d) and could simultaneously bind to IL-18. Their different glycosaminoglycan and cell binding properties may allow the long and short forms of MC54L to inactivate IL-18 near the site of infection and at more distal locations, respectively.