[PMID: 32905676]
Darolutamide is a structurally distinct androgen-receptor inhibitor that is approved for the treatment of nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer. In the planned primary analysis of a phase 3 trial, the median metastasis-free survival was significantly longer with darolutamide (40.4 months) than with placebo (18.4 months). The data for the analysis of overall survival were immature at the time of the primary analysis. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we randomly assigned 1509 men, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive darolutamide (955 patients) or placebo (554 patients) while they continued to receive androgen-deprivation therapy. After the results of the primary end-point analysis were found to be positive, unblinding of the treatment assignments occurred, and patients in the placebo group were permitted to cross over to receive open-label darolutamide treatment. At the time of this prespecified final analysis, which had been planned to be performed after approximately 240 deaths had occurred, overall survival and all other secondary end points were evaluated. The median follow-up time was 29.0 months. At the time of unblinding of the data, all 170 patients who were still receiving placebo crossed over to receive darolutamide; 137 patients who had discontinued placebo before unblinding had occurred received at least one other life-prolonging therapy. Overall survival at 3 years was 83% (95% confidence interval [CI], 80 to 86) in the darolutamide group and 77% (95% CI, 72 to 81) in the placebo group. The risk of death was significantly lower, by 31%, in the darolutamide group than in the placebo group (hazard ratio for death, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.53 to 0.88; P = 0.003). Darolutamide was also associated with a significant benefit with respect to all other secondary end points, including the time to first symptomatic skeletal event and the time to first use of cytotoxic chemotherapy. The incidence of adverse events after the start of treatment was similar in the two groups; no new safety signals were observed. Among men with nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer, the percentage of patients who were alive at 3 years was significantly higher among those who received darolutamide than among those who received placebo. The incidence of adverse events was similar in the two groups. (Funded by Bayer HealthCare and Orion Pharma; ARAMIS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02200614.).

[PMID: 31571146]
Darolutamide is a novel androgen receptor (AR) antagonist approved for the treatment of nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC). Accordingly, the drug-drug interaction (DDI) potential of darolutamide was investigated in both nonclinical and clinical studies. In vitro studies were performed to determine the potential for darolutamide to be a substrate, inducer or inhibitor for cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms, other metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters. A phase I drug-interaction study in healthy volunteers evaluated the impact of co-administering rifampicin [CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) inducer] and itraconazole [CYP3A4, P-gp and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) inhibitor] on the pharmacokinetics of darolutamide. Two further phase I studies assessed the impact of co-administering oral darolutamide on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam (sensitive CYP3A4 substrate) and dabigatran etexilate (P-gp substrate) and the impact on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered rosuvastatin [a substrate for BCRP, organic anion-transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B1, OATP1B3 and organic anion transporter (OAT)3]. In vitro, darolutamide was predominantly metabolized via oxidative biotransformation catalyzed by CYP3A4 and was identified as a substrate for P-gp and BCRP. The enzymatic activity of nine CYP isoforms was not inhibited or slightly inhibited in vitro with darolutamide, and a rank order and mechanistic static assessment indicated that risk of clinically relevant DDIs via CYP inhibition is very low. In vitro, darolutamide exhibited no relevant induction of CYP1A2 or CYP2B6 activity. Inhibition of BCRP-, P-gp-, OAT3-, MATE1-, MATE2-K-, OATP1B1- and OATP1B3-mediated transport was observed in vitro. Phase I data showed that darolutamide exposure increased 1.75-fold with co-administered itraconazole and decreased by 72% with rifampicin. Co-administration of darolutamide with CYP3A4/P-gp substrates showed no effect or only minor effects. Rosuvastatin exposure increased 5.2-fold with darolutamide because of BCRP and probably also OATPB1/OATPB3 inhibition. Darolutamide has a low potential for clinically relevant DDIs with drugs that are substrates for CYP or P-gp; increased exposure of BCRP and probably OATP substrates was the main interaction of note.

[PMID: 32282865]
Darolutamide is a novel, nonsteroidal androgen receptor (AR)-signaling inhibitor. It serves as a second-generation antiandrogen and is currently indicated for the treatment of patients with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC). The product was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in July 2019 and by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) in January 2020 for the treatment of men with nmCRPC, and is awaiting approval in the E.U. for the same indication. This review will cover the background, preclinical development, safety, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clinical studies that led to the approval of darolutamide. The key clinical data, ongoing trials and future directions for darolutamide are also discussed herein.

[PMID: 31582533]
The DNA damage response (DDR) secures the integrity of the genome of eukaryotic cells. DDR deficiencies can promote tumorigenesis but concurrently may increase dependence on alternative repair pathways. The ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase plays a central role in the DDR by activating essential signaling pathways of DNA damage repair. Here, we studied the effect of the novel selective ATR kinase inhibitor BAY 1895344 on tumor cell growth and viability. Potent antiproliferative activity was demonstrated in a broad spectrum of human tumor cell lines. BAY 1895344 exhibited strong monotherapy efficacy in cancer xenograft models that carry DNA damage repair deficiencies. The combination of BAY 1895344 with DNA damage-inducing chemotherapy or external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) showed synergistic antitumor activity. Combination treatment with BAY 1895344 and DDR inhibitors achieved strong synergistic antiproliferative activity <i>in vitro</i>, and combined inhibition of ATR and PARP signaling using olaparib demonstrated synergistic antitumor activity <i>in vivo</i> Furthermore, the combination of BAY 1895344 with the novel, nonsteroidal androgen receptor antagonist darolutamide resulted in significantly improved antitumor efficacy compared with respective single-agent treatments in hormone-dependent prostate cancer, and addition of EBRT resulted in even further enhanced antitumor efficacy. Thus, the ATR inhibitor BAY 1895344 may provide new therapeutic options for the treatment of cancers with certain DDR deficiencies in monotherapy and in combination with DNA damage-inducing or DNA repair-compromising cancer therapies by improving their efficacy.

[PMID: 33237495]
Oral darolutamide (Nubeqa™) is a novel second-generation, nonsteroidal, selective androgen receptor (AR) inhibitor indicated for the treatment of non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC). In the pivotal multinational, phase 3 ARAMIS trial in men with nmCRPC, relative to placebo plus ongoing androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), darolutamide (+ ADT) significantly prolonged metastasis-free survival (MFS) at the time of the primary analysis and overall survival (OS) at the time of the final OS analysis and was generally well tolerated in extended follow-up. Albeit long-term data from the real-world setting are required to fully define the safety profile of darolutamide, current evidence from the final ARAMIS analysis indicates that darolutamide has a low propensity for CNS-related adverse events (AEs) associated with other currently approved second-generation AR inhibitors. Given the efficacy and safety evidence from the final ARAMIS analysis and the key role of second-generation AR inhibitors in the management of nmCRPC, darolutamide + ADT represents an important emerging option for the treatment of men with nmCRPC who are at high risk of developing metastatic prostate cancer.

[PMID: 32073798]
The results of a recent randomised phase 3 clinical trial show that the androgen receptor antagonist darolutamide improves metastasis-free survival in men with non-metastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer, compared with placebo. The trial included 1509 men with a prostate-specific antigen doubling time of 10 months or less. Non-metastatic disease was defined as the absence of metastases, using conventional imaging rather than the substantially more sensitive PSMA scans. The effect of darolutamide is similar to that of other androgen inhibitors, such as apalutamide and enzalutamide. The value of the current trial to Dutch clinical practice is limited, as the number of patients with non-metastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer is low due to the increased use of PSMA scans and the reluctance of urologists to start androgen-deprivation therapy in the absence of metastatic disease.

[PMID: 28851578]
Darolutamide (ODM-201) is a novel androgen receptor (AR) antagonist with a chemical structure distinctly different from currently approved AR antagonists that targets both wild-type and mutated ligand binding domain variants to inhibit AR nuclear translocation. Here, we evaluate the activity of darolutamide in enzalutamide-resistant castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) as well as in AR mutants detected in patients after treatment with enzalutamide, abiraterone, or bicalutamide. Darolutamide significantly inhibited cell growth and AR transcriptional activity in enzalutamide-resistant MR49F cells in vitro, and led to decreased tumor volume and serum prostate-specific antigen levels in vivo, prolonging survival in mice bearing enzalutamide-resistant MR49F xenografts. Moreover, darolutamide inhibited the transcriptional activity of AR mutants identified in the plasma of CRPC patients progressing on traditional therapies. In particular, darolutamide significantly inhibited the transcriptional activity of the F877L, H875Y/T878A, F877L/T878A, and the previously unreported T878G AR mutants, that transform enzalutamide into a partial agonist. In silico cheminformatics computer modeling provided atomic level insights confirming darolutamide antagonist effect in F877L and T878G AR mutants. In conclusion, our results provide a rationale for further clinical evaluation of darolutamide in enzalutamide-resistant CRPC, in particular in combination with circulating tumor DNA assays that detect AR mutants sensitive to darolutamide, in a precision oncology setting. In this study we evaluated the novel drug darolutamide in preclinical models of prostate cancer. We found that darolutamide delays growth of enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancer, in particular in cells with mutated forms of the androgen receptor after previous treatment. Our data supports further evaluation of darolutamide in clinical trials.

[PMID: 33226524]
Darolutamide, an oral androgen receptor inhibitor, has been approved for treating nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC), based on significant improvements in metastasis-free survival (MFS) in the ARAMIS clinical trial. Efficacy and safety of darolutamide in Japanese patients are reported here. In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial, 1509 patients with nmCRPC and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) doubling time ≤ 10 months were randomized 2:1 to darolutamide 600 mg twice daily or matched placebo while continuing androgen deprivation therapy. The primary endpoint was MFS. In Japan, 95 patients were enrolled and randomized to darolutamide (n = 62) or placebo (n = 33). At the primary analysis (cut-off date: September 3, 2018), after 20 primary end-point events had occurred, median MFS was not reached with darolutamide vs. 18.2 months with placebo (HR 0.28, 95% CI 0.11-0.70). Median OS was not reached due to limited numbers of events in both groups but favored darolutamide in the Japanese subgroup. Time to pain progression, time to PSA progression, and PSA response also favored darolutamide. Among Japanese patients randomized to darolutamide vs. placebo, incidences of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were 85.5 vs. 63.6%, and incidences of treatment discontinuation due to TEAEs were 8.1 vs. 6.1%. Efficacy outcomes favored darolutamide in Japanese patients with nmCRPC, supporting the clinical benefit of darolutamide in this patient population. Darolutamide was well tolerated; however, due to the small sample size, it is impossible to conclude with certainty whether differences in the safety profile exist between Japanese and overall ARAMIS populations.

[PMID: 32456317]
Enzalutamide is the first second-generation nonsteroidal androgen receptor (AR) antagonist with a strong binding affinity to AR. Most significantly, enzalutamide can prolong not only overall survival time and metastatic free survival time for patients with lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), but also castration-resistant free survival time for patients with castration-sensitive prostate cancer (CSPC). Enzalutamide has thus been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of both metastatic (in 2012) and non-metastatic (in 2018) CRPC, as well as CSPC (2019). This is an inspiring drug discovery story created by an amazing interdisciplinary collaboration. Equally important, the successful clinical use of enzalutamide proves the notion that the second-generation AR antagonists can serve as hormonal therapeutics for three forms of advanced prostate cancer. This has been further verified by the recent FDA approval of the other two second-generation AR antagonists, apalutamide and darolutamide, for the treatment of prostate cancer. This review focuses on the rational design and discovery of these three second-generation AR antagonists, and then highlights their syntheses, clinical studies, and use. Strategies to overcome the resistance to the second-generation AR antagonists are also reviewed.

[PMID: 32430485]
The next-generation antiandrogen drugs, XTANDI (enzalutamide), ZYTIGA (abiraterone acetate), ERLEADA (apalutamide) and NUBEQA (darolutamide) extend survival times and improve quality of life in patients with advanced prostate cancer. Despite these advances, resistance occurs frequently and there is currently no definitive cure for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Our previous studies identified that similar mechanisms of resistance to enzalutamide or abiraterone occur following treatment and cross-resistance exists between these therapies in advanced prostate cancer. Here, we show that enzalutamide- and abiraterone-resistant prostate cancer cells are further cross-resistant to apalutamide and darolutamide. Mechanistically, we have determined that the AKR1C3/AR-V7 axis confers this cross-resistance. Knockdown of AR-V7 in enzalutamide-resistant cells resensitize cells to apalutamide and darolutamide treatment. Furthermore, targeting AKR1C3 resensitizes resistant cells to apalutamide and darolutamide treatment through AR-V7 inhibition. Chronic apalutamide treatment in C4-2B cells activates the steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway and increases AKR1C3 expression, which confers resistance to enzalutamide, abiraterone, and darolutamide. In conclusion, our results suggest that apalutamide and darolutamide share similar resistant mechanisms with enzalutamide and abiraterone. The AKR1C3/AR-V7 complex confers cross-resistance to second-generation androgen receptor-targeted therapies in advanced prostate cancer.

[PMID: 32822968]
Since 2018, apalutamide, darolutamide, and enzalutamide have been approved for the treatment of men with non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (M0CRPC). These approvals were based on the results of three separate randomized, placebo-controlled, phase III trials: SPARTAN (apalutamide), ARAMIS (darolutamide) and PROSPER (enzalutamide). These trials included men with M0CRPC and a short PSA doubling time (≤10 months). Results demonstrated a longer metastasis-free survival with these agents when used in conjunction with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), compared to ADT alone. Updated results of these trials presented in the 2020 annual meeting of American Society of Oncology (ASCO) showed significantly improved overall survival with these agents. Based on these results, apalutamide, darolutamide, and enzalutamide can now be considered the standard of care treatment options for the treatment of men with M0CRPC.

[PMID: 31972568]
To indirectly compare the efficacy and safety of systemic therapies used for patients with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC). The relevant randomized controlled trials were retrieved from PubMed and the Cochrane Library. Network meta-analyses were used to compare multiple drugs simultaneously for the outcomes of nmCRPC. Direct evidence in trials and indirect evidence across trials were combined by the network meta-analyses to estimate the treatment efficiency. Eight studies were included in our research. For prostate-specific antigen progression-free survival, the rate of progression was significantly decreased following apalutamide, enzalutamide, bicalutamide+dutasteride, and bicalutamide treatment compared with placebo. Compared with placebo treatment, metastases-free survival was significantly increased in patients who received apalutamide (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.28, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.23-0.35), enzalutamide (HR: 0.29, 95% CI: 0.24-0.35), and darolutamide (HR: 0.42, 95% CI: 0.35-0.50). Direct comparison showed significant survival benefits in patients who received second-generation anti-androgen therapy (apalutamide, enzalutamide, and darolutamide: HR: 0.74, 95% CI: 0.61-0.91) compared with patients who received placebo. With respect to metastases-free survival, based on SUCRA analysis, there was 80% and 78% probability that apalutamide and enzalutamide were preferred treatment, while darolutamide was likely to be second-best choice. Compared with placebo, all agents were not associated with significantly higher likelihood of serious adverse events and grade 3 to 4 adverse events. Our outcomes support equivalent efficacy and similar risk of adverse effects between apalutamide, enzalutamide, and darolutamide, supporting the use of these antiandrogen agents in high-risk of progression nmCRPC.

[PMID: 32125151]
The antiandrogen therapeutics apalutamide and darolutamide entered the clinic in 2018 and 2019, respectively, for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Increased expression of the enzyme aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3) is phenotypic of CRPC. The enzyme acts to circumvent castration by producing potent androgens that drive proliferation. Furthermore, AKR1C3 mediates chemotherapeutic resistance to the standard of care, enzalutamide, a structural analogue of apalutamide. Resistance develops in almost all CRPC patients within three months of beginning treatment. Herein, we report that both apalutamide and the structurally distinct darolutamide induce AKR1C3 expression in <i>in vitro</i> models of prostate cancer and are susceptible to AKR1C3-mediated resistance. This effect is countered by pretreatment with a potent and highly selective AKR1C3 inhibitor, sensitizing high AKR1C3 expressing prostate cancer cell lines to the action of both chemotherapeutics with a concomitant reduction in expression of AKR1C3 and the biomarker prostate-specific antigen.

[PMID: 31605368]
Darolutamide (NUBEQA™) is a structurally distinct non-steroidal androgen receptor antagonist being developed by Orion and Bayer as a treatment for prostate cancer. Based on positive results in the phase III ARAMIS trial, darolutamide was recently approved in the USA for the treatment of men with non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of darolutamide leading to this first approval.

[PMID: 31571095]
Darolutamide, an androgen receptor antagonist with a distinct molecular structure, significantly prolonged metastasis-free survival versus placebo in the phase III ARAMIS study in men with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC). In this population, polypharmacy for age-related comorbidities is common and may increase drug-drug interaction (DDI) risks. Preclinical/phase I study data suggest darolutamide has a low DDI potential-other than breast cancer resistance protein/organic anion transporter protein substrates (e.g., statins), no clinically relevant effect on comedications is expected. Our objective was to evaluate the effect of commonly administered drugs on the pharmacokinetics of darolutamide and the effect of comedications potentially affected by darolutamide on safety in patients with nmCRPC. Comorbidities and comedication use in the 1509 ARAMIS participants treated with darolutamide 600 mg twice daily or placebo were assessed. A population pharmacokinetic analysis evaluated whether comedications affected the pharmacokinetics of darolutamide in a subset of 388 patients. A subgroup analysis of adverse events (AEs) in statin users versus nonusers was conducted. Most participants (median age 74 years) had at least one comorbidity (98.4% in both arms) and used at least one comedication (98.7% with darolutamide vs. 98.0% with placebo); these were similar across study arms. Despite frequent use of comedications with DDI potential, no significant effects on darolutamide pharmacokinetics were identified. Comedications included lipid-modifying agents (34.5%), β-blockers (29.7%), antithrombotics (42.8%), and systemic antibiotics (26.9%). AE incidence was similar across study arms in statin users and nonusers. Study limitations include the small sample size for sub-analyses. These analyses suggest the pharmacokinetic profile of darolutamide is not affected by a number of commonly administered drugs in patients with nmCRPC. Although pharmacokinetic data have indicated that darolutamide has the potential to interact with rosuvastatin, used to assess DDI in these studies, this finding did not seem to translate into increased AEs due to statin use in the ARAMIS trial. Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT02200614.

[PMID: 30763142]
Darolutamide is a structurally unique androgen-receptor antagonist that is under development for the treatment of prostate cancer. We evaluated the efficacy of darolutamide for delaying metastasis and death in men with nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer. We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial involving men with nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer and a prostate-specific antigen doubling time of 10 months or less. Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive darolutamide (600 mg [two 300-mg tablets] twice daily) or placebo while continuing androgen-deprivation therapy. The primary end point was metastasis-free survival, with the presence of metastasis determined by independent central review of radiographic imaging every 16 weeks. In total, 1509 patients underwent randomization (955 to the darolutamide group and 554 to the placebo group). In the planned primary analysis, which was performed after 437 primary end-point events had occurred, the median metastasis-free survival was 40.4 months with darolutamide, as compared with 18.4 months with placebo (hazard ratio for metastasis or death in the darolutamide group, 0.41; 95% confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.50; P<0.001). Darolutamide was also associated with benefits with regard to all secondary end points, including overall survival, time to pain progression, time to cytotoxic chemotherapy, and time to a symptomatic skeletal event. The incidence of adverse events that occurred or worsened during the treatment period and had a frequency of 5% or more or were of grade 3 or higher was similar in the two groups; all such events except fatigue occurred in less than 10% of patients in either group. The percentage of patients who discontinued the assigned regimen because of adverse events was 8.9% in the darolutamide group and 8.7% in the placebo group. Darolutamide was not associated with a higher incidence of seizures, falls, fractures, cognitive disorder, or hypertension than placebo. Among men with nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer, metastasis-free survival was significantly longer with darolutamide than with placebo. The incidence of adverse events was similar for darolutamide and placebo. (Funded by Bayer HealthCare and Orion Pharma; ARAMIS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02200614.).

[PMID: 31953000]
Lately the development of 3 novel second-generation androgen receptor antagonists (enzalutamide, apalutamide, and darolutamide) chanced the treatment landscape of nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. After proofing their clinical efficacy in large phase III registration trials with good compatibilities and tolerable side effects currently all 3 substances are Food and Drug Administration-approved in nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. The present short review article provides an overview about these new treatment options and discusses their use in daily routine focusing on patient selection as well as on the impact of novel sensitive imaging modalities like prostate-specific membrane antigen-positron-emission tomography for detection of this stage of disease.

[PMID: 30824428]
The phase III ARAMIS study shows that the androgen-receptor antagonist darolutamide delays metastasis in men with castration-resistant prostate cancer by a median of 22 months compared with a placebo. Researchers also found that side effects associated with other drugs in this class were no more common in the placebo group than the darolutamide group.

[PMID: 32278840]
Among men with high-risk non-metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC), we used network meta-analysis to compare non-steroidal anti-androgens (NSAAs) and stratified class-level meta-analysis to identify subgroups with particular benefit from NSAAs with androgen deprivation therapy versus androgen deprivation therapy alone. We performed a systematic review of phase III parallel-group randomized controlled trials in adult men with nmCRPC. Primary outcome was metastasis-free survival (MFS). Secondary outcomes included overall survival (OS), prostate-specific antigen (PSA) progression-free survival (PFS), and rates of grade 3 to 4 adverse events (AEs). We assessed class-level effects using random effects models; effect modification owing to subgroup effects using random-effects models to pool study-level differences; and comparative outcomes between agents using fixed-effect network models in a Bayesian framework. Three randomized controlled trials were identified. Pooled MFS, PSA-PFS, and OS were significantly greater with NSAA versus placebo (hazard ratio [HR], 0.32; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.25-0.41; HR, 0.08; 95% CI, 0.05-0.13; and HR, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.61-0.90, respectively). Subgroup analysis demonstrated a greater benefit with NSAAs in men with Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0 (HR, 0.30; 95% CI, 0.24-0.38) versus 1 (HR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.36-0.56; P = .005), but no difference owing to PSA doubling time (P = .43) or use of osteoclast targeting therapy (P = .77). Bayesian analysis showed apalutamide and enzalutamide had a 56% and 44% likelihood of maximizing MFS, respectively, with subgroup analysis demonstrating these agents were preferred regardless of PSA doubling time and performance status. There was a 44%, 41%, and 15% likelihood that apalutamide, darolutamide and enzalutamide offered the greatest OS benefit, respectively. Grade 3 to 4 AEs were more common with NSAAs (odds ratio [OR], 1.47; 95% CI, 1.27-1.71) and there was a 61% chance that darolutamide was preferred. NSAAs improve survival in high-risk nmCRPC. Apalutamide and enzalutamide may result in improved oncologic outcomes. Darolutamide may result in fewer AEs. Phase IV data are needed to validate these findings.

[PMID: 33141615]
<b>BACKGROUND:</b> Darolutamide, a structurally distinct androgen receptor inhibitor approved for the treatment of men with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC), has been shown to increase metastasis-free survival among men with nmCRPC compared with placebo. This treatment has a novel chemical structure that may also have safety, tolerability, and efficacy advantages for men with nmCRPC. <b>OBJECTIVE:</b> To estimate the projected budget impact of including darolutamide on a U.S. payer formulary as a treatment option for men with nmCRPC. <b>METHODS:</b> A budget impact model was developed to evaluate darolutamide for nmCRPC for a hypothetical 1-million-member plan over a 5-year period. Costs (drug acquisition, drug administration, and treatment-related adverse events [AEs]) were estimated for 2 scenarios: with and without darolutamide treatment for nmCRPC. The budget impact of darolutamide was calculated as the difference in costs for these 2 scenarios. An analysis for high-risk nmCRPC also was conducted. The model included treatments recommended by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (e.g., apalutamide and enzalutamide) and potential comparators that are used but are not specifically indicated for nmCRPC. All treatments were assumed to be administered in combination with a weighted average androgen deprivation therapy comparator (consisting of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone [LHRH] agonists, LHRH antagonists, and first-generation antiandrogens). Market share estimates were derived from interviews with physicians treating men with nmCRPC. The model includes grade 3-4 AEs, and the rates were obtained from clinical trial data. Costs were taken from publicly available sources and varied in a one-way sensitivity analysis. <b>RESULTS:</b> For a plan with 1 million lives, there were approximately 90 incident cases of nmCRPC (46 high risk) each year, with 332 (109 high risk) treatment-eligible cases by year 5. Darolutamide's market share increased from 3.6% in year 1 to 18% in year 5. Given the utilization of other agents, introducing darolutamide along with other targeted therapies was predicted to increase the total budget by $158,640 ($0.0132 per member per month [PMPM]) in year 1, which decreased over time to a cost savings of $149,240 ($0.0124 PMPM) by year 5. The scenario with darolutamide showed reduced AE costs each year. Similar results were observed for the high-risk nmCRPC population. <b>CONCLUSIONS:</b> Adding darolutamide to a U.S. payer formulary for the treatment of nmCRPC can result in a manageable increase in the budget that is partly offset by AE costs in the first 4 years, followed by a cost savings by year 5. <b>DISCLOSURES:</b> This study was conducted by RTI Health Solutions under the direction of Bayer U.S. and was funded by Bayer U.S., which was involved in the design of the study; collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data; writing of the report; and the decision to submit the report for publication. Miles and Purser (and/or their institutions) are employees of RTI Health Solutions and received research funding from Bayer U.S. to develop the budget impact model. Appukkuttan and Farej are employees of Bayer U.S. Wen was an employee of Bayer U.S. at the time of the study. This study was presented as a poster at the AMCP Virtual Learning Event, April 20-24, 2020.

[PMID: 33135506]
<b>Introduction</b>: Currently, in prostate cancer, an increasing number of novel drugs are being used to delay its advancement to metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Apalutamide, enzalutamide, and most recently, darolutamide (novel androgen receptor antagonists) have been approved for nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC).<b>Areas covered</b>: The authors have evaluated darolutamide, covering all aspects of the clinical development, competence, and safety profile of the drug.<b>Expert opinion</b>: The unique structure of darolutamide is characterized by a high affinity for androgen receptors and detainment of antagonist activity in mutant isoforms of androgen receptors. In clinical practice, this is the main reason that makes darolutamide exceptional in terms of safety and efficacy compared to other drugs in this category. Darolutamide is considered to have the lowest probability for adverse events (AEs) compared to apalutamide and enzalutamide. Future studies, along with real-world clinical data are warranted to improve personalized treatment strategies as well as sequencing treatment between approved novel drugs.

[PMID: 32534790]
Prostate cancer affects one in every nine men in the USA and is the second leading cause of cancer-related death. The treatment landscape of advanced prostate cancer is changing rapidly. Multiple agents including abiraterone, enzalutamide, apalutamide, darolutamide, docetaxel, cabazitaxel, radium-223, and sipuleucel-T have been approved for advanced prostate cancer. Appropriate drug selection remains crucial in this evolving landscape to derive maximum benefit for the patients. We summarize clinical trials leading to recent drug approvals and discuss optimal treatment selection. We also review recent advances in genomics including its evolving role in prognosis, in elucidating mechanisms of treatment resistance, and in guiding treatment decisions.

[PMID: 32924096]
Management of non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC) has undergone a paradigm shift with next-generation androgen receptor inhibitors. However, direct comparative data are not available to inform treatment decisions and/or guideline recommendations. Therefore, we performed network meta-analysis to indirectly compare the efficacy and safety of currently available treatments. Multiple databases were searched for articles published before June 2020. Studies that compared overall and/or metastasis-free and/or prostate-specific antigen (PSA) progression-free survival (OS/MFS/PSA-PFS) and/or adverse events (AEs) in nmCRPC patients were considered eligible. Three studies (n = 4117) met our eligibility criteria. Formal network meta-analyses were conducted. For MFS, apalutamide, darolutamide, and enzalutamide were significantly more effective than placebo, and apalutamide emerged as the best option (P score: 0.8809). Apalutamide [hazard ratio (HR): 0.85, 95% credible interval (CrI): 0.77-0.94] and enzalutamide (HR: 0.86, 95% CrI: 0.78-0.95) were both significantly more effective than darolutamide. For PSA-PFS, all three agents were statistically superior to placebo, and apalutamide emerged as the likely preferred option (P score: 1.000). Apalutamide (HR: 0.71, 95% CrI: 0.69-0.74) and enzalutamide (HR: 0.76, 95% CrI: 0.74-0.79) were both significantly more effective than darolutamide. For AEs (including all AEs, grade 3 or grade 4 AEs, grade 5 AEs, and discontinuation rates), darolutamide was the likely best option. Apalutamide and enzalutamide appear to be more efficacious agents for therapy of nmCRPC, while darolutamide appears to have the most favorable tolerability profile. These findings may facilitate individualized treatment strategies and inform future direct comparative trials.

[PMID: 32605736]
Studies using apalutamide, enzalutamide, or darolutamide have shown improved metastasis free survival (MFS) rates, leaving clinicians with a dilemma of choosing one over the other, for nonmetastatic castration recurrent prostate cancer (nmCRPC). We performed a network meta-analysis to provide an indirect comparison of oncologic outcomes and adverse events (AEs) of these medications. We searched PubMed, MEDLINE, and SCOPUS databases, for studies reporting apalutamide, enzalutamide, or darolutamide until January 25, 2020. Results were input into an EndNote library, and data were extracted into a predefined template. Progression free survival (PFS) was defined as radiologic progression or death. Network meta-analysis was done using R and meta-analysis was performed with RevMan v. 5. Surface under the cumulative ranking (SUCRA) value was used to provide rank probabilities. We found 3 studies reporting results for apalutamide, enzalutamide, and darolutamide. MFS was significantly lower in patients receiving darolutamide compared to both apalutamide (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.73, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.55-0.97) and enzalutamide (HR: 0.71, 95% CI: 0.54-0.93). MFS was similar for enzalutamide and apalutamide (HR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.73-1.28). In PFS, apalutamide showed a slightly higher rate compared to darolutamide (HR: 0.76, 95% CI: 0.59-0.99). There was no difference in overall survival (OS) between any of the medications. There was no statistically significant difference in AEs profile of the 3 medications. However, darolutamide had the highest SUCRA value and probability of being the most preferred medication based on AEs profile. Enzalutamide and apalutamide had similar and higher MFS rate in indirect comparison with darolutamide. In cases where AEs are concerning, darolutamide might be the preferred agent.

[PMID: 32436836]
Darolutamide is recently approved for the treatment of non-metastatic castrate resistance prostate cancer. Hitherto, no stereoselective pharmacokinetic data have been published pertaining to darolutamide and its diastereomers in animals or humans. The key aims of the experiment were to examine darolutamide, S,S-darolutamide and S,R-darolutamide with respect to (a) assessment of in vitro metabolic stability and protein binding and (b) characterization of in vivo oral and intravenous pharmacokinetics in mice. In vitro (liver microsomes stability and protein binding) and in vivo experiments (oral/intravenous dosing to mice) were carried out using darolutamide, S,S-darolutamide and S,Rdarolutamide. Besides, tissue levels of darolutamide, S,S-darolutamide and S,R-darolutamide were measured following oral and intravenous dosing. Appropriate plasma/tissue samples served to determine the pharmacokinetics of various analytes in mice. Liquid chromatography in tandem with mass spectrometry procedures enabled the delineation of the plasma pharmacokinetics, in vitro and tissue uptake data of the various analytes. Chiral inversion was absent in the metabolic stability study. However, darolutamide showed profound stereoselectivity (S,S-darolutamide greater than S,R-darolutamide) after either intravenous or oral dosing. S,R-darolutamide but not S,S-darolutamide showed conversion to its antipode post oral and intravenous dosing to mice. Regardless of oral or intravenous dosing, active keto darolutamide formation was evident after administration of darolutamide, S,S-darolutamide or S,R- darolutamide. Tissue data supported the observations in plasma; however, tissue exposure of darolutamide, S,Sdarolutamide and S,R-darolutamide was much lower as compared to plasma. In lieu of the human pharmacokinetic data, although the administration of diastereomeric darolutamide was justified, it is proposed to delineate the clinical pharmacokinetics of S,Rdarolutamide and S,S-darolutamide relative to darolutamide in future clinical pharmacology studies.

[PMID: 31695432]
The treatment landscape of advanced prostate cancer continues to evolve rapidly, with newer and more active drugs being used in earlier phases of the disease based on improved overall survival. After adoption of docetaxel for metastatic castration-sensitive disease, large trials with next-generation androgen receptor-signaling inhibitors (abiraterone, enzalutamide and apalutamide) have demonstrate significant improvements in survival and important secondary endpoints. For non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, recent phase III placebo-controlled trials with enzalutamide, apalutamide and darolutamide all demonstrated benefits in improving metastasis-free survival. This review aims to summarize the clinical development of darolutamide, a novel next-generation androgen receptor antagonist, including preclinical data, clinical studies and the potential of darolutamide for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. To date, darolutamide efficacy and tolerability has been demonstrated in the ARAMIS trial, which demonstrated an improvement in metastasis-free survival compared to placebo for non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients with a rapid PSA doubling time. Ongoing studies will further evaluate the role of darolutamide in metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer in combination with docetaxel (ARASENS trial) and also in other stages of the disease.