[PMID: 28444090]
To investigate the frequency of anxiety and depression and their association with clinical features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. This is a cross-sectional and descriptive study including a consecutive series of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis according to Awaji's criteria. Patients underwent clinical and psychiatric assessment (anxiety and depression symptoms). We included 76 patients. The men/women ratio was 1.6:1. Participants' mean age at disease onset was 55 years (SD±12.1). Sixty-six patients (86.8%) were able to complete psychiatric evaluation. Clinically significant anxiety was found in 23 patients (34.8%) while clinically significant depression was found in 24 patients (36.4%). When we compared patients with and without depression a significant difference was seen only in the frequency of anxiety symptoms (p<0.001). We did further analysis comparing subgroups of patients classified according to the presence or not of anxiety and or depression, without any significant difference regarding sex, age at onset, initial form, disease duration or functional measures. A positive correlation between anxiety and depressive symptoms was found (p<0.001). Anxiety and depressive symptoms were highly correlated and frequent in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In addition, anxiety and depression were not associated with disease duration and presentation, sex, age at onset, and functional score. Investigar a frequência de ansiedade e depressão e sua associação com aspectos clínicos da esclerose lateral amiotrófica. Estudo transversal e descritivo de uma série consecutiva de pacientes com esclerose lateral amiotrófica esporádica conforme os critérios de Awaji. Os pacientes foram submetidos à avaliação clínica e psiquiátrica (sintomas depressivos e ansiosos). Foram incluídos 76 pacientes. A relação homem/mulher foi de 1,6:1. A média de idade de início dos sintomas foi de 55 anos (DP±12,1). Foram capazes de completar a avaliação psiquiátrica 66 (86,8%) pacientes. Ansiedade clinicamente significativa foi encontrada em 23 pacientes (34,8%), enquanto depressão clinicamente significativa foi encontrada em 24 pacientes (36,4%). Ao comparar os pacientes com e sem depressão, houve diferença significativa apenas na frequência de sintomas de ansiedade (p<0,001). Posteriormente, foram comparados subgrupos de pacientes categorizados em relação à presença ou não de ansiedade e/ou depressão, sem diferença significativa em relação a sexo, idade de início dos sintomas, forma inicial, duração da doença ou na escala funcional. Foi encontrada correlação positiva entre os sintomas de ansiedade e depressão (p<0,001). Sintomas de ansiedade e depressão são frequentes em pacientes com esclerose lateral amiotrófica e estiveram altamente correlacionados. Ansiedade e depressão não foram associadas com duração da doença, forma inicial, sexo, idade de início dos sintomas e pontuação na escala funcional.

[PMID: 20659815]
The diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) includes demonstration of lower motor neuron (LMN) and upper motor neuron (UMN) involvement of bulbar and spinal muscles. Electromyography (EMG) is essential to confirm LMN affection in weak muscles, and to demonstrate changes in clinically non-involved muscles. The aim of the study was to determine the relative importance of ongoing (active) denervation, fasciculations, chronic partial denervation with reinnervation at weak effort and loss of motor units at maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) in ALS. EMG was carried out in weak and non-weak muscles in 220 patients suspected of ALS using concentric needle electrodes. Denervation activity and fasciculations in 966 muscles was quantified, the mean durations and amplitudes of motor unit potentials (MUPs) were compared to controls in 745 muscles, and the amplitudes and recruitment patterns at maximal voluntary effort were measured in 939 muscles. Twenty-five percent of patients had clinical involvement of 1 region, 42% of 2 regions and 33% of 3 regions. Clinically 65% had UMN involvement. Eighty-six percent of the patients had died on follow-up. Denervation activity occurred in 72% of weak muscles but in only 45% of non-weak muscles. Fasciculations occurred in 56% of weak muscles and in 65% of non-weak muscles. MUPs showed reinnervation in 87-91% of weak and non-weak muscles and in 44% of muscles neurogenic MUPs occurred in the absence of denervation activity. In patients with clinical involvement of 1 region, combined EMG criteria increased the number of affected regions in 93%, and in 40% of patients with clinical involvement of 2 regions EMG increased the number of involved regions. Quantitative EMG confirmed widespread LMN involvement in patients with early ALS including clinically non-involved regions. These findings suggest that the maintenance of force is due to compensatory reinnervation in early disease and that this capacity may decline at later stages of ALS. These findings support a recent consensus report (the Awaji criteria) that EMG should have equivalent weight to clinical manifestations to indicate LMN involvement. The findings strongly indicate that spontaneous activity is insufficient to show LMN involvement in non-affected muscles at early stages of disease, and that analysis of MUPs are needed to document the distribution of LMN involvement.

[PMID: 20928911]
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains a clinical diagnosis without validated biomarkers. To increase diagnostic sensitivity, an expert group modified the Airlie House diagnostic criteria and formulated new recommendations at a meeting on Awaji Island. Our retrospective analysis of patients referred over a 6-month period to the electromyography (EMG) laboratory for suspected motor neuron disease (MND) showed a higher agreement of the Awaji modifications than the Airlie House criteria with the clinical diagnosis of ALS.

[PMID: 27212114]
To determine the utility of the Awaji criteria in diagnosing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and to propose a novel modification so as to enhance sensitivity based on results of individual patient data (IPD). Individual patient data were available from 8 studies comparing the diagnostic accuracy of Awaji and revised El Escorial (rEEC) criteria. The sensitivity of a novel updated Awaji criteria, incorporating a "probable-laboratory supported" category, was also tested. Individual patient data were available from 1086 patients, consisting of 881 ALS and 205 patients with disorders mimicking ALS. Summary sensitivities based on random effects logistic regression modelling disclosed a higher sensitivity of the Awaji criteria (0.70, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.51-0.83) and updated Awaji criteria (0.73, 95% CI 0.56-0.85) when compared to rEEC (0.58, 95% CI 0.48-0.68). Paired analysis revealed higher sensitivities of Awaji criteria in 4 studies, and of updated Awaji criteria in 7 studies, when compared to rEEC. Individual patient data analysis established a higher sensitivity of Awaji criteria when compared to rEEC. The updated Awaji criteria enhanced the diagnostic sensitivity in limb-onset ALS. The updated Awaji criteria should be considered in clinical practice and future therapeutic trials.

[PMID: 25843898]
Diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains problematic, with substantial diagnostic delays. We assessed the sensitivity and specificity of a threshold tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) technique, which might allow early detection of upper motor neuron dysfunction, for the diagnosis of the disorder. We did a prospective study of patients referred to three neuromuscular centres in Sydney, Australia, in accordance with the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy. Participants had definite, probable, or possible ALS, as defined by the Awaji criteria; or pure motor disorder with clinical features of upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction in at least one body region, progressing over a 6 month follow-up period; or muscle wasting and weakness for at least 6 months. All patients underwent threshold tracking TMS at recruitment (index test), with application of the reference standard, the Awaji criteria, to differentiate patients with ALS from those with non-ALS disorders. The investigators who did the index test were masked to the results of the reference test and all other investigations. The primary outcome measures were the sensitivity and specificity of TMS in differentiating ALS from non-ALS disorders; these measures were derived from receiver operator curve analysis. Between Jan 1, 2010, and March 1, 2014, we screened 333 patients; 281 met our inclusion criteria. We eventually diagnosed 209 patients with ALS and 68 with non-ALS disorders; the diagnosis of four patients was inconclusive. The threshold tracking TMS technique differentiated ALS from non-ALS disorders with a sensitivity of 73·21% (95% CI 66·66-79·08) and specificity of 80·88% (69·53-89·40) at an early stage in the disease. All patients tolerated the study well, and we did not record any adverse events from performance of the index test. The threshold tracking TMS technique reliably distinguishes ALS from non-ALS disorders and, if these findings are replicated in larger studies, could represent a useful diagnostic investigation when combined with the Awaji criteria to prove upper motor neuron dysfunction at early stages of ALS. Motor Neuron Disease Research Institute of Australia, National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, and Pfizer.

[PMID: 24575803]
The Awaji criteria, recently introduced to increase diagnosis sensitivity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), equate the diagnostic significance of neurogenic electrophysiological changes to clinical signs of lower motor neuron dysfunction. They also increase the electrophysiological significance of fasciculation potentials (FPs). The aim of our study was to analyse whether the new parameters improve diagnostic sensitivity in ALS patients primarily diagnosed with the El Escorial criteria. Medical and electrophysiological records of 135 consecutive patients with ALS and 25 patients with progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) who underwent electrophysiological examination of at least three anatomical regions were analysed retrospectively. Results showed that implementation of the Awaji criteria increased the level of ALS diagnosis sensitivity in 5.9% of cases - 1.5% due to the new role of FPs potentials and 4.4% because of equalization of clinical and EMG findings. In 4% of patients the ALS diagnosis was, however, changed from laboratory-supported probable ALS to possible ALS. In conclusion, our study confirms that Awaji modifications are able to improve the diagnostic certainty in a few ALS cases. Although the new approach to FPs markedly increases the number of involved muscles, it only slightly raises the number of involved regions.

[PMID: 21940619]
To study the utility of muscle ultrasound (US) for detection of fasciculations and its contribution to diagnosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Fasciculations are characteristic features of ALS, and US can detect them easily and reliably. New diagnostic criteria for ALS, the Awaji algorithm, reintroduced fasciculations as evidence of acute denervation equivalent to that of fibrillations and positive sharp waves. In 81 consecutive patients with sporadic ALS, we prospectively performed needle EMG and US in 6 muscles (tongue, biceps brachii, first dorsalis interosseous, paraspinalis, vastus lateralis, and tibialis anterior), and diagnostic category were determined by revised El Escorial criteria and Awaji criteria. Fasciculations were much more frequently detected by US than by EMG in the tongue (60% vs 0%), biceps brachii (88% vs 60%), and tibialis anterior muscles (83% vs 45%). The proportion of the patients with definite or probable ALS was 48% by revised El Escorial criteria and 79% by Awaji criteria using US. Muscle US is a practical and efficient tool to detect fasciculations, particularly in the tongue. A combination of US and EMG substantially increases the diagnostic sensitivity of ALS.

[PMID: 25597926]
Recently, some authors have claimed that the Awaji criteria (AC) are not always more sensitive than the revised El Escorial criteria (rEEC) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). A meta-analysis examined 2 prospective and 7 retrospective studies, which included 1,121 ALS patients, to compare AC and rEEC for early diagnosis of ALS. AC led to an 11% greater likelihood of being classified into the categories "clinically definite" or "clinically probable", while if confined to the "clinically probable - laboratory supported (LS)" category, this effect was 40% higher with the rEEC (95% cnfidence interval, 3-82%; I2=98%). Specifically, AC downgraded 20% of the rEEC "clinically probable - LS" category to the AC "clinically possible". Despite overall superiority of AC, this meta-analysis shows that it is not always more sensitive than rEEC. These results are related to the requirement for 2 upper motor neuron signs in the AC "clinically probable" category.

[PMID: 28249004]
The accurate and early diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is important for extending the life expectancy of patients. However, previous studies that have assessed the diagnostic sensitivities of the Awaji criteria (AC) and the revised El Escorial criteria (rEEC) in patients with ALS have been inconsistent, most of them were consensual regarding the advantage of Awaji over conventional criteria. Our study sought to compare the roles of AC and rEEC in the diagnosis of ALS. Data from a total of 294 consecutive patients with ALS were collected between January 2014 and August 2015 in the Peking Union Medical College Hospital. The clinical and electrophysiological records of 247 patients were eventually analyzed. The primary outcome measures were the sensitivities of the AC and rEEC for the diagnosis of ALS. The sensitivity of probable or definite ALS as diagnosed with the AC (78%) was greater than that of the rEEC (36%, P <0.001). Following the application of the AC, 103 of the 147 patients categorized as probable ALS-laboratory supported from the rEEC were upgraded to probable or definite ALS, and 44 were downgraded to possible ALS. Our data demonstrated that the AC exhibited greater diagnostic sensitivity than the rEEC in a Chinese ALS population. The use of the AC should be considered in clinical practice.

[PMID: 28631957]
To assess the added prognostic value of the aggregated clinical and electrodiagnostic data, which define a given diagnostic category according to the Awaji or revised El Escorial criteria at time of diagnosis in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Clinical signs and electrodiagnostic test results were collected at time of diagnosis in 396 patients with ALS between January 2009 and January 2016. Significant predictors of prognosis were identified using a univariate model, and later combined in a multivariate Cox regression model. Known factors associated with reduced survival included older age at onset, shorter diagnostic delay, higher ALSFRS-R slope and presence of C9orf72 mutation (all p < 0.05). Diagnostic category according to Awaji (p < 0.0001) or to revised El Escorial (p = 0.0177) criteria, definite ALS according to Awaji (p < 0.0001) or to revised El Escorial (p = 0.0343) and number of regions with LMN involvement (p < 0.0001) were all associated with shorter survival. Clinical and electrodiagnostic data at time of diagnosis provide additional prognostic information compared to other known prognostic factors. Diagnostic category according to Awaji and the extensiveness of LMN involvement contain the most additional value.

[PMID: 24239347]
Diagnosis of bulbar ALS is difficult at the early stage of the disease. According to guidelines, early diagnosis is better in view to optimize the management of affected patients. To improve the sensitivity without losing specificity of the prior criteria, the Board of Awaji has proposed modified electrodiagnostic criteria for ALS. The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of needle electromyography in early diagnosis of bulbar ALS by comparing the El Escorial criteria (EEC), Revised El Escorial Criteria (R-EEC) and Awaji algorithm (AA). In a retrospective study, we analysed clinical and electrophysiological data of 46 patients followed in our center for a bulbar-onset ALS seen for the first time between January 2007 and February 2011. All these patients had bulbar-onset ALS probable or certain at the last follow-up. All data were collected during the first clinical examination and the first electrophysiological study. Mean age of the population was 69 (37-90years, sex ratio: 0.91). Using the EEC, 9 patients were diagnosed as definite or probable ALS at the first consultation. Applying the R-EEC, 13 patients were diagnosed as definite or probable ALS and using the AA, 23 patients were diagnosed as definite or probable ALS. The sensitivity of the EEC was 19.5%, the R-EEC was 28.2% and for AA was 49.98%. AA are more sensitive in early diagnosis of bulbar ALS compared to R-EEC with the contribution of ENMG and when fasciculations are considered as evidence of spontaneous activity. Such an approach can contribute to accelerate an optimal management of the disease. AA are a breakthrough in the diagnosis of ALS especially in the bulbar-onset forms.

[PMID: 22892641]
To estimate the potential diagnostic added value of the Awaji criteria for diagnosis of a myotrophiclateral sclerosis (ALS), which have been compared with the previously accepted gold standard the revised El Escorial criteria in several studies. MEDLINE and Web of Science (until October2011). We searched for studies testing the diagnostic accuracy of the Awaji criteria vs the revised El Escorial criteria in patients referred with suspected ALS. Evaluation and data extraction of identified studies were done independently. The Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies list was used to assess study quality. We determined the proportion of patients classified as having probable/definite ALS and derived indices of diagnostic performance(sensitivity, specificity, and diagnostic odds ratio). Quantitative data synthesis was accomplished through random-effects meta-analysis, and heterogeneity was assessed with the I2 test. Eight studies were included (3 prospective and 5 retrospective) enrolling 1187 patients. Application of Awaji criteria led to a 23% (95% CI, 12% to 33%; I2=84%) increase in the proportion of patients classified as having probable/definite ALS. Diagnostic performance of the Awaji criteria was higher than the revised El Escorial criteria (pooled sensitivity: 81.1% [95%CI, 72.2% to 90.0%; I2=91%] vs 62.2% [95% CI, 49.4%to 75.1%; I2=93%]; pooled diagnostic odds ratio, 35.8[95% CI, 15.2 to 84.7; I2=3%] vs 8.7 [95% CI, 2.2 to 35.6;I2=50%]). Diagnostic accuracy of Awaji criteria was higher in bulbar- than in limb-onset cases. The Awaji criteria have a significant clinical impact allowing earlier diagnosis and clinical trial entry in ALS.

[PMID: 21215419]
Recently, new electrophysiological ALS criteria incorporating fasciculation potentials (FPs) as evidence for lower motor neuron signs (Awaji Criteria (AC)) was proposed to provide earlier detection of early-stage ALS than revised El Escorial electrophysiological criteria (REEC). However, serial electrophysiological analysis is lacking to ascertain the original intention. The objective for this study was to elucidate whether electrophysiological criteria set for AC detects ALS earlier than REEC's counterpart in patients with ALS. Of the 51 patients who were clinically suspected of ALS, 35 patients prospectively received serial electrophysiological studies every 3 months until (1) both electrophysiological AC and REEC criteria were met in more than two muscles representing both of the cervical and lumbosacral segments or (2) either clinically definite or clinically probable REEC criteria was met. The intervals were determined between the initial disease onset and when the respective electrophysiological criteria were met. Electrophysiological diagnostic criteria were met in 94.3% by AC and 40% by REEC at the initial visits. The intervals between the disease onset and the time of meeting the electrophysiological criteria were shorter in AC (mean: 9.0 months) than in REEC (mean: 15.2 months) (P<0.01). Eleven patients who met only AC electrophysiological criteria on the initial study subsequently met REEC electrophysiological criteria with the mean interval of 3.8 months. A higher percentage of bulbar-type ALS (83.3%) met AC than limb-onset ALS (43.4%) (P<0.05). FPs tended to be more frequently observed than fib/psw in the muscles outside the region of initial clinical onset. Electrophysiological criteria of AC were met earlier than that of REEC in ALS patients, especially in patients with bulbar onset. Early recognition of ALS by AC may allow effective therapeutic intervention in the early disease stage.

[PMID: 29742797]
In this study we compared the electrodiagnostic (EDX) yield of limb muscles in revealing lower motor neuron (LMN) dysfunction by electromyography (EMG) in early-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This investigation was undertaken as a retrospective review at a single center. Our study included 122 consecutive patients with possible ALS, as defined by revised El Escorial criteria. Distal limb muscles showed more frequent EMG abnormalities than proximal muscles. EDX yield was found to be higher in the limb where weakness began and when clinical signs of LMN dysfunction were evident. Adoption of the Awaji criteria significantly increased the yield of EMG-positive segments in the cervical (P < 0.0005) and lumbosacral (P < 0.0001) regions, and upgraded 19 patients into the probable category and 1 patient into the definite category. EMG abnormalities are predominant in the distal limb in early-stage ALS. A redefinition of an EDX-positive cervical or lumbosacral segment, with an emphasis on distal limb muscles, may result in an earlier ALS diagnosis. Muscle Nerve 58: 389-395, 2018.

[PMID: 21764635]
To assess whether Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of diagnosis for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In Awaji ALS criteria, fasciculation potentials are regarded as evidence of acute denervation in the presence of chronic neurogenic changes on needle electromyography. We reviewed clinical and neurophysiological data of 113 consecutive patients who were suspected as suffering ALS. The six muscles (trapezius, biceps, first dorsal interosseous, T10-paraspinalis, vastus lateralis, and tibialis anterior muscles) were examined by EMG, focusing on the presence of fasciculation potentials. The sensitivity of revised El Escorial (R-EEC) and Awaji criteria was compared. Probable or definite ALS was diagnosed in 61% of the patients by R-EEC and 71% by Awaji criteria. By applying Awaji criteria; (1) 17 of the 44 patients categorized as possible ALS by R-EEC reached to probable/definite ALS, 11 of whom had bulbar onset, (2) in 48 patients with bulbar onset, the proportion of probable/definite ALS increased from 59% to 82%, (3) in 62 patients with limb onset, the proportion of probable/definite ALS was 61% (63% by R-EEC). Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of ALS diagnosis in patients with bulbar onset, but not in those with limb onset. Accepting fasciculation potentials as evidence of acute denervation increases the diagnostic sensitivity of ALS, particularly in patients with bulbar onset, and contributes to early diagnosis.

[PMID: 22277500]
Electrodiagnostic methods, especially needle EMG plays an important role for the ALS diagnosis. Existing diagnostic criteria such as revised El Escorial criteria (R-EEC) and Awaji algorithm have a drawback of low sensitivity. Our study revealed that the percentage of patients classified as confirmed ALS, i.e. clinically probable (laboratory supported) or higher, was 43% using the R-EEC and 37% using the Awaji algorithm. Needle EMG can strongly suggest ALS beyond these criteria. Fasciculation potentials (FPs) are sufficiently specific for ALS, and we have argued its diagnostic utitlity in ALS diagnosis. FPs are rare in other neurogenic diseases, such as cervical or lumbar spine disorders and spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Profuse FPs observed in both upper and lower limbs would strongly suggest ALS. EMG of the upper trapezius muscle is useful since it is easily relaxed, and the spontaneous activities in this muscle are sufficiently sensitive and specific for ALS. Inclusion body myositis (IBM) might be confused with ALS, but its differentiation is actually easy since a normal recruitment in a chronically weak muscle definitely indicates myopathy. Furthermore, EMG of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle in IBM patients would reveal typical myopathic, i.e. low-amplitude and thin, motor unit potentials.

[PMID: 22246871]
The role of fasciculation potentials (FPs) in the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has been underrated. The Awaji algorithm has restored the value of FPs. Our aim was to test the diagnostic yield of the Awaji algorithm, with consideration of FPs. Subjects consisted of 139 consecutive ALS patients retrospectively enrolled over 5 years. At presentation we evaluated the diagnostic categories using the revised El Escorial Criteria (R-EEC) and the Awaji algorithm. The percentage of patients classified as confirmed ALS, clinically probable (laboratory-supported), or higher was 43% using the R-EEC and 37% using the Awaji algorithm. Thirteen patients with upper motor neuron signs only in one body region showed a decrease in their category using the Awaji algorithm. FPs were observed in 89% of ALS patients and were frequent in proximal muscles. The sensitivity of the Awaji algorithm is lower than that of the R-EEC.

[PMID: 26821620]
The contribution of cranial and thoracic region electromyography (EMG) to diagnostic criteria for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has not been evaluated. Clinical and EMG data from each craniospinal region were retrospectively assessed in 470 patients; 214 had ALS. Changes to diagnostic classification in Awaji-Shima and revised El Escorial criteria after withdrawal of cranial/thoracic EMG data were ascertained. Sensitivity for lower motor neuron involvement in ALS was highest in the cervical/lumbar regions; specificity was highest in cranial/thoracic regions. Cranial EMG contributed to definite/probable Awaji-Shima categorization in 1.4% of patients. Thoracic EMG made no contribution. For revised El Escorial criteria, cranial and thoracic data reclassified 1% and 5% of patients, respectively. Cranial EMG data make small contributions to both criteria, whereas thoracic data contribute only to the revised El Escorial criteria. However, cranial and thoracic region abnormalities are specific in ALS. Consideration should be given to allowing greater diagnostic contribution from thoracic EMG. Muscle Nerve 54: 378-385, 2016.

[PMID: 20536375]
The Awaji Commission recently proposed a modification of the electrodiagnostic criteria for ALS. We assessed whether the Awaji recommendations improve the sensitivity of the early diagnosis of ALS. In a retrospective study we reviewed clinical and neurophysiological data for 213 patients who visited our motor neuron disease outpatient clinic between October 2006 and December 2008. Using the El Escorial criteria, 51 patients were diagnosed with definite or probable ALS, 14 with probable laboratory-supported ALS, and 28 with possible ALS. An alternative diagnosis was present in 120 patients. Applying the Awaji recommendations, 66 patients were diagnosed with either definite or probable ALS, and 27 with possible ALS. Of the 14 patients diagnosed with probable laboratory-supported ALS, eight switched to probable ALS and six to possible ALS using the Awaji recommendations; none of the patients with an ALS mimic was diagnosed with ALS according to the Awaji recommendations. In conclusion, the new criteria for ALS do not result in a loss of specificity and can potentially improve the sensitivity by 16%. However, this diagnostic improvement appears eliminated if patients with probable laboratory-supported ALS - due to UMN signs in one region - should be categorized as possible ALS.

[PMID: 28457490]
Neuronal and/or axonal hyperactivity and hyperexcitability is an important feature of motor neuron diseases. It results clinically in cramps and fasciculations. It is not specific to motor neuron diseases, and can occur in healthy subjects, as well as in various pathologies of the peripheral nervous system, including nerve hyperexcitability syndromes. Hyperexcitability plays an important and debated role in the pathophysiology of motor neuron diseases, especially in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The mechanisms causing hyperexcitability are not yet clearly identified. While most studies favor a distal axonal origin site of fasciculations, some of the fasciculations could be of cortical origin. The consequences of hyperexcitability are also discussed, whether it is rather protective or deleterious in the disease course. Fasciculations are depicted both clinically and using electromyogram, and more recently the interest of ultrasound has been highlighted. The importance of fasciculation potentials in the diagnosis of ALS led to changes in electrophysiological criteria at Awaji consensus conference. The contribution of these modifications to ALS diagnosis has been the subject of several studies. In clinical practice, it is necessary to distinguish fasciculations potentials of motor neuron disease from benign fasciculations. In most studies of fasciculation potentials in ALS, the presence of complex fasciculation potentials appears to be relevant for the diagnosis and the prognosis of the disease.

[PMID: 27117334]
In the motor system there is a complex interplay between cortical structures and spinal cord lower motor neurons (LMN). In this system both inhibitory and excitatory neurons have relevant roles. LMN loss is a marker of motor neuron disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS). Conventional needle electromyography (EMG) does not allow LMN loss to be quantified. Measurement of compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude or area, and the neurophysiological index, provide a surrogate estimate of the number of functional motor units. Increased motor neuronal excitability is a neurophysiological marker of ALS in the context of a suspected clinical and electrophysiological diagnosis. In the LMN system, fasciculation potentials (FPs) are the earliest changes observed in affected muscles, a feature of LMN hyperexcitability. Reinnervation is best investigated by needle EMG although other methods can be explored. Moreover needle EMG give information about the temporal profile of the reinnervation process, important ancillary data. Quantitative motor unit potential analysis is a valuable method of evaluating reinnervation. The importance of FPs has been recognized in the Awaji criteria for the electrodiagnosis of ALS, criteria that are a sensitive adjunct to the revised El Escorial criteria. Finally, functionality of LMN's, and perhaps excitability studies in motor nerves, aids understanding of the disease process, allowing measurement of potential treatment effects in clinical trials. Other investigational techniques, such as electrical impedance myography, muscle and nerve ultrasound, and spinal cord imaging methods may prove useful in future.

[PMID: 23261262]
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is the most common motor neuron disorder in adults. Although the diagnosis appears obvious in theory, clinical practice shows the contrary as diagnosis is delayed in many patients; the average time between symptom onset and diagnosis can reach 12 months. The delay can be explained by the variability of the clinical presentation and by the absence of diagnostic markers. In order to standardize diagnosis for enrollment in clinical research, diagnostic criteria for ALS were created and revisited during the last 20 years. In 2006, the Awaji criteria for the diagnosis of ALS were proposed, adding two major points to the diagnostic criteria: electromyography is considered equivalent to clinical examination for the identification of LMN signs and fasciculation potentials resume their prominent place in the diagnosis. Comparisons of the accuracy of the revisited El Escorial and Awaji criteria support improved diagnostic sensitivity without any effect on specificity with the new classification. The only weakness of the new classification involves patients with UMN signs in one region and LMN in two regions; these patients were previously classified as laboratory-supported probable ALS and currently as possible ALS, a lower level of diagnostic certainty. In all other instances the accuracy appears to be improved by the Awaji criteria. Nevertheless, there is a body of evidence suggesting the need for a revision of these new criteria, giving more weight to clinical and complementary findings of UMN involvement. The need to diagnose and treat ALS quickly could be facilitated by the inclusion of complementary investigations that detect UMN signs.

[PMID: 24698287]
The diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) relies on identification of a combination of upper and lower motor neuron signs. In order to improve the diagnostic sensitivity for ALS, Awaji criteria were developed, in part to better incorporate neurophysiological measures, although assessment of upper motor neuron dysfunction remained clinically based. Given that cortical hyperexcitability appears to be an early feature in ALS, the present study assessed the diagnostic utility of a threshold tracking transcranial magnetic stimulation technique as an aid to the research-based Awaji criteria in establishing an earlier diagnosis of ALS. Prospective studies were undertaken on a cohort of 82 patients with suspected ALS and results were compared with 34 healthy controls. Short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI) was significantly reduced in ALS patients (P < 0.0001), with a comparable reduction evident in the Awaji groups (SICIAWAJI POSSIBLE 1.3% ± 1.3%; SICIAWAJI PROBABLE/DEFINITE 1.4% ±1.7%). Central motor conduction time was significantly prolonged (P < 0.001), whereas the motor evoked potential amplitude (P < 0.05) and intracortical facilitation (P < 0.05) were increased. The frequency of transcranial magnetic stimulation abnormalities was similar across Awaji subgroups, and addition of transcranial magnetic stimulation abnormalities as a diagnostic category enabled reclassification of 88% of Awaji possible patients to Awaji probable/definite. Cortical excitability studies potentially facilitate an earlier diagnosis of ALS when combined with clinical and conventional neurophysiological findings, albeit in a research setting.

[PMID: 21437935]
Early and accurate diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is important for patient care and for entry in clinical trials. Retrospective studies suggest that the use of the Awaji algorithm for the diagnosis of ALS is more sensitive for early diagnosis than the currently used revised El Escorial criteria. We prospectively compared the revised El Escorial criteria with the Awaji algorithm in patients seen with suspected ALS at the University Hospitals Leuven between January 2008 and April 2010. Out of 200 patients referred for the diagnosis of ALS, 66% and 85% could be categorized to definite or probable ALS at first presentation according to the revised El Escorial and the Awaji algorithm, respectively (p < 5.6 × 10(-17) ). This corresponds to a >50% reduction of patients not eligible for clinical trial entry. Application of the Awaji algorithm made the diagnosis of ALS more likely by at least 1 diagnostic category in 25.7% of patients and identified at least 1 additional region with electrodiagnostic signs of ongoing lower motor neuron loss in 46.4% of electrodiagnostic investigations. Application of the Awaji algorithm did not result in a single false-positive diagnosis of ALS in this study. Our data demonstrate that the Awaji algorithm is significantly more sensitive compared to the revised El Escorial criteria, without resulting in false-positive diagnoses of ALS. It should therefore be used in clinical trials.

[PMID: 23407618]
ALS may be diagnosed although affection of other organs suggests another pathogenetic back-ground. In a 72yo non-smoking male progressive gait disturbance with recurrent falls since 2y was initially attributed to axonal polyneuropathy. Additionally, he had arterial hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, hyper-CK-emia, hepatopathy, atrial fibrillation, recurrent heart-failure, pulmonary hypertension, mitral insufficiency, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. Possible causes of polyneuropathy were diabetes, long-standing alcoholism, folate-deficiency, or hereditary disease. Later the patient was re-diagnosed as ALS despite absence of upper motor-neuron or bulbar signs, the presence of multiple risk factors for polyneuropathy, of stocking-type sensory disturbances, and of cardiac abnormalities, which could explain dyspnea. Misdiagnosing polyneuropathy as ALS stigmatized the patient and prevented him from further diagnostic work-up for cardiac disease and adequate treatment for heart-failure. Though the diagnosis of ALS was withdrawn, he was put on comfort care and opiates were given when dyspnea acutely deteriorated to death without further cardiac or pulmonary investigations or specific cardiac treatment. ALS should be diagnosed only if the Awaji-shima criteria are fulfilled and if all differential diagnoses were profoundly excluded. Respiratory insufficiency should not be attributed to bulbar involvement in ALS as long as cardiac, pulmonary, or myopathic causes were excluded.

[PMID: 27440148]
To assess the sensitivity and specificity of the Awaji and revised El Escorial diagnostic criteria (rEEC) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We conducted a large prospective multicenter study, recruiting 416 patients (253 male, 163 female) between January 1, 2012, and August 31, 2015, to compare the diagnostic accuracy of Awaji and rEEC in accordance with standards of reporting of diagnostic accuracy criteria. The sensitivity of the Awaji criteria (57%, 50.0%-63.3%) was higher when compared to rEEC (45%, 38.7%-51.7%, p < 0.001), translating to a 12% gain in sensitivity. The specificity of the both criteria were identical, 99.5%, indicating the number needed to test in order to diagnose one extra case of ALS was 1.8 (1.5-2) for Awaji criteria and 2.4 (2-2.6) for rEEC. The Awaji criteria exhibited a higher sensitivity across subgroups, including bulbar (p < 0.001) and limb-onset (p < 0.001) patients. The inclusion of the possible diagnostic category as a positive finding enhanced sensitivity of the Awaji criteria and rEEC, particularly in early stages of ALS, while maintaining specificity. The present study established a higher sensitivity of Awaji criteria when compared to rEEC, with diagnostic benefits evident in bulbar and limb-onset disease. Inclusion of possible as a positive finding enhanced sensitivity of both criteria, while maintaining specificity, and should be considered in clinical practice and future therapeutic trials. This study provides Class IV evidence that the Awaji criteria have a higher sensitivity and the same specificity as the rEEC in identifying patients with ALS.