[PMID: 15197606]
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii has been notorious as an archaeon in which the replication origins are difficult to identify. Although extensive efforts have been exerted on this issue, the locations of replication origins still remain elusive 7 years after the publication of its complete genome sequence in 1996. Ambiguous results were obtained in identifying the replication origins of M. jannaschii based on all theoretical and experimental approaches. In the genome of M. jannaschii, we found that an ORF (MJ0774), annotated as a hypothetical protein, is a homologue of the Cdc6 protein. The position of the gene is at a global minimum of the x component of the Z curve, i.e., RY disparity curve, which has been used to identify replication origins in other Archaea. In addition, an intergenic region (694,540-695,226 bp) that is between the cdc6 gene and an adjacent ORF shows almost all the characteristics of known replication origins, i.e., it is highly rich in AT composition (80%) and contains multiple copies of repeat elements and AT stretches. Therefore, these lines of evidence strongly suggest that the identified region is a replication origin, which is designated as oriC1. The analysis of the y component of the Z curve, i.e., MK disparity curve, suggests the presence of another replication origin corresponding to one of the peaks in the MK disparity curve at around 1,388 kb of the genome.

[PMID: 20850498]
This report shows that isochore-like structures can be found not only in warm-blooded animals, some reptiles, fishes and yeast, but also in certain archaeal species. In perfectly shaped isochore-like structures (in "protoisochores") from Sulfolobus acidocaldarius and Thermofilum pendens genomes the difference in 3GC levels between genes from different "protoisochores" is about 30%. In these archaeal species GC-poor "protoisochores" are situated near the origin of replication, while GC-rich "protoisochores" are situated near the terminus of replication. There is a strong linear dependence between position of a gene and its 3GC level in S. acidocaldarius (an average difference in 3GC per 100,000 base pairs is equal to 3.6%). Detailed analyses of nucleotide usage biases in genes from leading and lagging strands led us to the suggestion that 3GC in genes situated near terminus of replication grows due to higher rates of thymine oxidation producing T to C transitions in lagging strands.

[PMID: 16249118]
The discovery of multiple chromosome replication origins in Sulfolobus species has added yet another eukaryotic trait to the archaea, and brought new levels of complexity to the cell cycle in terms of initiation of chromosome replication, replication termination and chromosome decatenation. Conserved repeated DNA elements--origin recognition boxes--have been identified in the origins of replication, and shown to bind the Orc1/Cdc6 proteins involved in cell cycle control. The origin recognition boxes aid in the identification and characterization of new origins, and their conservation suggests that most archaea have a similar replication initiation mechanism. Cell-cycle-dependent variation in Orc1/Cdc6 levels has been demonstrated, reminiscent of variations in cyclin levels during the eukaryotic cell cycle. Information about archaeal chromosome segregation is also accumulating, including the identification of a protein that binds to short regularly spaced repeats that might constitute centromere-like elements. In addition, studies of cell-cycle-specific gene expression have potential to reveal, in the near future, missing components in crenarchaeal chromosome replication, genome segregation and cell division. Together with an increased number of physiological and cytological investigations of the overall organization of the cell cycle, rapid progress of the archaeal cell cycle field is evident, and archaea, in particular Sulfolobus species, are emerging as simple and powerful models for the eukaryotic cell cycle.

[PMID: 2541880]
Halobacterium halobium contains two gas vacuole protein genes that are located in plasmid pHH1 (p-vac) and in the chromosomal DNA (c-vac). The mutation frequency for these genes is different: the constitutively expressed p-vac gene is mutated with a frequency of 10(-2), while the chromosomal gene expressed in the stationary phase of growth is mutated with a frequency of 10(-5). The difference in the mutation susceptibility is due to the dynamics of plasmid pHH1. p-vac gene mutations are caused (i) by the integration of an insertion element or (ii) by a deletion event encompassing the p-vac gene region. In contrast, c-vac mutants analyzed to date incurred neither insertion elements nor deletions. Deletion events within pHH1 occur at high frequencies during the development of a H. halobium culture. The investigation of the fusion regions resulting from deletion events indicates that insertion elements are involved. The analysis of pHH1 deletion variants led to a 4 kilobase pair DNA region containing the origin of replication of the pHH1 plasmid.

[PMID: 16321966]
Deviations from Chargaff's 2nd parity rule, according to which A approximately T and G approximately C in single stranded DNA, have been associated with replication as well as with transcription in prokaryotes. Based on observations regarding mainly the transcription-replication co-linearity in a large number of prokaryotic species, we formulate the hypothesis that the replication procedure may follow different modes between genomes throughout which the skews clearly follow different patterns. We draw the conclusion that multiple functional sites of origin of replication may exist in the genomes of most archaea and in some exceptional cases of eubacteria, while in the majority of eubacteria, replication occurs through a single fixed origin.

[PMID: 24185008]
DNA replication initiates at defined sites called origins, which serve as binding sites for initiator proteins that recruit the replicative machinery. Origins differ in number and structure across the three domains of life and their properties determine the dynamics of chromosome replication. Bacteria and some archaea replicate from single origins, whereas most archaea and all eukaryotes replicate using multiple origins. Initiation mechanisms that rely on homologous recombination operate in some viruses. Here we show that such mechanisms also operate in archaea. We use deep sequencing to study replication in Haloferax volcanii and identify four chromosomal origins of differing activity. Deletion of individual origins results in perturbed replication dynamics and reduced growth. However, a strain lacking all origins has no apparent defects and grows significantly faster than wild type. Origin-less cells initiate replication at dispersed sites rather than at discrete origins and have an absolute requirement for the recombinase RadA, unlike strains lacking individual origins. Our results demonstrate that homologous recombination alone can efficiently initiate the replication of an entire cellular genome. This raises the question of what purpose replication origins serve and why they have evolved.

[PMID: 22978470]
While multiple replication origins have been observed in archaea, considerably less is known about their evolutionary processes. Here, we performed a comparative analysis of the predicted (proved in part) orc/cdc6-associated replication origins in 15 completely sequenced haloarchaeal genomes to investigate the diversity and evolution of replication origins in halophilic Archaea. Multiple orc/cdc6-associated replication origins were predicted in all of the analyzed haloarchaeal genomes following the identification of putative ORBs (origin recognition boxes) that are associated with orc/cdc6 genes. Five of these predicted replication origins in Haloarcula hispanica were experimentally confirmed via autonomous replication activities. Strikingly, several predicted replication origins in H. hispanica and Haloarcula marismortui are located in the distinct regions of their highly homologous chromosomes, suggesting that these replication origins might have been introduced as parts of new genomic content. A comparison of the origin-associated Orc/Cdc6 homologs and the corresponding predicted ORB elements revealed that the replication origins in a given haloarchaeon are quite diverse, while different haloarchaea can share a few conserved origins. Phylogenetic and genomic context analyses suggested that there is an original replication origin (oriC1) that was inherited from the ancestor of archaea, and several other origins were likely evolved and/or translocated within the haloarchaeal species. This study provides detailed information about the diversity of multiple orc/cdc6-associated replication origins in haloarchaeal genomes, and provides novel insight into the evolution of multiple replication origins in Archaea.

[PMID: 16980466]
We report here a comparative analysis of the genome sequence of Methanosarcina barkeri with those of Methanosarcina acetivorans and Methanosarcina mazei. The genome of M. barkeri is distinguished by having an organization that is well conserved with respect to the other Methanosarcina spp. in the region proximal to the origin of replication, with interspecies gene similarities as high as 95%. However, it is disordered and marked by increased transposase frequency and decreased gene synteny and gene density in the distal semigenome. Of the 3,680 open reading frames (ORFs) in M. barkeri, 746 had homologs with better than 80% identity to both M. acetivorans and M. mazei, while 128 nonhypothetical ORFs were unique (nonorthologous) among these species, including a complete formate dehydrogenase operon, genes required for N-acetylmuramic acid synthesis, a 14-gene gas vesicle cluster, and a bacterial-like P450-specific ferredoxin reductase cluster not previously observed or characterized for this genus. A cryptic 36-kbp plasmid sequence that contains an orc1 gene flanked by a presumptive origin of replication consisting of 38 tandem repeats of a 143-nucleotide motif was detected in M. barkeri. Three-way comparison of these genomes reveals differing mechanisms for the accrual of changes. Elongation of the relatively large M. acetivorans genome is the result of uniformly distributed multiple gene scale insertions and duplications, while the M. barkeri genome is characterized by localized inversions associated with the loss of gene content. In contrast, the short M. mazei genome most closely approximates the putative ancestral organizational state of these species.

[PMID: 11967086]
HF2 is a haloarchaeal virus infecting two Halorubrum species (Family Halobacteriaceae). It is lytic, has a head-and-tail morphology and belongs to the Myoviridae (contractile tails). The linear double-stranded DNA genome was sequenced and found to be 77 670 bp in length, with a mol% G+C of 55.8. A total of 121 likely open reading frames (ORFs) were identified, of which 37 overlapped at start and stop codons. The predicted proteins were usually acidic (average pI of 4.8), and less than about 12% of them had homologues in the sequence databases. Four complete tRNA-like sequences (tRNA-Arg, -Asx, -Pro and -Tyr) and an incomplete tRNA-Thr were detected. A transcription map showed that most of the genome was transcribed and that the synthesis of transcripts occurred in a highly organized and reproducible pattern over a 5 h infection cycle. Transcripts often spanned multiple ORFs, suggesting that viral genes were organized into operons. The predicted ORF and observed transcript directions matched well and showed that transcription is mainly directed inwards from the genome termini, meeting at about 45-48 kb, and this was also a turning point in a cumulative GC-skew plot. The low point in cumulative GC-skew, near the left end, was a region rich in short repeats and lacking ORFs, which is likely to be an origin of replication. The HF2 genome is a mosaic of components from widely different sources, demonstrating clearly that viruses of haloarchaea, like their bacteriophage counterparts, are vectors for the exchange and transmission of genetic material between wide taxonomic distances, even across domains.

[PMID: 20667100]
Species of the crenarchaeon Sulfolobus harbour three replication origins in their single circular chromosome that are synchronously initiated during replication. We demonstrate that global gene expression in two Sulfolobus species is highly biased, such that early replicating genome regions are more highly expressed at all three origins. The bias by far exceeds what would be anticipated by gene dosage effects alone. In addition, early replicating regions are denser in archaeal core genes (enriched in essential functions), display lower intergenic distances, and are devoid of mobile genetic elements. The strong replication-biased structuring of the Sulfolobus chromosome implies that the multiple replication origins serve purposes other than simply shortening the time required for replication. The higher-level chromosomal organisation could be of importance for minimizing the impact of DNA damage, and may also be linked to transcriptional regulation.

[PMID: 17350933]
Hyperthermus butylicus, a hyperthermophilic neutrophile and anaerobe, is a member of the archaeal kingdom Crenarchaeota. Its genome consists of a single circular chromosome of 1,667,163 bp with a 53.7% G+C content. A total of 1672 genes were annotated, of which 1602 are protein-coding, and up to a third are specific to H. butylicus. In contrast to some other crenarchaeal genomes, a high level of GUG and UUG start codons are predicted. Two cdc6 genes are present, but neither could be linked unambiguously to an origin of replication. Many of the predicted metabolic gene products are associated with the fermentation of peptide mixtures including several peptidases with diverse specificities, and there are many encoded transporters. Most of the sulfur-reducing enzymes, hydrogenases and electron-transfer proteins were identified which are associated with energy production by reducing sulfur to H(2)S. Two large clusters of regularly interspaced repeats (CRISPRs) are present, one of which is associated with a crenarchaeal-type cas gene superoperon; none of the spacer sequences yielded good sequence matches with known archaeal chromosomal elements. The genome carries no detectable transposable or integrated elements, no inteins, and introns are exclusive to tRNA genes. This suggests that the genome structure is quite stable, possibly reflecting a constant, and relatively uncompetitive, natural environment.

[PMID: 18922777]
The "baby machine" provides a means of generating synchronized cultures of minimally perturbed cells. We describe the use of this technique to establish the key cell-cycle parameters of hyperthermophilic archaea of the genus Sulfolobus. The 3 DNA replication origins of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius were mapped by 2D gel analysis to near 0 (oriC2), 579 (oriC1), and 1,197 kb (oriC3) on the 2,226-kb circular genome, and we present a direct demonstration of their activity within the first few minutes of a synchronous cell cycle. We also detected X-shaped DNA molecules at the origins in log-phase cells, but these were not directly associated with replication initiation or ongoing chromosome replication in synchronized cells. Whole-genome marker frequency analyses of both synchronous and log-phase cultures showed that origin utilization was close to 100% for all 3 origins per round of replication. However, oriC2 was activated slightly later on average compared with oriC1 and oriC3. The DNA replication forks moved bidirectionally away from each origin at approximately 88 bp per second in synchronous culture. Analysis of the 3 Orc1/Cdc6 initiator proteins showed a uniformity of cellular abundance and origin binding throughout the cell cycle. In contrast, although levels of the MCM helicase were constant across the cell cycle, its origin localization was regulated, because it was strongly enriched at all 3 origins in early S phase.

[PMID: 14526006]
We report on the identification and first cloning of an autonomously replicating sequence element from the chromosome of an archaeon, the extreme halophile Halobacterium strain NRC-1. The putative replication origin was identified by association with the orc7 gene and replication ability in the host strain, demonstrated by cloning into a nonreplicating plasmid. Deletion analysis showed that sequences located up to 750 bp upstream of the orc7 gene translational start, plus the orc7 gene and 50 bp downstream, are sufficient to endow the plasmid with replication ability, as judged by expression of a plasmid-encoded mevinolin resistance selectable marker and plasmid recovery after transformation. Sequences located proximal to the two other chromosomally carried haloarchaeal orc genes (orc6 and orc8) are not able to promote efficient autonomous replication. Located within the 750-bp region upstream of orc7 is a nearly perfect inverted repeat of 31 bp, which flanks an extremely AT-rich (44%) stretch of 189 bp. The replication ability of the plasmid was lost when one copy of the inverted repeat was deleted. Additionally, the inverted repeat structure near orc7 homologs in the genomic sequences of two other halophiles, Haloarcula marismortui and Haloferax volcanii, is highly conserved. Our results indicate that, in halophilic archaea, a chromosomal origin of replication is physically linked to orc7 homologs and that this element is sufficient to promote autonomous replication. We discuss the finding of a functional haloarchaeal origin in relation to the large number of orc1-cdc6 homologs identified in the genomes of all haloarchaea to date.

[PMID: 23375370]
Chromosomes with multiple DNA replication origins are a hallmark of Eukaryotes and some Archaea. All eukaryal nuclear replication origins are defined by the origin recognition complex (ORC) that recruits the replicative helicase MCM(2-7) via Cdc6 and Cdt1. We find that the three origins in the single chromosome of the archaeon Sulfolobus islandicus are specified by distinct initiation factors. While two origins are dependent on archaeal homologs of eukaryal Orc1 and Cdc6, the third origin is instead reliant on an archaeal Cdt1 homolog. We exploit the nonessential nature of the orc1-1 gene to investigate the role of ATP binding and hydrolysis in initiator function in vivo and in vitro. We find that the ATP-bound form of Orc1-1 is proficient for replication and implicates hydrolysis of ATP in downregulation of origin activity. Finally, we reveal that ATP and DNA binding by Orc1-1 remodels the protein's structure rather than that of the DNA template.

[PMID: 15876567]
The Z-curve is a three-dimensional curve that constitutes a unique representation of a DNA sequence, i.e., both the Z-curve and the given DNA sequence can be uniquely reconstructed from the other. We employed Z-curve analysis to identify one replication origin in the Methanocaldococcus jannaschii genome, two replication origins in the Halobacterium species NRC-1 genome and one replication origin in the Methanosarcina mazei genome. One of the predicted replication origins of Halobacterium species NRC-1 is the same as a replication origin later identified by in vivo experiments. The Z-curve analysis of the Sulfolobus solfataricus P2 genome suggested the existence of three replication origins, which is also consistent with later experimental results. This review aims to summarize applications of the Z-curve in identifying replication origins of archaeal genomes, and to provide clues about the locations of as yet unidentified replication origins of the Aeropyrum pernix K1, Methanococcus maripaludis S2, Picrophilus torridus DSM 9790 and Pyrobaculum aerophilum str. IM2 genomes.

[PMID: 21364800]
Genome replication is a crucial and essential process for the continuity of life.In all organisms it starts at a specific region of the genome known as origin of replication (Ori) site. The number of Ori sites varies in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Replication starts at a single Ori site in bacteria, but in eukaryotes multiple Ori sites are used for fast copying across all chromosomes. The situation becomes complex in archaea, where some groups have single and others have multiple origins of replication. Themococcales, are a hyperthermophilic order of archaea. They are anaerobes and heterotrophs-peptide fermenters, sulphate reducers, methanogens being some of the examples of metabolic types. In this paper we have applied a combination of multiple in silico approaches - Z curve, the cell division cycle (cdc6) gene location and location of consensus origin recognition box (ORB) sequences for location of origin of replication in Thermococcus onnurineus, Thermococcus gammatolerans and other Themococcales and compared the results to that of the well-documented case of Pyrococcus abyssi. The motivation behind this study is to find the number of Ori sites based on the data available for members of this order. Results from this in silico analysis show that the Themococcales have a single origin of replication.

[PMID: 17511521]
The halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii has a multireplicon genome, consisting of a main chromosome, three secondary chromosomes, and a plasmid. Genes for the initiator protein Cdc6/Orc1, which are commonly located adjacent to archaeal origins of DNA replication, are found on all replicons except plasmid pHV2. However, prediction of DNA replication origins in H. volcanii is complicated by the fact that this species has no less than 14 cdc6/orc1 genes. We have used a combination of genetic, biochemical, and bioinformatic approaches to map DNA replication origins in H. volcanii. Five autonomously replicating sequences were found adjacent to cdc6/orc1 genes and replication initiation point mapping was used to confirm that these sequences function as bidirectional DNA replication origins in vivo. Pulsed field gel analyses revealed that cdc6/orc1-associated replication origins are distributed not only on the main chromosome (2.9 Mb) but also on pHV1 (86 kb), pHV3 (442 kb), and pHV4 (690 kb) replicons. Gene inactivation studies indicate that linkage of the initiator gene to the origin is not required for replication initiation, and genetic tests with autonomously replicating plasmids suggest that the origin located on pHV1 and pHV4 may be dominant to the principal chromosomal origin. The replication origins we have identified appear to show a functional hierarchy or differential usage, which might reflect the different replication requirements of their respective chromosomes. We propose that duplication of H. volcanii replication origins was a prerequisite for the multireplicon structure of this genome, and that this might provide a means for chromosome-specific replication control under certain growth conditions. Our observations also suggest that H. volcanii is an ideal organism for studying how replication of four replicons is regulated in the context of the archaeal cell cycle.

[PMID: 11521661]
Genome-wide measures of DNA strand composition have been used to find archaeal DNA replication origins. Archaea seem to replicate using a single origin (as do eubacteria) even though archaeal replication factors are more like those of eukaryotes.

[PMID: 17956224]
To date, methanogens are the only group within the archaea where firing DNA replication origins have not been demonstrated in vivo. In the present study we show that a previously identified cluster of ORB (origin recognition box) sequences do indeed function as an origin of replication in vivo in the archaeon Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus. Although the consensus sequence of ORBs in M. thermautotrophicus is somewhat conserved when compared with ORB sequences in other archaea, the Cdc6-1 protein from M. thermautotrophicus (termed MthCdc6-1) displays sequence-specific binding that is selective for the MthORB sequence and does not recognize ORBs from other archaeal species. Stabilization of in vitro MthORB DNA binding by MthCdc6-1 requires additional conserved sequences 3' to those originally described for M. thermautotrophicus. By testing synthetic sequences bearing mutations in the MthORB consensus sequence, we show that Cdc6/ORB binding is critically dependent on the presence of an invariant guanine found in all archaeal ORB sequences. Mutation of a universally conserved arginine residue in the recognition helix of the winged helix domain of archaeal Cdc6-1 shows that specific origin sequence recognition is dependent on the interaction of this arginine residue with the invariant guanine. Recognition of a mutated origin sequence can be achieved by mutation of the conserved arginine residue to a lysine or glutamine residue. Thus despite a number of differences in protein and DNA sequences between species, the mechanism of origin recognition and binding appears to be conserved throughout the archaea.

[PMID: 15337158]
Until recently, the only archaeon for which a bona fide origin of replication was reported was Pyrococcus abyssi, where a single origin was identified. Although several in silico analyses have suggested that some archaeal species might contain more than one origin, this has only been demonstrated recently. Two studies have shown that multiple origins of replication function in two archaeal species. One study identified two origins of replication in the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus, whereas a second study used a different technique to show that both S. solfataricus and Sulfolobus acidocaldarius have three functional origins. These are the first reports of archaea having multiple origins. This finding has implications for research on the mechanisms of DNA replication and evolution.

[PMID: 21784908]
We report the construction of a series of replicating shuttle vectors that consist of a low-copy-number cloning vector for Escherichia coli and functional components of the origin of replication (oriC) of the chromosome of the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus. In the process of identifying the minimum replication origin sequence required for autonomous plasmid replication in P. furiosus, we discovered that several features of the origin predicted by bioinformatic analysis and in vitro binding studies were not essential for stable autonomous plasmid replication. A minimum region required to promote plasmid DNA replication was identified, and plasmids based on this sequence readily transformed P. furiosus. The plasmids replicated autonomously and existed in a single copy. In contrast to shuttle vectors based on a plasmid from the closely related hyperthermophile Pyrococcus abyssi for use in P. furiosus, plasmids based on the P. furiosus chromosomal origin were structurally unchanged after transformation and were stable without selection for more than 100 generations.

[PMID: 20978102]
In bacterial chromosomes, the position of a gene relative to the single origin of replication generally reflects its replication timing, how often it is expressed, and consequently, its rate of evolution. However, because some archaeal genomes contain multiple origins of replication, bias in gene dosage caused by delayed replication should be minimized and hence the substitution rate of genes should associate less with chromosome position. To test this hypothesis, six archaeal genomes from the genus Sulfolobus containing three origins of replication were selected, conserved orthologs were identified, and the evolutionary rates (dN and dS) of these orthologs were quantified. Ortholog families were grouped by their consensus position and designated by their proximity to one of the three origins (O1, O2, O3). Conserved orthologs were concentrated near the origins and most variation in genome content occurred distant from the origins. Linear regressions of both synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates on distance from replication origins were significantly positive, the rates being greatest in the region furthest from any of the origins and slowest among genes near the origins. Genes near O1 also evolved faster than those near O2 and O3, which suggest that this origin may fire later in the cell cycle. Increased evolutionary rates and gene dispensability are strongly associated with reduced gene expression caused in part by reduced gene dosage during the cell cycle. Therefore, in this genus of Archaea as well as in many Bacteria, evolutionary rates and variation in genome content associate with replication timing.

[PMID: 12646230]
The genomic sequence of the halophilic archaeon Halobacterium NRC-1 has been analyzed by the Z curve method. The Z curve is a three-dimensional curve that uniquely represents a given DNA sequence. Based on the known behaviors of the Z curves for the archaea whose replication origins have been identified, the analysis of the Z curve for the genome of Halobacterium NRC-1 strongly suggests that the large genome has two replication origins, oriC1 (921,863-922,014) and oriC2 (1,806,444-1,807,229), which are located at two sharp peaks of the Z curve. These two regions are next to the cdc6 genes and contain multiple copies of stretches of G and C, i.e., ggggtgggg and ccccacccc, which may also be regarded as direct and inverted repeats. Based on the above analysis, a model of replication of Halobacterium NRC-1 with two replication origins and two termini has been proposed. The experimental confirmation of this model would constitute the first example of multiple replication origins of archaea, which will finally provide much insight into the understanding of replication mechanisms of eukaryotic organisms, including human. In addition, the potential multiple replication origins of the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus are suggested by the analysis based on the Z curve method.

[PMID: 22942672]
Different patterns of strand asymmetry have been documented in a variety of prokaryotic genomes as well as mitochondrial genomes. Because different replication mechanisms often lead to different patterns of strand asymmetry, much can be learned of replication mechanisms by examining strand asymmetry. Here I summarize the diverse patterns of strand asymmetry among different taxonomic groups to suggest that (1) the single-origin replication may not be universal among bacterial species as the endosymbionts Wigglesworthia glossinidia, Wolbachia species, cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803 and Mycoplasma pulmonis genomes all exhibit strand asymmetry patterns consistent with the multiple origins of replication, (2) different replication origins in some archaeal genomes leave quite different patterns of strand asymmetry, suggesting that different replication origins in the same genome may be differentially used, (3) mitochondrial genomes from representative vertebrate species share one strand asymmetry pattern consistent with the strand-displacement replication documented in mammalian mtDNA, suggesting that the mtDNA replication mechanism in mammals may be shared among all vertebrate species, and (4) mitochondrial genomes from primitive forms of metazoans such as the sponge and hydra (representing Porifera and Cnidaria, respectively), as well as those from plants, have strand asymmetry patterns similar to single-origin or multi-origin replications observed in prokaryotes and are drastically different from mitochondrial genomes from other metazoans. This may explain why sponge and hydra mitochondrial genomes, as well as plant mitochondrial genomes, evolves much slower than those from other metazoans.

[PMID: 12237132]
The genomic sequence of the archaeon Methanosarcina mazei has been analyzed by the Z curve method. The Z curve is a three-dimensional curve that uniquely represents the given DNA sequence. The three-dimensional Z curve and its x and y components for the genome of M. mazei show a sharp peak and relatively broad peak, respectively. The cdc6 gene is located exactly at the position of the sharp peak. Based on the known behavior of the Z curves for the archaea whose replication origins have been identified, we hypothesize that the replication origin and termination sites correspond to the positions of the sharp peak and broad peak, respectively. We have located an intergenic region that is between the cdc6 gene (MM1314) and the gene for an adjacent protein (MM1315), which shows strong characteristics of the known replication origins. This region is highly rich in AT and contains multiple copies of consecutive repeats. Our results strongly suggest that the single replication origin of M. mazei is situated at the intergenic region between the cdc6 gene and the gene for the adjacent protein, from 1,564,657 to 1,566,241 bp of the genome.

[PMID: 22812406]
Replication origins were mapped in hyperthermophilic crenarchaea, using high-throughput sequencing-based marker frequency analysis. We confirm previous origin mapping in Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, and demonstrate that the single chromosome of Pyrobaculum calidifontis contains four replication origins, the highest number detected in a prokaryotic organism. The relative positions of the origins in both organisms coincided with regions enriched in highly conserved (core) archaeal genes. We show that core gene distribution provides a useful tool for origin identification in archaea, and predict multiple replication origins in a range of species. One of the P. calidifontis origins was mapped in detail, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated binding of the Cdc6/Orc1 replication initiator protein to a repeated sequence element, denoted Orb-1, within the origin. The high-throughput sequencing approach also allowed for an annotation update of both genomes, resulting in the restoration of open reading frames encoding proteins involved in, e.g., sugar, nitrate and energy metabolism, as well as in glycosylation and DNA repair.

[PMID: 17392430]
In all three domains of life, DNA replication begins at specialized loci termed replication origins. In bacteria, replication initiates from a single, clearly defined site. In contrast, eukaryotic organisms exploit a multitude of replication origins, dividing their genomes into an array of short contiguous units. Recently, the multiple replication origin paradigm has also been demonstrated within the archaeal domain of life, with the discovery that the hyperthermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus has three replication origins. However, the evolutionary mechanism driving the progression from single to multiple origin usage remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that Aeropyrum pernix, a distant relative of Sulfolobus, has two origins. Comparison with the Sulfolobus origins provides evidence for evolution of replicon complexity by capture of extrachromosomal genetic elements. We additionally identify a previously unrecognized candidate archaeal initiator protein that is distantly related to eukaryotic Cdt1. Our data thus provide evidence that horizontal gene transfer, in addition to its well-established role in contributing to the information content of chromosomes, may fundamentally alter the manner in which the host chromosome is replicated.