[PMID: 30967003]
In tumour cells, macropinocytosis functions as an amino acid supply route and supports cancer cell survival and proliferation. Initially demonstrated in oncogenic KRAS-driven models of pancreatic cancer, macropinocytosis triggers the internalization of extracellular proteins via discrete endocytic vesicles called macropinosomes. The incoming protein cargo is targeted for lysosome-dependent degradation, causing the intracellular release of amino acids. These protein-derived amino acids support metabolic fitness by contributing to the intracellular amino acid pools, as well as to the biosynthesis of central carbon metabolites. In this way, macropinocytosis represents a novel amino acid supply route that tumour cells use to survive the nutrient-poor conditions of the tumour microenvironment. Macropinocytosis has also emerged as an entry mechanism for a variety of nanomedicines, suggesting that macropinocytosis regulation in the tumour setting can be harnessed for the delivery of anti-cancer therapeutics. A slew of recent studies point to the possibility that macropinocytosis is a pervasive feature of many different tumour types. In this review, we focus on the role of this important uptake mechanism in a variety of cancers and highlight the main molecular drivers of macropinocytosis in these malignancies. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 33520357]
Macropinocytosis is a form of endocytosis which provides an effective way for non-selective uptakes of extracellular proteins, liquids, and particles. The endocytic process is initiated by the activation of the growth factors signaling pathways. After activation of the biochemical signal, the cell starts internalizing extracellular solutes and nutrients into the irregular endocytic vesicles, known as macropinosomes that deliver them into the lysosomes for degradation. Macropinocytosis plays an important role in the nutritional supply of cancer cells. Due to the rapid expansion of cancer cells and the abnormal vascular microenvironment, cancer cells are usually deprived of oxygen and nutrients. Therefore, they must transform their metabolism to survive and grow in this harsh microenvironment. To satisfy their energy needs, cancer cells enhance the activity of macropinocytosis. Therefore, this metabolic adaptation that is used by cancer cells can be exploited to develop new targeted cancer therapies. In this review, we discuss the molecular mechanism that actuates the process of macropinocytosis in a variety of cancers, and the novel anti-cancer therapeutics in targeting macropinocytosis.

[PMID: 30967006]
Macropinosome formation occurs as a localized sequence of biochemical activities and associated morphological changes, which may be considered a form of signal transduction leading to the construction of an organelle. Macropinocytosis may also convey information about the availability of extracellular nutrients to intracellular regulators of metabolism. Consistent with this idea, activation of the metabolic regulator mechanistic target of rapamycin complex-1 (mTORC1) in response to acute stimulation by growth factors and extracellular amino acids requires internalization of amino acids by macropinocytosis. This suggests that macropinocytosis is necessary for mTORC1-dependent growth of metazoan cells, both as a route for delivery of amino acids to sensors associated with lysosomes and as a platform for growth factor-dependent signalling to mTORC1 via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and the Akt pathway. Because the biochemical signals required for the construction of macropinosomes are also required for cell growth, and inhibition of macropinocytosis inhibits growth factor signalling to mTORC1, we propose that signalling by growth factor receptors is organized into stochastic, structure-dependent cascades of chemical reactions that both build a macropinosome and stimulate mTORC1. More generally, as discrete units of signal transduction, macropinosomes may be subject to feedback regulation by metabolism and cell dimensions. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 30967007]
In macropinocytosis, cells take up micrometre-sized droplets of medium into internal vesicles. These vesicles are acidified and fused to lysosomes, their contents digested and useful compounds extracted. Indigestible contents can be exocytosed. Macropinocytosis has been known for approaching 100 years and is described in both metazoa and amoebae, but not in plants or fungi. Its evolutionary origin goes back to at least the common ancestor of the amoebozoa and opisthokonts, with apparent secondary loss from fungi. The primary function of macropinocytosis in amoebae and some cancer cells is feeding, but the conserved processing pathway for macropinosomes, which involves shrinkage and the retrieval of membrane to the cell surface, has been adapted in immune cells for antigen presentation. Macropinocytic cups are large actin-driven processes, closely related to phagocytic cups and pseudopods and appear to be organized around a conserved signalling patch of PIP3, active Ras and active Rac that directs actin polymerization to its periphery. Patches can form spontaneously and must be sustained by excitable kinetics with strong cooperation from the actin cytoskeleton. Growth-factor signalling shares core components with macropinocytosis, based around phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase), and we suggest that it evolved to take control of ancient feeding structures through a coupled growth factor receptor. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 30967008]
Macropinocytosis is an evolutionarily conserved form of endocytosis that mediates non-selective uptake of extracellular fluid and the solutes contained therein. In mammalian cells, macropinocytosis is initiated by growth factor-mediated activation of the Ras and PI3-kinase signalling pathways. In malignant cells, oncogenic activation of growth factor signalling sustains macropinocytosis cell autonomously. Recent studies of cancer metabolism, discussed here, have begun to define a role for macropinocytosis as a nutrient uptake route. Macropinocytic cancer cells ingest macromolecules in bulk and break them down in the lysosome to support metabolism and macromolecular synthesis. Thereby, macropinocytosis allows cells to tap into the copious nutrient stores of extracellular macromolecules when canonical nutrients are scarce. These findings demonstrate that macropinocytosis promotes metabolic flexibility and resilience, which enables cancer cells to survive and grow in nutrient-poor environments. Implications for physiological roles of growth factor-stimulated macropinocytosis in cell metabolism and its relationship with other nutrient uptake pathways are considered. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 30967009]
Macropinocytosis-the large-scale, non-specific uptake of fluid by cells-is used by Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae to obtain nutrients. These cells form circular ruffles around regions of membrane defined by a patch of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) and the activated forms of the small G-proteins Ras and Rac. When this ruffle closes, a vesicle of the medium is delivered to the cell interior for further processing. It is accepted that PIP3 is required for efficient macropinocytosis. Here, we assess the roles of Ras and Rac in Dictyostelium macropinocytosis. Gain-of-function experiments show that macropinocytosis is stimulated by persistent Ras activation and genetic analysis suggests that RasG and RasS are the key Ras proteins involved. Among the activating guanine exchange factors (GEFs), GefF is implicated in macropinocytosis by an insertional mutant. The individual roles of Rho family proteins are little understood but activation of at least some may be independent of PIP3. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 30400219]
Macropinocytosis is a regulated form of endocytosis that mediates the nonselective uptake of nutrients to support growth under nutrient-deprived conditions. KRAS-mutant cancer cells upregulate macropinocytosis to import extracellular proteins, which subsequently undergo proteolytic degradation in the lysosome. Although transcription factor EB (TFEB) is a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and function, its role in the degradation of extracellular protein from macropinocytosis in KRAS-mutant cells has not previously been elucidated. In this study, we investigated the role of TFEB in the recovery of macropinocytosis-mediated mTORC1 activity and cell growth under nutrient depletion. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing <i>Kras</i><sup>G12D</sup> and KRAS-mutant human cancer cells took up markedly higher levels of tetramethylrhodamine (TMR)-dextran than the corresponding wild-type cells. siRNA-mediated inhibition of TFEB did not influence extracellular TMR-dextran uptake, but significantly attenuated lysosomal degradation of extracellular protein. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) treatment restored p-S6K levels and cell proliferation suppressed by leucine deprivation, and these effects were blocked by si<i>TFEB</i>. Collectively, our results show that TFEB plays a role in macropinocytosis-mediated KRAS-mutant cell growth under nutrient deprivation by promoting lysosomal degradation of extracellular proteins.

[PMID: 32756454]
Macropinocytosis is a unique pathway of endocytosis characterised by the nonspecific internalisation of large amounts of extracellular fluid, solutes and membrane in large endocytic vesicles known as macropinosomes. Macropinocytosis is important in a range of physiological processes, including antigen presentation, nutrient sensing, recycling of plasma proteins, migration and signalling. It has become apparent in recent years from the study of specialised cells that there are multiple pathways of macropinocytosis utilised by different cell types, and some of these pathways are triggered by different stimuli. Understanding the physiological function of macropinocytosis requires knowledge of the regulation and fate of the macropinocytosis pathways in a range of cell types. Here, we compare the mechanisms of macropinocytosis in different primary and immortalised cells, identify the gaps in knowledge in the field and discuss the potential approaches to analyse the function of macropinocytosis in vivo.

[PMID: 10678991]
Gonococcal entry into primary human urethral epithelial cells (HUEC) can occur by macropinocytosis. Scanning and transmission electron microscopy revealed lamellipodia surrounding gonococci, and confocal laser scanning microscopy analysis showed organisms colocalized with M(r) 70,000 fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled dextran within the cells. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitors and an actin polymerization inhibitor prevented macropinocytic entry of gonococci into HUEC.

[PMID: 25096879]
Macropinocytosis is exploited by many pathogens for entry into cells. Coronaviruses (CoVs) such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV are important human pathogens; however, macropinocytosis during CoV infection has not been investigated. We demonstrate that the CoVs SARS CoV and murine hepatitis virus (MHV) induce macropinocytosis, which occurs late during infection, is continuous, and is not associated with virus entry. MHV-induced macropinocytosis results in vesicle internalization, as well as extended filopodia capable of fusing with distant cells. MHV-induced macropinocytosis requires fusogenic spike protein on the cell surface and is dependent on epidermal growth factor receptor activation. Inhibition of macropinocytosis reduces supernatant viral titers and syncytia but not intracellular virus titers. These results indicate that macropinocytosis likely facilitates CoV infection through enhanced cell-to-cell spreading. Our studies are the first to demonstrate virus use of macropinocytosis for a role other than entry and suggest a much broader potential exploitation of macropinocytosis in virus replication and host interactions. Importance: Coronaviruses (CoVs), including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV, are critical emerging human pathogens. Macropinocytosis is induced by many pathogens to enter host cells, but other functions for macropinocytosis in virus replication are unknown. In this work, we show that CoVs induce a macropinocytosis late in infection that is continuous, independent from cell entry, and associated with increased virus titers and cell fusion. Murine hepatitis virus macropinocytosis requires a fusogenic virus spike protein and signals through the epidermal growth factor receptor and the classical macropinocytosis pathway. These studies demonstrate CoV induction of macropinocytosis for a purpose other than entry and indicate that viruses likely exploit macropinocytosis at multiple steps in replication and pathogenesis.

[PMID: 10321993]
Macrophage foam cell formation in vitro requires uptake of modified low density lipoproteins (LDL) such as acetylated LDL (AcLDL) and moderately oxidized LDL (OxLDL). Macrophages incubated with AcLDL and OxLDL, but not LDL, showed increased membrane ruffling as seen with time-lapse phase contrast video light microscopy. Modified LDLs stimulated circular membrane ruffles between 2 and 10 min after incubation. These membrane ruffles were readsorbed into the plasma membrane between 5 and 15 min later. Phase-bright macropinosomes formed at the base of the stimulated membrane ruffles. The fluid-phase marker lucifer yellow labeled the modified LDL stimulated macropinosomes. Modified LDLs stimulate fluid-phase uptake by 1.5-fold to threefold as measured with 14C-sucrose uptake. Transmission electron microscopy showed that gold conjugated AcLDL and OxLDL bound preferentially to membrane ruffles and were present in macropinosomes (diameter >0.2 pm) underneath these membrane ruffles. AcLDL and OxLDL were also present in clathrin-coated pits and endosomes. These studies suggest that modified lipoproteins stimulate macropinocytosis. AcLDL and OxLDL are partially internalized by macropinocytosis and partially internalized via clathrin-coated pit endocytosis.

[PMID: 11029048]
Macropinocytosis results from the closure of lamellipodia generated by membrane ruffling, thereby reflecting cortical actin dynamics. Both transformation of Rat-1 fibroblasts by v-Src or K-Ras and stable transfection for expression of dominant-positive, wild-type phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) regulatory subunit p85 alpha constitutively led to stress fiber disruption, cortical actin recruitment, extensive ruffling, and macropinosome formation, as measured by a selective acceleration of fluid-phase endocytosis. These alterations closely correlated with activation of PI3K and phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC), as assayed by 3-phosphoinositide synthesis in situ and in vitro and inositol 1, 4,5 trisphosphate steady-state levels, respectively; they were abolished by stable transfection of v-Src-transformed cells for dominant-negative truncated p85 alpha expression and by pharmacological inhibitors of PI3K and PI-PLC, indicating a requirement for both enzymes. Whereas PI3K activation resisted PI-PLC inhibition, PI-PLC activation was abolished by a PI3K inhibitor and dominant-negative transfection, thus placing PI-PLC downstream of PI3K. Together, these data suggest that permanent sequential activation of both PI3K and PI-PLC is necessary for the dramatic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in oncogene-transformed fibroblasts, resulting in constitutive ruffling and macropinocytosis.

[PMID: 11890548]
Macropinocytosis refers to the formation of primary large endocytic vesicles of irregular size and shape, generated by actin-driven evaginations of the plasma membrane, whereby cells avidly incorporate extracellular fluid. Macropinosomes resemble "empty" phagosomes and show no difference with the "spacious phagosomes" triggered by the enteropathogenic bacteria Salmonella and Shigella. Macropinosomes may fuse with lysosomes or regurgitate their content back to the extracellular space. In multiple cell types, macropinocytosis is a transient response to growth factors. When amoebas are cultured under axenic conditions, macropinocytosis is induced so as to fulfil nutritional requirements. In immature dendritic cells, macropinocytosis allows for extensive sampling of soluble antigens; after a few days of maturation, this activity vanishes as processed peptides are being presented. Macropinosomes are also formed at the leading edge of motile leukocytes or neurons. In all these examples, macropinocytosis appears tightly regulated. Transformation of fibroblasts by Src or Ras also results in constitutive formation of macropinosomes at "ruffling" zones, that could be related to accelerated cell motility. Like phagocytosis, macropinocytosis depends on signalling to the actin cytoskeleton. We have explored this signalling in transformed cells. v-Src and K-Ras activate PI3K and PLC, as demonstrated by in situ production of the corresponding lipid products. Pharmacological inhibitors of PI3K and PLC and stable transfection leading to a dominant-negative PI3-kinase construct in transformed fibroblasts abolish macropinocytosis, demonstrating that both enzyme activities are essential. Conversely, stable transfection leading to a dominant-positive P13K in non-transformed fibroblasts is sufficient to induce macropinocytosis. Combination of experiments allows to conclude that P13K and PLC act in sequential order. In non-polarized cells expressing a thermosensitive v-Src mutant, v-Src kinase activation accelerates fluid-phase endocytosis. In polarized MDCK cells, this stimulation occurs selectively at the apical domain and the response is selectively abrogated by pharmacological inhibitors of P13K and PLC. Thus, two paradigmatic oncogenes cause constitutive macropinocytosis. For v-Src, this response is polarized at the apical membrane. It is suggested that, in enterocytes that do not normally phagocytose, the P13K-PLC signalling pathway leading to selective induction of macropinocytosis at the luminal surface has been subverted by enteropathogenic bacteria to penetrate via "spacious phagosomes".

[PMID: 15533943]
Previously, we reported that fluid-phase endocytosis of native LDL by PMA-activated human monocytederived macrophages converted these macrophages into cholesterol-enriched foam cells (Kruth, H. S., Huang, W., Ishii, I., and Zhang, W. Y. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 34573-34580). Uptake of fluid by cells can occur either by micropinocytosis within vesicles (<0.1 microm diameter) or by macropinocytosis within vacuoles ( approximately 0.5-5.0 microm) named macropinosomes. The current investigation has identified macropinocytosis as the pathway for fluid-phase LDL endocytosis and determined signaling and cytoskeletal components involved in this LDL endocytosis. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor, LY294002, which inhibits macropinocytosis but does not inhibit micropinocytosis, completely blocked PMA-activated macrophage uptake of fluid and LDL. Also, nystatin and filipin, inhibitors of micropinocytosis from lipid-raft plasma membrane domains, both failed to inhibit PMA-stimulated macrophage cholesterol accumulation. Time-lapse video phase-contrast microscopy and time-lapse digital confocal-fluorescence microscopy with fluorescent DiI-LDL showed that PMA-activated macrophages took up LDL in the fluid phase by macropinocytosis. Macropinocytosis of LDL depended on Rho GTPase signaling, actin, and microtubules. Bafilomycin A1, the vacuolar H+-ATPase inhibitor, inhibited degradation of LDL and caused accumulation of undegraded LDL within macropinosomes and multivesicular body endosomes. LDL in multivesicular body endosomes was concentrated >40-fold over its concentration in the culture medium consistent with macropinosome shrinkage by maturation into multivesicular body endosomes. Macropinocytosis of LDL taken up in the fluid phase without receptor-mediated binding of LDL is a novel endocytic pathway that generates macrophage foam cells. Macropinocytosis in macrophages and possibly other vascular cells is a new pathway to target for modulating foam cell formation in atherosclerosis.

[PMID: 32745890]
Macropinocytosis is increasingly recognized for its versatile adaptations and functions as a highly conserved, ubiquitous pathway for the bulk uptake of fluid, particulate cargo, and membranes. Innate immune cells and transformed cancer cells share the capacity for both constitutive and induced macropinocytosis, which is used for immune surveillance, ingestion of pathogens, immune response shaping, and enhancement of scavenging for nutrients as fuel for cell survival and proliferation. Immunology and cancer biology are leading a resurgence of interest in defining the molecular and physiological regulation of macropinocytosis, partly in pursuit of ways to control macropinocytic uptake in disease settings. New approaches, including high-resolution live imaging, screening of cell surface molecular inventories, biophysics, and exploration of cell microenvironments, have converged to provide new insights into macropinosome induction, formation, and maturation. Recent studies reveal mechanisms for fluid control in and by macrophage macropinosomes that impinge on membrane trafficking and cell migration. EGFR, PTEN, V-ATPase, syndecan 1, and galectin-3 have roles variably in the metabolic regulation of Ras or PI3K signaling for Rac1-mediated macropinocytosis in cancer. These molecular pathways and mechanisms contribute to the impressive adaptability of macropinocytosis in many cells and tissues and in disease.

[PMID: 31924779]
Macropinocytosis is an evolutionarily-conserved, large-scale, fluid-phase form of endocytosis that has been ascribed different functions including antigen presentation in macrophages and dendritic cells, regulation of receptor density in neurons, and regulation of tumor growth under nutrient-limiting conditions. However, whether macropinocytosis regulates the expansion of non-transformed mammalian cells is unknown. Here we show that primary mouse and human T cells engage in macropinocytosis that increases in magnitude upon T cell activation to support T cell growth even under amino acid (AA) replete conditions. Mechanistically, macropinocytosis in T cells provides access of extracellular AA to an endolysosomal compartment to sustain activation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) that promotes T cell growth. Our results thus implicate a function of macropinocytosis in mammalian cell growth beyond Ras-transformed tumor cells via sustained mTORC1 activation.

[PMID: 34755081]
Macropinocytosis refers to the non-specific uptake of extracellular fluid, which plays ubiquitous roles in cell growth, immune surveillance, and virus entry. Despite its widespread occurrence, it remains unclear how its initial cup-shaped plasma membrane extensions form without any external solid support, as opposed to the process of particle uptake during phagocytosis. Here, by developing a computational framework that describes the coupling between the bistable reaction-diffusion processes of active signaling patches and membrane deformation, we demonstrated that the protrusive force localized to the edge of the patches can give rise to a self-enclosing cup structure, without further assumptions of local bending or contraction. Efficient uptake requires a balance among the patch size, magnitude of protrusive force, and cortical tension. Furthermore, our model exhibits cyclic cup formation, coexistence of multiple cups, and cup-splitting, indicating that these complex morphologies self-organize via a common mutually-dependent process of reaction-diffusion and membrane deformation.

[PMID: 30617109]
Macropinocytosis is an actin-driven process of large-scale and non-specific fluid uptake used for feeding by some cancer cells and the macropinocytosis model organism <i>Dictyostelium discoideum</i> In <i>Dictyostelium</i>, macropinocytic cups are organized by 'macropinocytic patches' in the plasma membrane. These contain activated Ras, Rac and phospholipid PIP3, and direct actin polymerization to their periphery. We show that a <i>Dictyostelium</i> Akt (PkbA) and an SGK (PkbR1) protein kinase act downstream of PIP3 and, together, are nearly essential for fluid uptake. This pathway enables the formation of larger macropinocytic patches and macropinosomes, thereby dramatically increasing fluid uptake. Through phosphoproteomics, we identify a RhoGAP, GacG, as a PkbA and PkbR1 target, and show that it is required for efficient macropinocytosis and expansion of macropinocytic patches. The function of Akt and SGK in cell feeding through control of macropinosome size has implications for cancer cell biology.

[PMID: 30333835]
Macropinocytosis has received increasing attention in recent years for its various roles in nutrient acquisition, immune surveillance, and virus and cancer pathologies. In most cases macropinocytosis is initiated by the sudden increase in an external stimulus such as a growth factor. This "induced" form of macropinocytosis has been the subject of much of the work addressing its mechanism and function over the years. An alternative, "constitutive" form of macropinocytosis restricted to primary innate immune cells also exists, although its mechanism has remained severely understudied. This mini-review focuses on the very recent advances that have shed new light on the initiation, formation and functional relevance of constitutive macropinocytosis in primary innate immune cells. An emphasis is placed on how this new understanding of constitutive macropinocytosis is helping to define the sentinel function of innate immune cells including polarized macrophages and dendritic cells.

[PMID: 30966999]
Macropinocytosis is a prevalent and essential pathway in macrophages where it contributes to anti-microbial responses and innate immune cell functions. Cell surface ruffles give rise to phagosomes and to macropinosomes as multi-functional compartments that contribute to environmental sampling, pathogen entry, plasma membrane turnover and receptor signalling. Rapid, high resolution, lattice light sheet imaging demonstrates the dynamic nature of macrophage ruffling. Pathogen-mediated activation of surface and endosomal Toll-like receptors (TLRs) in macrophages upregulates macropinocytosis. Here, using multiple forms of imaging and microscopy, we track membrane-associated, fluorescently-tagged Rab8a expressed in live macrophages, using a variety of cell markers to demonstrate Rab8a localization and its enrichment on early macropinosomes. Production of a novel biosensor and its use for quantitative FRET analysis in live cells, pinpoints macropinosomes as the site for TLR-induced activation of Rab8a. We have previously shown that TLR signalling, cytokine outputs and macrophage programming are regulated by the GTPase Rab8a with PI3 Kγ as its effector. Finally, we highlight another effector, the phosphatase OCRL, which is located on macropinosomes and interacts with Rab8a, suggesting that Rab8a may operate on multiple levels to modulate phosphoinositides in macropinosomes. These findings extend our understanding of macropinosomes as regulatory compartments for innate immune function in macrophages. This article is part of the Theo Murphy meeting issue 'Macropinocytosis'.

[PMID: 27352861]
Macropinocytosis is a means by which eukaryotic cells ingest extracellular liquid and dissolved molecules. It is widely conserved amongst cells that can take on amoeboid form and, therefore, appears to be an ancient feature that can be traced back to an early stage of evolution. Recent advances have highlighted how this endocytic process can be subverted during pathology - certain cancer cells use macropinocytosis to feed on extracellular protein, and many viruses and bacteria use it to enter host cells. Prion and prion-like proteins can also spread and propagate from cell to cell through macropinocytosis. Progress is being made towards using macropinocytosis therapeutically, either to deliver drugs to or cause cell death by inducing catastrophically rapid fluid uptake. Mechanistically, the Ras signalling pathway plays a prominent and conserved activating role in amoebae and in mammals; mutant amoebae with abnormally high Ras activity resemble tumour cells in their increased capacity for growth using nutrients ingested through macropinocytosis. This Commentary takes a functional and evolutionary perspective to highlight progress in understanding and use of macropinocytosis, which is an ancient feeding process used by single-celled phagotrophs that has now been put to varied uses by metazoan cells and is abused in disease states, including infection and cancer.

[PMID: 29085336]
Oncogenic mutations, such as Ras mutations, drive not only enhanced proliferation but also the metabolic adaptations that confer to cancer cells the ability to sustain cell growth in a harsh tumor microenvironment. These adaptations might represent metabolic vulnerabilities that can be exploited to develop novel and more efficient cancer therapies. Macropinocytosis is an evolutionarily conserved endocytic pathway that permits the internalization of extracellular fluid <i>via</i> large endocytic vesicles known as macropinosomes. Recently, macropinocytosis has been determined to function as a nutrient-scavenging pathway in Ras-driven cancer cells. Macropinocytic uptake of extracellular proteins, and their further degradation within endolysosomes, provides the much-needed amino acids that fuel cancer cell metabolism and tumor growth. Here, we review the molecular mechanisms that govern the process of macropinocytosis, as well as discuss recent work that provides evidence of the important role of macropinocytosis as a nutrient supply pathway in cancer cells.

[PMID: 14732047]
Macropinocytosis is a form of endocytosis that accompanies cell surface ruffling. It is distinct in many ways from the better characterized micropinocytosis, which includes clathrin-coated vesicle endocytosis and small uncoated vesicles. Because macropinosomes are relatively large, they provide an efficient route for non-selective endocytosis of solute macromolecules. This route may facilitate MHC-class-II-restricted antigen presentation by dendritic cells. Because the ruffling that leads to macropinocytosis is regulated, it has been exploited by some pathogenic bacteria as a novel route for entry into cells.

[PMID: 27503856]
Macropinocytosis is a normal cellular process by which cells internalize extracellular fluids and nutrients from their environment and is one strategy that Ras-transformed pancreatic cancer cells use to increase uptake of amino acids to meet the needs of rapid growth. Paradoxically, in non-Ras transformed medulloblastoma brain tumors, we have shown that expression and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase TrkA overactivates macropinocytosis, resulting in the catastrophic disintegration of the cell membrane and in tumor cell death. The molecular basis of this uncontrolled form of macropinocytosis has not been previously understood. Here, we demonstrate that the overactivation of macropinocytosis is caused by the simultaneous activation of two TrkA-mediated pathways: (i) inhibition of RhoB via phosphorylation at Ser(185) by casein kinase 1, which relieves actin stress fibers, and (ii) FRS2-scaffolded Src and H-Ras activation of RhoA, which stimulate actin reorganization and the formation of lamellipodia. Since catastrophic macropinocytosis results in brain tumor cell death, improved understanding of the mechanisms involved will facilitate future efforts to reprogram tumors, even those resistant to apoptosis, to die.

[PMID: 30725454]
Macropinocytosis has emerged as an important nutrient supply pathway that sustains cell growth of cancer cells within the nutrient-poor tumor microenvironment. By internalizing extracellular fluid through this bulk endocytic pathway, albumin is supplied to the cancer cells, which, after degradation, serves as an amino acid source to meet the high nutrient demands of these highly proliferating cells. Here, we describe a streamlined protocol for visualization and quantitation of macropinosomes in adherent cancer cells grown in vitro. The determination of the "macropinocytic index" provides a tool for measuring the extent to which this internalization pathway is utilized within the cancer cells and allows for comparison between different cell lines and treatments. The protocol provided herein has been optimized for reproducibility and is readily adaptable to multiple conditions and settings.

[PMID: 27647881]
Macropinocytosis is an ancient mechanism that allows cells to harvest nutrients from extracellular media, which also allows immune cells to sample antigens from their surroundings. During macropinosome formation, bulk plasma membrane is internalized with all its integral proteins. It is vital for cells to salvage these proteins before degradation, but the mechanisms for sorting them are not known. Here we describe the evolutionarily conserved recruitment of the WASH (WASP and SCAR homolog) complex to both macropinosomes and phagosomes within a minute of internalization. Using Dictyostelium, we demonstrate that WASH drives protein sorting and recycling from macropinosomes and is thus essential to maintain surface receptor levels and sustain phagocytosis. WASH functionally interacts with the retromer complex at both early and late phases of macropinosome maturation, but mediates recycling via retromer-dependent and -independent pathways. WASH mutants consequently have decreased membrane levels of integrins and other surface proteins. This study reveals an important pathway enabling cells to sustain macropinocytosis without bulk degradation of plasma membrane components.

[PMID: 17760832]
Macropinocytosis defines a series of events initiated by extensive plasma membrane reorganization or ruffling to form an external macropinocytic structure that is then enclosed and internalized. The process is constitutive in some organisms and cell types but in others it is only pronounced after growth factor stimulation. Internalized macropinosomes share many features with phagosomes and both are distinguished from other forms of pinocytic vesicles by their large size, morphological heterogeneity and lack of coat structures. A paucity of information is available on other distinguishing features for macropinocytosis such as specific marker proteins and drugs that interfere with its mechanism over other endocytic processes. This has hampered efforts to characterize the dynamics of this pathway and to identify regulatory proteins that are expressed in order to allow it to proceed. Upon internalization, macropinosomes acquire regulatory proteins common to other endocytic pathways, suggesting that their identities as unique structures are short-lived. There is however less consensus regarding the overall fate of the macropinosome cargo or its limiting membrane and processes such as fusion, tubulation, recycling and regulated exocytosis have all been implicated in shaping the macropinosome and directing cargo traffic. Macropinocytosis has also been implicated in the internalization of cell penetrating peptides that are of significant interest to researchers aiming to utilize their translocation abilities to deliver therapeutic entities such as genes and proteins into cells. This review focuses on recent findings on the regulation of macropinocytosis, the intracellular fate of the macropinosome and discusses evidence for the role of this pathway as a mechanism of entry for cell penetrating peptides.