[PMID: 11785652]
Her-2/neu belongs to the family of tyrosine kinase transmembrane proteins whose overexpression has been associated with a poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer. The product of this proto-oncogene is overexpressed in 25-30% of human breast cancer and is the target of selective immunotherapy. Concerned about the ethnic differences on the expression of this oncogene, we have evaluated 143 consecutive specimens of primary breast cancer diagnosed in San Pablo Hospital, Puerto Rico. The specimens were analyzed for Her-2/neu expression using immunohistochemistry assays (Hercept test). We have related the expression of hormone receptor status, percent cells in S phase, DNA ploidy, tumor size, nodal status and menopausal state with the Her2/neu expression. Out of 143 specimens, 28 overexpressed the Her-2/neu (19.6%). Of the Her/2 negative 30/114 (26%) were estrogen receptor negative as compared to 9/27 (33%) (p = 0.464). The degree of aneuploidy was abnormal in 25/104 (24%) in the Her-2/neu negative vs 11/27 (41%) p = 0.083. The percent cell in DNA synthesis was high in 16/77 (21%) in Her-2/neu negative vs 4/15 (27%) p = 0.613. The tumor size was greater than 2 cm in 35/106 (33%) in Her-2/neu negative vs 9/23 (39%) p = 0.575. In the progesterone specimens negative for Her2, 44/114 (39%) were Her2/neu negative vs 15/27 (56%) p = 0.108. No differences were seen regarding menopausal status, age and nuclear grading. A trend favoring abnormal aneuploidy in Her2/neu positive was seen. Nodal involvement was significantly associated with Her2/neu overexpression. (p = 0.037). Although the incidence of Her2 overexpression found in this database was somewhat lower than the one reported in the literature, this might also be due to the small cohort examined or to the technique utilized.

[PMID: 12767812]
The EGF family of receptors belongs to the tyrosine kinase receptor (TKR) family and plays an important role during embryonic and postnatal development and also in the progression of tumors. Her-2/neu/c-erbB-2, a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor family, can be cleaved into a soluble extra cellular domain (ECD) and a membrane-bound stub fragment. Her-2 ECD from a breast cancer cell line SKBR3 was immunopurified and analyzed with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) and carboxyl terminal amino acid sequencing. A sequence within the juxtamembrane region (only 11 amino acid residues) PAEQR ASP was identified most likely as a primary site of cleavage, PA EQRASP as a minor site, that generate the ECD. The sites of cleavage are within the signature motif P/GX(5-7)P/G highly conserved in the EGF receptor family.

[PMID: 30312728]
Overexpression of the tight junction protein Junctional Adhesion Molecule-A (JAM-A) has been linked to aggressive disease in breast and other cancers, but JAM-targeting drugs remain elusive. Screening of a natural compound library identified the antibiotic Tetrocarcin-A as a novel downregulator of JAM-A and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) protein expression in breast cancer cells. Lysosomal inhibition partially rescued the downregulation of JAM-A and HER2 caused by Tetrocarcin-A, and attenuated its cytotoxic activity. Tetrocarcin-A treatment or JAM-A silencing reduced AKT and ERK phosphorylation, inhibited c-FOS phosphorylation at Threonine-232 (its transcriptional regulation site), inhibited nuclear localization of c-FOS, and downregulated expression of the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAP). This was accompanied by Tetrocarcin-A-induced caspase-dependent apoptosis. To begin evaluating the potential clinical relevance of our findings, we extended our studies to other models. Encouragingly, Tetrocarcin-A downregulated JAM-A expression and caused cytotoxicity in primary breast cells and lung cancer stem cells, and inhibited the growth of xenografts in a semi-in vivo model involving invasion across the chicken egg chorioallantoic membrane. Taken together, our data suggest that Tetrocarcin-A warrants future evaluation as a novel cancer therapeutic by virtue of its ability to downregulate JAM-A expression, reduce tumorigenic signaling and induce apoptosis.

[PMID: 10480346]
The HER2 protein, a member of the epidermal growth factor family, is encoded by the protooncogene c-erbB-2. Its overexpression, occurring in approximately one-third of all breast carcinomas, is associated with a poor prognosis. A humanized mouse antibody against HER2 has been developed by genetic engineering. Here an unspecific human IgG was connected to the recognizing mouse IgG fragment. The allergization typical for allogeneic antibodies does not take place in this context. The effectiveness of this antibody has been confirmed by two international prospective phase III trials that tested it alone and combined with chemotherapy. Both modes of application increased the response rates and the time to progression. Side-effects were rare except for a high rate of cardiac dysfunction when the antibody was combined with anthracyclines. The effectiveness and negligible side-effects of the chimeric antibody against HER2 (Herceptin) render it a valuable tool in the treatment of breast cancer.

[PMID: 25620423]
HER2, a member of the human ErbB protein family belonging to receptor tyrosine kinases, plays important roles in regulating crucial cellular processes, including cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation. A missense mutation, L755P, in the HER2 kinase domain has been involved in lung cancer in humans and exhibits reduced response to lapatinib therapy. However, the detailed mechanism of how the HER2 L755P mutation causes drug resistance to lapatinib remains elusive. Here, molecular docking, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, binding free energy calculations [molecular mechanics and generalized Born/surface area (MM-GBSA)] were performed to reveal the mechanism of drug resistance due to the HER2 L755P mutation. MD simulations revealed that the L755P mutation caused structural changes in the regions of helix αC, the glycine-rich loop, and the activation loop, thereby leading to the loss of interactions between the solubilizing group of lapatinib and HER2. Moreover, MM-GBSA calculations suggested that hydrophobic interactions between lapatinib and HER2 contribute most to the binding affinity, and that the L755P mutation could result in a less energetically favorable HER2/lapatinib complex. This may weaken the binding of lapatinib to the mutated HER2, thereby leading to the emergence of drug resistance. This study offers a structural explanation for the effect of the L755P mutation on the HER2/lapatinib complex.

[PMID: 33202212]
HER2 (Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2), also known as ERBB2, CD340, and Neu protooncogene, is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGRF) family. Members of the ERBB family, including HER2, activate molecular cascades that stimulate proliferation and migration of cancer cells, as well as their resistance to the anticancer therapy. These proteins are often overexpressed and/or mutated in various cancer types and represent promising targets for the anti-cancer therapy. Currently, anti-HER2 drugs have been approved for the treatment of several types of solid tumors. HER2-specific therapy includes monoclonal antibodies and low-molecular weight inhibitors of tyrosine kinase receptors, such as lapatinib, neratinib, and pyrotinib. In addition to the activation of molecular pathways responsible for cell proliferation and survival under stress conditions, HER2 directly regulates programmed cell death. Here, we review the studies focused on the involvement of HER2 in various signaling pathways and its role in the regulation of apoptosis.

[PMID: 30384340]
Herceptin is a humanized monoclonal antibody that selectively binds to the extracellular domain of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Herceptin has an important role in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer when used in the neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and metastatic settings, and in the treatment of HER2-positive metastatic gastric cancer, and gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma. Prior to intravenous infusion, Herceptin must be reconstituted with sterile water for injection and then diluted in intravenous bags with normal saline. The objective of this study was to test the in-use physicochemical stability of the Herceptin drug product after dilution in 0.9% sodium chloride in commercial polyvinylchloride, and polyolefin/ polyethylene/polypropylene infusion bags over the course of a 7-day storage at 2°C to 8°C followed by 24 hours of storage at 30°C with ambient light exposure. Three batches of Herceptin were reconstituted to yield a 21-mg/mL solution that was stored for 48 hours at 2°C to 8°C prior to dilution with 0.9% sodium chloride to create low (0.24-mg/mL) and high (3.84-mg/mL) concentration solutions that were then tested in simulated infusions with a polyvinylchloride or polyolefin/polyethylene/polypropylene infusion bag. Samples for analysis were obtained immediately after dilution of the reconstituted solution (T0), after 7 days of storage at 5°C (T7), after 1 further day of storage at 30°C (T7+1), and after administration through intravenous tubing (Tend). Control samples were obtained from bags containing only 0.9% sodium chloride at each time point. For experiments with both infusion bags, all samples were practically free from particles, were colorless, and had low numbers of subvisible particles with no differences between control and experimental samples. No change in turbidity was detected between T0 and Tend for low and high-concentration samples for each batch. The pH values remained consistent between T0 and T7+1, and osmolality values were consistent across low-concentration and high-concentration samples. Protein content, size, and potency remained consistent throughout storage and simulated infusion. In conclusion, Herceptin remains physicochemically stable for 7 days when stored at 2°C to 8°C, followed by an additional 24 hours at 30°C when diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride and stored in commercially available polyvinylchloride or polyolefin/polyethylene/polypropylene infusion bags.

[PMID: 11180765]
The product of the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene, HER2, is the second member of the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family of tyrosine kinase receptors and has been suggested to be a ligand orphan receptor. Ligand-dependent heterodimerization between HER2 and another HER family member, HER1, HER3 or HER4, activates the HER2 signaling pathway. The intracellular signaling pathway of HER2 is thought to involve ras-MAPK, MAPK-independent S6 kinase and phospholipase C-gamma signaling pathways. However, the biological consequences of the activation of these pathways are not yet completely known. Amplification of the HER2 gene and overexpression of the HER2 protein induces cell transformation and has been demonstrated in 10% to 40% of human breast cancer. HER2 overexpression has been suggested to associate with tumor aggressiveness, prognosis and responsiveness to hormonal and cytotoxic agents in breast cancer patients. These findings indicate that HER2 is an appropriate target for tumor-specific therapies. A number of approaches have been investigated: (1) a humanized monoclonal antibody against HER2, rhuMAbHER2 (trastuzumab), which is already approved for clinical use in the treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer; (2) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as emodin, which block HER2 phosphorylation and its intracellullar signaling; (3) active immunotherapy, such as vaccination; and (4) heat shock protein (Hsp) 90-associated signal inhibitors, such as radicicol derivatives, which induce degradation of tyrosine kinase receptors, such as HER2.

[PMID: 16800251]
Metastatic breast cancer is an incurable disease in a very high percentage of patients. Despite new progress in endocrine and other systemic therapies, this evidence remains challenging for patients and clinicians. HER2 protein is a member of the epidermal growth factor family of transmembrane receptors. HER2 is overexpressed in approximately 20% to 30% of breast cancers. Overexpression of HER2 has been shown to be associated with increased tumor proliferation and relative resistance to some types of chemotherapy and hormonal therapies. Trastuzumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against HER2 protein, has been shown to be an efficacious and well tolerated treatment for HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer, both as a single agent and when it is used in combination with chemotherapy.

[PMID: 19279475]
Erb-B1 (epidermal growth factor receptor, EGFR) and Erb-B2 (HER-2) are two of the best-characterized members in the EGFR pathway. In many tumor types, overexpression of these proteins is associated with enhanced malignant potential. The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic impact of EGFR and HER-2 protein expression on colorectal cancer. Immunohistochemistry was carried out in paraffin-embedded specimens of 115 colorectal carcinomas for the assessment of EGFR and HER-2 expression. Immunostaining for EGFR was graded negative, weak or strong according to extension and staining intensity. The results were correlated with traditional clinicopathologic parameters and patients' outcome. The mean survival time was 64 (range 9-78) months in the EGFR-negative group, 166 (range 2-293) months in the group with a low EGFR expression, and 51 (range 4-71) months in the group with a high EGFR expression. The median survival time was 31 (range 2-114) months in the HER-2 negative group, and 30 (range 4-293) months in the HER-2 positive group. None of the clinicopathologic parameters or patient prognoses had statistically significant association with EGFR or HER-2 expression. Conventional immunohistochemistry was unable to reveal any association between EGFR or HER-2 expression and outcome predicted by the biologic role of EGFR in tumor behavior and the established prognostic role of HER-2 in breast cancer.

[PMID: 18505086]
The epidermal growth factor family members: EGF, EGFR and the c-erbB-2(HER-2/neu) gene product have been found to play a role in carcinomas of the stomach, liver, breast, ovary and lungs. Recent reports have indicated that they are also involved in the growth of pancreatic ductal carcinoma, its invasiveness and metastasis. Thirty-six patients with pancreatic ductal carcinoma were analysed with respect to sex, age, histological type, malignancy grade (G), pTN status (pTN), local lymph node involvement and distant metastasis. The tumor levels of EGF, EGFR and c-erbB-2 expression were determined immunohistochemically. Expression of c-erbB-2 was observed in 24/36 cases, EGF in 13/36 cases and EGFR in 18/36 cases. Overexpression of EGF and EGFR was associated with metastasis to lymph nodes and other organs. A correlation was also found between EGF expression and the presence of EGFR in the tumour. The expression of c-erbB-2 protein was not found to correlate with any parameters. EGF and EGFR play a key role in neoplastic spread through lymph node involvement and metastasis to other organs.

[PMID: 27993109]
Overexpression and amplification of the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) occur in 20% of total breast carcinomas. HER2-overexpression is implicated in disease initiation and progression and associated with poor prognosis. Trastuzumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, is the standard HER2-targeted therapy for early and metastatic HER2-amplified breast cancer patients. Trastuzumab has significantly increased clinical benefit in HER2+ metastatic and adjuvant settings; however, it is not effective for many patients due to primary or acquired resistance to the drug. During the last decade, many studies have revealed a number of novel molecular traits of HER2+ breast cancer, allowing us to uncover the molecular mechanisms involved in trastuzumab resistance and develop strategies to overcome resistance to therapy. In this review, we comprehensively addressed the current achievements in preclinical studies; we discussed molecular mechanisms of acquired trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ breast cancer models and potential therapeutic approaches based on the molecular features for HER2+ breast cancer. Enhanced understanding of the molecular profiles in HER2+ breast cancer may lead to the identification of novel biomarkers for the development of diagnostic approaches and improvement of therapeutic targets for the prevention and treatment of trastuzumab resistant HER2+ breast cancer.

[PMID: 21805036]
The human epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (HER) family consists of four receptors that bind to ligands sharing an EGF-like motif. The HER family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands (EGF family) are known to play a significant role in gastrointestinal cancer. In particular, the EGF receptor, HER1, is one of the main candidates for the molecular-targeted therapy of colon cancer, and HER2 is a candidate for the treatment of gastric cancer which overexpresses HER2. In contrast, the role of the HER and EGF families in malignant lymphoma has not been fully elucidated. In this study, we investigated the expression and function of the HER and EGF families in lymphoma cell lines and tumor samples. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed that the ligands for HER1 were mainly expressed in gastric cancer and colon cancer cell lines, but not in lymphoma cell lines. On the other hand, the EGF family member, neuregulin (NRG) 4, was highly expressed in lymphoma cell lines. Immunohistochemical analyses of malignant lymphoma clinical samples revealed that NRG4 and HER4 were mainly expressed in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and follicular lymphoma. Immunoprecipitation of Raji and Daudi cell lines revealed that recombinant NRG4 induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of HER4. Additionally, recombinant NRG4 activated the proliferation of lymphoma cell lines. These findings suggest that the NRG4-HER4 axis plays a major role in the proliferation of malignant lymphoma cells in the gastrointestinal tract.

[PMID: 22505536]
HER-2/neu, also known as c-erbB-2/neu, is an oncogene located in chromosome 17 which encodes HER-2/neu, a transmembrane protein belonging to the EGFR family. The external domain of this protein is released by the cell and can be studied in serum by immunoassay. HER-2/neu in serum is a specific tumor marker and only slight elevations may be found in the absence of malignancy, mainly in association with liver diseases. Likewise, the highest concentrations of this oncoprotein are found in patients with breast cancer, but lower concentrations may be found in other malignancies, particularly ovarian, prostate and lung cancer (mainly adenocarcinomas). HER-2/neu assay sensitivity in patients with untreated primary loco-regional breast cancer is <10% and seems to be related to overexpression in tissue as well as to the most important prognostic factors: tumor size and nodal involvement. Serial HER-2/neu determinations after surgery seem to be useful in the early diagnosis of recurrence, mainly in patients with HER-2/neu overexpression in tissue, but additional studies are necessary to confirm these results. HER-2/neu sensitivity (proportion of patients with abnormal values) in patients with metastasis is around 40%-45%, with a clear relationship to tissue overexpression and to site (higher in visceral metastases) and number of metastases. The clinical utility of HER-2/neu in patients with advanced disease is mainly for therapeutic monitoring. Likewise, in most of the studies published, a relationship has been found between serum HER-2/neu levels (either pretreatment or at follow-up) with tumor response.

[PMID: 11694782]
Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2/erbB-2) belongs to a family of four transmembrane receptors involved in signal transduction pathways that regulate cell growth and differentiation. Overexpression/amplification of HER2 is associated with malignancy and a poor prognosis in breast cancer. HER2 acts as a networking receptor that mediates signaling to cancer cells, causing them to proliferate. HER receptors exist as monomers but dimerize on ligand binding. HER ligands are bivalent growth factor molecules whose low-affinity site binds to HER2. No HER2-specific ligand has been identified but HER2 is the preferred heterodimerization partner for other HER receptors. HER2-containing heterodimers are relatively long-lived and potent. HER3 has no inherent activity and is the major and most potent dimerization partner of HER2. HER2 overexpression biases the formation of HER2-containing heterodimers, leading to enhanced responsiveness to stromal growth factors and oncogenic transformation. Removal of HER2 from the cell surface or inhibition of its intrinsic enzymatic activity may reduce oncogenicity. Our research suggests that the antitumor efficacy of HER2-specific antibodies such as Herceptin relates to their ability to direct HER2 to a Cbl- dependent endocytosis and degradation pathway. The reported clinical therapeutic efficacy of anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies in breast cancer highlights the importance of understanding the biology of HER2.

[PMID: 17867585]
HER-2 belongs to a family of four transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases that mediate growth, differentiation and survival of cells. HER-2 overexpression and amplification occurs in approximately 15 to 25 % of breast cancers and is associated with aggressive tumour behaviour. Herceptin (trastuzumab), a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the extracellular domain of the HER-2 receptor, has been shown to have clinical activity in HER-2-positive advanced breast cancer when administered alone or in combination with chemotherapy. It has been approved for HER-2-positive metastatic breast cancer by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 1998 and in the countries of the European Union in 2000. Recently, promising results of the four randomized international multicenter trials evaluating the therapeutic benefit of Herceptin in the adjuvant treatment of HER-2-positive primary breast cancer have been reported. Data of the first planned interim analysis of the studies showed significantly improved disease-free survival in patients assigned to one year of Herceptin compared to the control groups even after short term follow up. These results caused an immediate wave of demand for Herceptin in adjuvant therapy. Results of these studies are critically reviewed. Furthermore, the available preliminary results from studies using Herceptin in the primary (neoadjuvant) therapy of HER-2-positive breast cancer are addressed and possible implications for HER-2 testing are discussed.

[PMID: 16707458]
Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor family member Her-2/neu in breast cancer leads to autophosphorylation of the receptor and induction of multiple downstream signaling pathways, including the Akt kinase to nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) cascade that is associated with poor prognosis. Previously, we showed that the green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) inhibits growth of NF639 Her-2/neu-driven breast cancer cells via reducing receptor autophosphorylation and downstream Akt and NF-kappaB activities. Interestingly, upon prolonged culture in the presence of EGCG, cells resistant to the polyphenol could be isolated. Here, we report that resistant cells have lost tyrosine phosphorylation on the Her-2/neu receptor. Surprisingly, they displayed elevated NF-kappaB activity, and inhibition of this activity sensitized cells to EGCG. Data from microarray studies of the original and resistant NF639 populations of cells were subjected to Gene Set Enrichment Analysis pathway assessment, which revealed that the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway was activated in the resistant cells. Treatment of the resistant cells with the MAPK inhibitor U0216 reduced growth in soft agar and invasive phenotype, whereas the combination of EGCG and U0216 resulted in cells with a cobblestone epithelial phenotype. Thus, activation of the MAPK pathway mediates resistance to EGCG.

[PMID: 17536308]
The HER-2/neu oncogene encodes for a transmembrane glycoprotein with intracellular tyrosine kinase activity. The HER-2/neu receptor belongs to the family of epidermal growth factor receptors that are crucial in the activation of subcellular signal transduction pathways controlling epithelial cell growth and differentiation. Overexpression of HER-2/neu is observed in 20% to 40% of breast cancers and other solid tumors. Although information is limited, one study suggested that 15% of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) express HER-2/neu by immunohistochemistry (IHC); gene amplification by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was not investigated. Studies in this area are potentially significant owing to the role of recombinant monoclonal anti-HER-2/neu antibody traztuzumab (Herceptin) in the treatment of tumors. A retrospective clinicopathologic review of 49 patients with GBM with HER-2/neu IHC staining and HER-2/neu gene amplification by FISH was performed. The study included 44 patients (17 women, 27 men; age range 20 to 79 y, mean 57.9 y). Initial surgery involved tumor debulking or subtotal resection in 34 patients. Thirty-six patients received adjuvant radiation therapy and 19 patients received adjuvant chemotherapy. At follow-up (range 1.0 to 49.5 mo, mean 10.5 mo), 40 patients died with tumor and 4 patients were lost to follow-up. All tumors were negative for HER-2/neu protein by IHC and for HER-2/neu gene amplification by FISH. No GBM demonstrates HER-2/neu protein by IHC or amplification of the HER-2/neu gene by FISH. The HER-2/neu oncogene does not seem to play a role in the pathogenesis of GBM.

[PMID: 29389942]
HER-2 belongs to the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family. Via different signal transduction pathways, HER-2 regulates normal cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Recently, it was reported that MCF10A, BT474, and MDA-MB-231 cells bearing the HER2 K753E mutation were resistant to lapatinib. Present study revealed that HER-2 mutant K753E showed some contrasting behaviour as compared to wild, L768S and V773L HER-2 in complex with lapatinib while similar to previously known lapatinib resistant L755S HER-2 mutant. Lapatinib showed stable but reverse orientation in binding site of K753E and the highest binding energy among studied HER2-lapatinib complexes but slightly lesser than L755S mutant. Results indicate that K753E has similar profile as L755S mutant for lapatinib. The interacting residues were also found different from other three studied forms as revealed by free energy decomposition and ligplot analysis.

[PMID: 15173008]
HER-2 belongs to the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases, which has been implicated in a variety of cancers. Overexpression of HER-2 is seen in 25-30% of breast cancer patients and predicts a poor outcome in patients with primary disease. Trastuzumab (Herceptin), a monoclonal antibody to HER-2, is specifically approved for HER-2-positive breast cancer but is active only in a subset of these tumors. Blocking HER-2 function by a small molecule kinase inhibitor, therefore, represents an attractive alternate strategy to inhibit the growth of HER-2-positive tumors. HKI-272 is a potent inhibitor of HER-2 and is highly active against HER-2-overexpressing human breast cancer cell lines in vitro. It also inhibits the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase and the proliferation of EGFR-dependent cells. HKI-272 reduces HER-2 receptor autophosphorylation in cells at doses consistent with inhibition of cell proliferation and functions as an irreversible binding inhibitor, most likely by targeting a cysteine residue in the ATP-binding pocket of the receptor. In agreement with the predicted effects of HER-2 inactivation, HKI-272 treatment of cells results in inhibition of downstream signal transduction events and cell cycle regulatory pathways. This leads to arrest at the G(1)-S (Gap 1/DNA synthesis)-phase transition of the cell division cycle, ultimately resulting in decreased cell proliferation. In vivo, HKI-272 is active in HER-2- and EGFR-dependent tumor xenograft models when dosed orally on a once daily schedule. On the basis of its favorable preclinical pharmacological profile, HKI-272 has been selected as a candidate for additional development as an antitumor agent in breast and other HER-2-dependent cancers.

[PMID: 15920544]
The human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family of receptor tyrosine kinase has been extensively studied in breast cancer; however, systematic studies of EGFR gene amplification and protein overexpression in breast carcinoma are lacking. We studied EGFR gene amplification by chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) and protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 175 breast carcinomas, using tissue microarrays. Tumors with >5 EGFR gene copies per nucleus were interpreted as positive for gene amplification. Protein overexpression was scored according to standardized criteria originally developed for HER-2. EGFR mRNA levels, as measured by Affymetrix U133 Gene Chip microarray hybridization, were available in 63 of these tumors. HER-2 gene amplification by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and protein overexpression by immunohistochemistry were also studied. EGFR gene amplification (copy number range: 7-18; median: 12) was detected in 11/175 (6%) tumors, and protein overexpression was found in 13/175 (7%) tumors. Of the 11 tumors, 10 (91%) with gene amplification also showed EGFR protein overexpression (2+ or 3+ by immunohistochemistry). The EGFR mRNA level, based on Affymetrix U133 chip hybridization data, was increased relative to other breast cancer samples in three of the five tumors showing gene amplification. Exons 19 and 21 of EGFR, the sites of hotspot mutations in lung adenocarcinomas, were screened in the 11 EGFR-amplified tumors but no mutations were found. Three of these 11 tumors also showed HER-2 overexpression and gene amplification. Approximately 6% of breast carcinomas show EGFR amplification with EGFR protein overexpression and may be candidates for trials of EGFR-targeted antibodies or small inhibitory molecules.

[PMID: 26545934]
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a member of the HER family of proteins containing four receptor tyrosine kinases. It plays an important role in the pathogenesis of certain human cancers. In non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), HER2 amplification or mutations have been reported. However, little is known about the benefit of HER2-targeted therapy for NSCLCs harboring HER2 alterations. In this study, we investigated the antitumor effect of afatinib, an irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-HER2 dual inhibitor, in lung cancers harboring HER2 oncogene alterations, including novel HER2 mutations in the transmembrane domain, which we recently identified. Normal bronchial epithelial cells, BEAS-2B, ectopically overexpressing wild-type HER2 or mutants (A775insYVMA, G776VC, G776LC, P780insGSP, V659E, and G660D) showed constitutive autophosphorylation of HER2 and activation of downstream signaling. They were sensitive to afatinib, but insensitive to gefitinib. Furthermore, we examined the antitumor activity of afatinib and gefitinib in several NSCLC cell lines, and investigated the association between their genetic alterations and sensitivity to afatinib treatment. In HER2-altered NSCLC cells (H2170, Calu-3, and H1781), afatinib downregulated the phosphorylation of HER2 and EGFR as well as their downstream signaling, and induced an antiproliferative effect through G1 arrest and apoptotic cell death. In contrast, HER2- or EGFR-non-dependent NSCLC cells were insensitive to afatinib. In addition, these effects were confirmed in vivo by using a xenograft mouse model of HER2-altered lung cancer cells. Our results suggest that afatinib is a therapeutic option as a HER2-targeted therapy for NSCLC harboring HER2 amplification or mutations.

[PMID: 27426127]
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are a superfamily of transmembrane proteins that mediate intracellular signaling by phosphorylating substrate proteins involved in cell proliferation, survival, differentiation or migration. The Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor (HER) family belongs to the RTKs superfamily, and comprises four members: EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor), HER2, HER3 and HER4. Physiologically, these receptors are activated by the ligands of the EGF family. In solid tumors other mechanisms of activation, such as overexpression or molecular alterations have been reported, and have been linked to tumour initiation/progression. Because of that, several strategies have been developed to target HER receptors and include i) antibody-based therapies using monoclonal antibodies against the extracellular domain of these receptors, and ii) small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against the intracellular kinase domain. In this review we will provide basic information about biological aspects of HER receptors and their ligands as well as the therapeutic strategies to target them. We also summarize general mechanisms of resistance generated in patients to such anti-HER therapies.

[PMID: 19048033]
The human epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (HER) family members cooperate in malignancy. Of this family, HER2 does not bind growth factors and HER3 does not encode an active tyrosine kinase. This diversity creates difficulty in creating pan-specific therapeutic HER family inhibitors. We have identified single amino acid changes in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and HER3 which create high affinity sequestration of the cognate ligands, and may be used as receptor decoys to downregulate aberrant HER family activity. In silico modeling and high throughput mutagenesis were utilized to identify receptor mutants with very high ligand binding activity. A single mutation (T15S; EGFR subdomain I) enhanced affinity for EGF (two-fold), TGF-alpha (twenty-six-fold), and heparin-binding (HB)-EGF (six-fold). This indicates that T15 is an important, previously undescribed, negative regulatory amino acid for EGFR ligand binding. Another mutation (Y246A; HER 3 subdomain II) enhanced neuregulin (NRG)1-beta binding eight-fold, probably by interfering with subdomain II-IV interactions. Further work revealed that the HER3 subunit of an EGFR:HER3 heterodimer suppresses EGFR ligand binding. Optimization required reversing this suppression by mutation of the EGFR tether domain (G564A; subdomain IV). This mutation resulted in enhanced ligand binding (EGF, ten-fold; TGF-alpha, thirty-four-fold; HB-EGF, seventeen-fold; NRG1-beta, thirty-one-fold). This increased ligand binding was reflected in improved inhibition of in vitro tumor cell proliferation and tumor suppression in a human non-small cell lung cancer xenograft model. In conclusion, amino acid substitutions were identified in the EGFR and HER3 ECDs that enhance ligand affinity, potentially enabling a pan-specific therapeutic approach for downregulating the HER family in cancer.

[PMID: 15782071]
The human epidermal growth factor receptor (Her) family of receptor tyrosine kinases includes Her-1, Her-2, and Her-3. The overexpression of Her-1 and Her-2 have been reported previously in surface epithelial ovarian cancer. Although up to one-third of ovarian carcinomas have been found to have amplification or overexpression of Her-2, responses to trastuzumab therapy in these patients have been disappointing. In this study, we examined Her-1, Her-2, and Her- 3 protein expression as well as the frequency of Her-2 amplification in a series of 103 high-grade, advanced-stage (FIGO stage III or IV) ovarian surface epithelial carcinomas. Immunohistochemical staining using commercially available antibodies against Her-1-3 and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes against Her-2 and chromosome 17 centromere (CEP) were performed on a tissue microarray containing cores of tumor from 103 surface epithelial carcinomas (85 serous, 6 mixed surface epithelial, 5 clear cell, 3 endometrioid, 3 undifferentiated, 1 mucinous). Nine of 99 (9.1%) tumors were positive for Her-1 expression and 5 of 102 (4.9%) tumors were positive for Her-2 expression, with 1 showing strong immunoreactivity. None of the Her-1 positive tumors exhibited Her-2 immunoreactivity. There was no correlation between Her-1 or Her-2 expression and survival. Using Her-2:centromere fluorescence ratios of 2.0 or 1.5 as cutoffs in assessment of Her-2 amplification, 8 of 75 (10.7%) and 25 of 75 (33.3%) tumors, respectively, showed Her-2 amplification. Two of eight tumors that showed higher level (>2) Her-2 amplification by FISH also were positive for Her-2 by immunohistochemistry. Only 3 of 103 tumors expressed Her-3. Immunoreactivity for Her-1 and Her-2 was less frequently observed in this series than has been previously reported. The strong correlation between Her-2 immunostaining and amplification characteristic of breast carcinoma is not seen in ovarian carcinoma. These results indicated that few patients with ovarian carcinoma have tumors that would benefit from therapy targeted specifically against Her-1, Her-2, or Her-3.

[PMID: 7612897]
The family of protein kinases includes many oncogenes and growth factor receptors, many of which have been linked to the pathogenesis and progression of cancer. Protein tyrosine kinases such as HER-2/c-erbB-2 and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been linked specifically to breast cancer, and perturbations of HER-2 affect response to chemotherapy. We have reviewed the biology of protein kinases in human breast cancer, as well as their translational applications to breast cancer patients. We have studied the spectrum of protein kinases expressed in human breast cancer cells and have identified four protein kinases with potentially important functions in breast cancer: rak (src-related), TK5 (which we now designate JAK3), the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), and STK1 (human M015/CAK). We describe the potential significance of these genes in breast cancer, as well as our methodology for identifying and characterizing novel genes in breast cancer.

[PMID: 21896992]
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family members (EGFR, HER2, HER3 and HER4) have been extensively investigated for its possible involvement in cancer development and progression. In colorectal cancer (CRC) EGFR family has been found frequently over-expressed, thus therapy targeting EGFR has been developed. Interestingly, it has been observed that genetic variants in these receptors may alter the therapeutic efficacy of EGFR inhibitors. Polymorphic variants in members of the EGFR family could influence different biologic activities, such as ligands affinity, dimerization efficiency, kinase activity, expression levels, with a consequent impact in signalling pathways and cell behaviour. This study aimed to verify whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EGFR family members could represent susceptibility factors able to influence the risk to develop CRC. Peripheral blood of 70 Italian colon cancer patients and 72 healthy controls was used as a source of genomic DNA to investigate EGFR, HER2 and HER3 common non-synonymous SNPs. Genetic association tests were performed to verify a possible relationship with CRC. Evidence of genotype association was found for the R521K EGFR polymorphism under a dominant mode of inheritance (Mid-P=0.031). Genotypes with the variant allele of EGFR R521K SNP confer a risk reduction to develop CRC.