[PMID: 2461933]
Two different molecular species of protein methylases I (S-adenosylmethionine:protein-arginine N-methyltransferase, EC 2.1.1.23), one specific for myelin basic protein (MBP) and the other for histone, have been purified from calf brain to near homogeneity, as discerned by nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Although both methylases share some common properties, such as utilization of S-adenosyl-L-methionine as the methyl donor and methylation of protein-bound arginine residues, they are distinctly different from each other in molecular weight and in catalytic, as well as the immunological, properties. The MBP-specific protein methylase I (approximately 500 kDa) methylates MBP preferentially (Km = 2 X 10(-7) M) and histone to a much lesser extent (Km = 1 X 10(-4) M), while the histone-specific methylase I (approximately 275 kDa) methylates histone only. Both methylases exhibit two major subunit bands on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis: 100 and 72 kDa for the MBP-specific and 110 and 75 kDa for the histone-specific. At 0.5 mM p-chloromercuribenzoate, about 50% of the MBP-specific enzyme remained as active, while most of the histone-specific enzyme activity was lost. In 2 mM guanidine HCl, approximately 90% of the former enzyme activity remained while nearly complete inactivation of the latter enzyme was observed. The enzymes also exhibited quite different inactivation profiles toward high temperature (45-65 degrees C); MBP-enzyme was stable up to 50 degrees C and was rapidly inactivated at higher temperatures with an inflection point at about 57 degrees C. However, under the identical conditions, histone-enzyme was inactivated progressively and linearly in the same temperature range. Finally, Western immunoblot analysis of polyclonal antibodies directed against either enzyme exhibited no cross-reactivity with the other.

[PMID: 12819771]
SET domain protein methyltransferases catalyze the transfer of methyl groups from the cofactor S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) to specific lysine residues of protein substrates, such as the N-terminal tails of histones H3 and H4 and the large subunit of the Rubisco holoenzyme complex. The crystal structures of pea Rubisco large subunit methyltransferase (LSMT) in ternary complexes with either lysine or epsilon-N-methyllysine (MeLys) and the product S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) were determined to resolutions of 2.65 and 2.55 A, respectively. The zeta-methyl group of MeLys is bound to the enzyme via carbon-oxygen hydrogen bonds that play a key role in catalysis. The methyl donor and acceptor are aligned in a linear geometry for S(N)2 nucleophilic transfer of the methyl group during catalysis. Differences in hydrogen bonding between the MeLys epsilon-amino group and Rubisco LSMT and SET7/9 explain why Rubisco LSMT generates multiply methylated Lys, wheras SET7/9 generates only MeLys.

[PMID: 22561085]
The filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans carries a single gene for the S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) synthetase SasA, whereas many other organisms possess multiple SAM synthetases. The conserved enzyme catalyzes the reaction of methionine and ATP to the ubiquitous methyl group donor SAM. SAM is the main methyl group donor for methyltransferases to modify DNA, RNA, protein, metabolites, or phospholipid target substrates. We show here that the single A. nidulans SAM synthetase encoding gene sasA is essential. Overexpression of sasA, encoding a predominantly cytoplasmic protein, led to impaired development including only small sterile fruiting bodies which are surrounded by unusually pigmented auxiliary Hülle cells. Hülle cells are the only fungal cell type which does not contain significant amounts of SasA. Sterigmatocystin production is altered when sasA is overexpressed, suggesting defects in coordination of development and secondary metabolism. SasA interacts with various metabolic proteins including methionine or mitochondrial metabolic enzymes as well as proteins involved in fungal morphogenesis. SasA interaction to histone-2B might reflect a putative epigenetic link to gene expression. Our data suggest a distinct role of SasA in coordinating fungal secondary metabolism and development.

[PMID: 23086207]
Protein lysine methylation occurs extensively in the Crenarchaeota, a major kingdom in the Archaea. However, the enzymes responsible for this type of posttranslational modification have not been found. Here we report the identification and characterization of the first crenarchaeal protein lysine methyltransferase, designated aKMT, from the hyperthermophilic crenarchaeon Sulfolobus islandicus. The enzyme was capable of transferring methyl groups to selected lysine residues in a substrate protein using S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) as the methyl donor. aKMT, a non-SET domain protein, is highly conserved among crenarchaea, and distantly related homologs also exist in Bacteria and Eukarya. aKMT was active over a wide range of temperatures, from ~25 to 90 °C, with an optimal temperature at ~60 to 70 °C. Amino acid residues Y9 and T12 at the N terminus appear to be the key residues in the putative active site of aKMT, as indicated by sequence conservation and site-directed mutagenesis. Although aKMT was identified based on its methylating activity on Cren7, the crenarchaeal chromatin protein, it exhibited broad substrate specificity and was capable of methylating a number of recombinant Sulfolobus proteins overproduced in Escherichia coli. The finding of aKMT will help elucidate mechanisms underlining extensive protein lysine methylation and the functional significance of posttranslational protein methylation in crenarchaea.

[PMID: 20936105]
The low efficiency observed in cloning by nuclear transfer is related to an aberrant gene expression following errors in epigenetic reprogramming. Recent studies have focused on further understanding of the modifications that take place in the chromatin of embryos during the preimplantation period, through the use of chromatin modifying agents. The goal of these studies is to identify the factors involved in nuclear reprogramming and to adjust in vitro manipulations in order to better mimic in vivo conditions. Therefore, proper knowledge of epigenetic reprogramming is necessary to prevent possible epigenetic errors and to improve efficiency and the use of in vitro fertilization and cloning technologies in cattle and other species.

[PMID: 18693240]
Polycomb gene silencing requires histone methyltransferase activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which methylates lysine 27 of histone H3. Information on how PRC2 works is limited by lack of structural data on the catalytic subunit, Enhancer of zeste (E(Z)), and the paucity of E(z) mutant alleles that alter its SET domain. Here we analyze missense alleles of Drosophila E(z), selected for molecular study because of their dominant genetic effects. Four missense alleles identify key E(Z) SET domain residues, and a fifth is located in the adjacent CXC domain. Analysis of mutant PRC2 complexes in vitro, and H3-K27 methylation in vivo, shows that each SET domain mutation disrupts PRC2 histone methyltransferase. Based on known SET domain structures, the mutations likely affect either the lysine-substrate binding pocket, the binding site for the adenosylmethionine methyl donor, or a critical tyrosine predicted to interact with the substrate lysine epsilon-amino group. In contrast, the CXC mutant retains catalytic activity, Lys-27 specificity, and trimethylation capacity. Deletion analysis also reveals a functional requirement for a conserved E(Z) domain N-terminal to CXC and SET. These results identify critical SET domain residues needed for PRC2 enzyme function, and they also emphasize functional inputs from outside the SET domain.

[PMID: 17440941]
Evidence indicates that failure of nuclear transfer (NT) embryos to develop normally can be attributed, at least partially, to the use of a differentiated cell nucleus as the donor karyoplast. It has been hypothesized that blastocyst production and development to term of cloned embryos may differ between population doublings (PDs) of the same cell line as a consequence of changes in DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns during in vitro culture. The objective of this study was to determine gene expression patterns of the chromatin remodeling proteins DNA methyltransferase-1 (Dnmt1), methyl CpG binding protein-2 (MeCP2), and histone deacetyltransferse-1 (HDAC1), in addition, to measuring levels of DNA methylation and histone acetylation of bovine fibroblast cells at different PDs. Bovine fibroblast cell lines were established from four 50-day fetuses. Relative levels of Dnmt1, MeCP2, HDAC1, methylated DNA, and acetylated histone were analyzed at PDs 2, 7, 15, 30, 45, and 70. RNA levels of Dnmt1, HDAC1, and MeCP2 were examined using Q-PCR. Global levels of methylated DNA and acetylated histone were determined by incubation of fixed cells with an anti-5-methylcytidine and anti-acetyl-histone H3 antibody, respectively. Cells were labeled with a second antibody, counter-stained with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. These data demonstrate that chromatin remodeling protein mRNAs involved in epigenetic modifications are altered during in vitro culture. Methylated DNA and acetylated histone patterns of in vitro cells change with time in culture. Subsequent use of these cells for NT will provide insight as to how these epigenetic modifications affect reprogramming.

[PMID: 164278]
Protein methylase III (S-adenosylmethionine:proteinlysine methyltransferase; ED 2.1.1.25) and protein methylase I (S-adenosylmethionine:protein-arginine methyltransferase; EC 2.1.1.23) activities were examined in isolated nuclei and cytosol fraction, respectively, from various hepatomas with different growth rates. The enzyme activities of both enzymes paralleled the rates of tumor growth in fast- and moderately growing hepatomas. The parallelism was more evident with protein methylase I than with protein methylase III. While protein methylase III activity was elevated in the fast- to moderately growing hepatomas, the enzyme that is responsible for demethylating proteins, epsilon-alkyllysinase (epsilon-slkyl-L-lysine:oxygen oxidoreductase; EC 1.5.3.4), had an inverse relationship to the rate of tumor growth, thus suggesting a possible physiological antagonism. When isolated rat liver nuclei were methylated in vitro with S-adenosyl-L-[methyl-14 C]methionine as methyl donor, H2SO4-insoluble protein and histones had almost equal amounts of methyl-14 C incorporated. However, amino acid analysis revealed that methylated arginines are the predominant form of radioactivity in the H2SO4-insoluble protein (product of protein methylase I), while methylated lysines are the major methylated amino acids in the histones (product of protein methylase III). Furthermore, the hydrolysate of the H2SO4-insoluble protein showed four unknown radioactivity peaks on the amino acid analyzer in addition to the known methylated arginine and lysine derivatives.

[PMID: 196592]
A protein methylase III responsible for specifically methylating the cytochrome c in Neurospora crassa was partially characterized by using unmethylated horse heart cytochrome c as a substrate. This enzyme utilizes S-adenosyl-L-methionine as the methyl donor. An analysis of the distribution of [14C]methyl groups in the peptides obtained by chymotrypsin digestion of the enzymically methylated cytochrome c showed that all of the radioactivity could be recovered within a single peak after chromatography. This indicates that the enzyme methylates a specific amino acid sequence within cytochrome c. On hydrolysis of the radioactive chymotryptic peptide, Me-14C-labelled epsilon -N-mono-methyl-lysine, epsilon-N-dimethyl-lysine and epsilon-N-trimethyl-lysine were identified. The enzyme can easily be extracted from the N. crassa mycelial pads and was purified approx. 30-fold.

[PMID: 15292170]
Methylation of Lys79 on histone H3 by Dot1p is important for gene silencing. The elongated structure of the conserved core of yeast Dot1p contains an N-terminal helical domain and a seven-stranded catalytic domain that harbors the binding site for the methyl-donor and an active site pocket sided with conserved hydrophobic residues. The S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine exhibits an extended conformation distinct from the folded conformation observed in structures of SET domain histone lysine methyltransferases. A catalytic asparagine (Asn479), located at the bottom of the active site pocket, suggests a mechanism similar to that employed for amino methylation in DNA and protein glutamine methylation. The acidic, concave cleft between the two domains contains two basic residue binding pockets that could accommodate the outwardly protruding basic side chains around Lys79 of histone H3 on the disk-like nucleosome surface. Biochemical studies suggest that recombinant Dot1 proteins are active on recombinant nucleosomes, free of any modifications.

[PMID: 10747987]
Plants synthesize S-methylmethionine (SMM) from S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), and methionine (Met) by a unique reaction and, like other organisms, use SMM as a methyl donor for Met synthesis from homocysteine (Hcy). These reactions comprise the SMM cycle. Two Arabidopsis cDNAs specifying enzymes that mediate the SMM --> Met reaction (SMM:Hcy S-methyltransferase, HMT) were identified by homology and authenticated by complementing an Escherichia coli yagD mutant and by detecting HMT activity in complemented cells. Gel blot analyses indicate that these enzymes, AtHMT-1 and -2, are encoded by single copy genes. The deduced polypeptides are similar in size (36 kDa), share a zinc-binding motif, lack obvious targeting sequences, and are 55% identical to each other. The recombinant enzymes exist as monomers. AtHMT-1 and -2 both utilize l-SMM or (S,S)-AdoMet as a methyl donor in vitro and have higher affinities for SMM. Both enzymes also use either methyl donor in vivo because both restore the ability to utilize AdoMet or SMM to a yeast HMT mutant. However, AtHMT-1 is strongly inhibited by Met, whereas AtHMT-2 is not, a difference that could be crucial to the control of flux through the HMT reaction and the SMM cycle. Plant HMT is known to transfer the pro-R methyl group of SMM. This enabled us to use recombinant AtHMT-1 to establish that the other enzyme of the SMM cycle, AdoMet:Met S-methyltransferase, introduces the pro-S methyl group. These opposing stereoselectivities suggest a way to measure in vivo flux through the SMM cycle.

[PMID: 23236167]
Ezh2 (Enhancer of zeste homolog 2) protein is the enzymatic component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which represses gene expression by methylating lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27) and regulates cell proliferation and differentiation during embryonic development. Recently, hot-spot mutations of Ezh2 were identified in diffused large B-cell lymphomas and follicular lymphomas. To investigate if tumor growth is dependent on the enzymatic activity of Ezh2, we developed a potent and selective small molecule inhibitor, EI1, which inhibits the enzymatic activity of Ezh2 through direct binding to the enzyme and competing with the methyl group donor S-Adenosyl methionine. EI1-treated cells exhibit genome-wide loss of H3K27 methylation and activation of PRC2 target genes. Furthermore, inhibition of Ezh2 by EI1 in diffused large B-cell lymphomas cells carrying the Y641 mutations results in decreased proliferation, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis. These results provide strong validation of Ezh2 as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of cancer.

[PMID: 17640894]
Multiple protein arginine methyltransferases are involved in transcriptional activation of nuclear receptors. Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1)-mediated histone methylation has been shown to activate nuclear receptor-dependent transcription; however, little is known about the regulation of its enzymatic activity. Here, we report that the methyltransferase activity of CARM1 is negatively regulated through phosphorylation at a conserved serine residue. When the serine residue is mutated to glutamic acid, which mimics the phosphorylated serine residue, the mutant CARM1 exhibits diminished ability to bind the methyl donor adenosylmethionine and diminished histone methylation activity. Moreover, such mutation leads to the inhibition of CARM1 transactivation of estrogen receptor-dependent transcription. Our results provide an example for the regulation of protein arginine methyltransferase activity by phosphorylation. As CARM1 is a potent transcriptional coactivator of estrogen receptor, our results suggest that phosphorylation of CARM1 serves as a unique mechanism for inactivating CARM1-regulated estrogen-dependent gene expression.

[PMID: 14633678]
Histone methyltransferase (HMT)(1) class enzymes that methylate lysine residues of histones or proteins contain a conserved catalytic core termed the SET domain, which shares sequence homology with an independently described sequence motif, the PR domain. Intact PR or SET sequence is required for tumor suppression functions, but it remains unclear whether it is histone methyltransferase activity that underlies tumor suppression. We now show that tumor suppressor RIZ1 (PRDM2) methylates histone H3 on lysine 9, and this activity is reduced by mutations in the PR domain found in human cancers. Also, S-adenosylhomocysteine or methyl donor deficiency inhibits RIZ1 and other H3 lysine 9 methylation activities. These results support the hypothesis that H3 lysine 9 methylation activities of a PR/SET domain have tumor suppression functions and may underlie carcinogenesis associated with dietary methyl donor deficiency.

[PMID: 6282265]
The mitochondrial cytochrome c-557 of Crithidia oncopelti contains two lysine residues and an N-terminal proline residue that are methylated in vivo by the methyl group of methionine. The purified cytochrome can act as a methyl acceptor for a methyltransferase activity in the cell extract that uses S-adenosylmethionine as methyl donor. Crithidia cytochrome c-557 is by far the best substrate for this methyltransferase of those tested, in spite of the fact that methylation sites are already almost fully occupied. The radioactive uptake of [14C]methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine occurred only at a lysine residue (-8) and the N-terminal proline residue. This methyltransferase appears to differ from that of Neurospora and yeast [Durban, Nochumson, Kim, Paik & Chan (1978) J. Biol. Chem. 253, 1427-1435; DiMaria, Polastro, DeLange, Kim & Paik (1979) J. Biol. Chem. 254, 4645-4652] in that lysine-72 of horse cytochrome c is a poor acceptor. Also, the Crithidia methyltransferase appears to be stable to carry lysine methylation much further to completion than do the enzymes from yeast and Neurospora, which produce very low degrees of methylation in native cytochromes c.

[PMID: 22624060]
Certain lysine residues on histone tails could be methylated by protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) using S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) as the methyl donor. Since the methylation states of the target lysines play a fundamental role in the regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression, it is important to study the property of PKMTs that allows a specific number of methyl groups (one, two or three) to be added (termed as product specificity). It has been shown that the product specificity of PKMTs may be controlled in part by the existence of specific residues at the active site. One of the best examples is a Phe/Tyr switch found in many PKMTs. Here quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical (QM/MM) molecular dynamics (MD) and free energy simulations are performed on wild type G9a-like protein (GLP) and its F1209Y and Y1124F mutants for understanding the energetic origin of the product specificity and the reasons for the change of product specificity as a result of single-residue mutations at the Phe/Tyr switch as well as other positions. The free energy barriers of the methyl transfer processes calculated from our simulations are consistent with experimental data, supporting the suggestion that the relative free energy barriers may determine, at least in part, the product specificity of PKMTs. The changes of the free energy barriers as a result of the mutations are also discussed based on the structural information obtained from the simulations. The results suggest that the space and active-site interactions around the ε-amino group of the target lysine available for methyl addition appear to among the key structural factors in controlling the product specificity and activity of PKMTs.

[PMID: 18852888]
The typical Western diet is not balanced in methyl nutrients that regulate the level of the methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and its derivative metabolite S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), which in turn may control the activity of certain methyltransferases. Feeding rodents with amino acid defined and methyl-imbalanced diet decreases hepatic SAM and causes liver cancers. RIZ1 (PRDM2 or KMT8) is a tumor suppressor and functions in transcriptional repression by methylating histone H3 lysine 9. Here we show that a methyl-balanced diet conferred additional survival benefits compared to a tumor-inducing methyl-imbalanced diet only in mice with wild type RIZ1 but not in mice deficient in RIZ1. While absence of RIZ1 was tumorigenic in mice fed the balanced diet, its presence did not prevent tumor formation in mice fed the imbalanced diet. Microarray and gene expression analysis showed that, unlike most of its related enzymes, RIZ1 was upregulated by methyl-balanced diet. Methyl-balanced diet did not fully repress oncogenes such as c-Jun in the absence of RIZ1. Higher RIZ1 activity was associated with greater H3 lysine 9 methylation in RIZ1 target genes as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. The data identify RIZ1 as a critical target of methyl-balanced diet in cancer prevention. The molecular understanding of dietary carcinogenesis may help people make informed choices on diet, which may greatly reduce the incidence of cancer.

[PMID: 20303346]
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), the major methyl donor for DNA and histone methylation was fed with ethanol for 1month in order to modify the effects of ethanol on rat liver. The following parameters were studied to determine the effects of SAMe; liver histology, the blood alcohol cycle (BAL), changes in gene expression mined from microarray analysis, changes in histone methylation, changes in liver SAMe levels and its metabolites and ADH. SAMe changed the type of fatty liver, reduced liver ALT levels and prevented the BAL cycle caused by intragastric ethanol feeding. Microarray analysis showed that SAMe feeding prevented most of the changes in gene expression induced by ethanol feeding, presumably by inducing H3K27me3 and gene silencing. H3K27me3 was significantly increased by SAMe with or without ethanol feeding. It is concluded that SAMe feeding stabilized global gene expression so that the changes in gene expression involved in the blood alcohol cycle were prevented.

[PMID: 18393372]
We previously showed that S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and its metabolite methylthioadenosine (MTA) blocked lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) expression in RAW (murine macrophage cell line) and Kupffer cells at the transcriptional level without affecting nuclear factor kappa B nuclear binding. However, the exact molecular mechanism or mechanisms of the inhibitory effect were unclear. While SAMe is a methyl donor, MTA is an inhibitor of methylation. SAMe can convert to MTA spontaneously, so the effect of exogenous SAMe may be mediated by MTA. The aim of our current work is to examine whether the mechanism of SAMe and MTA's inhibitory effect on proinflammatory mediators might involve modulation of histone methylation. In RAW cells, we found that LPS induced TNFalpha expression by both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. SAMe and MTA treatment inhibited the LPS-induced increase in gene transcription. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we found that LPS increased the binding of trimethylated histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) to the TNFalpha promoter, and this was completely blocked by either SAMe or MTA pretreatment. Similar effects were observed with LPS-mediated induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). LPS increased the binding of histone methyltransferases Set1 and myeloid/lymphoid leukemia to these promoters, which was unaffected by SAMe or MTA. The effects of MTA in RAW cells were confirmed in vivo in LPS-treated mice. Exogenous SAMe is unstable and converts spontaneously to MTA, which is stable and cell-permeant. Treatment with SAMe doubled intracellular MTA and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) levels. SAH also inhibited H3K4 binding to TNFalpha and iNOS promoters. The mechanism of SAMe's pharmacologic inhibitory effect on proinflammatory mediators is mainly mediated by MTA and SAH at the level of histone methylation.

[PMID: 16086857]
The SET-domain protein methyltransferase superfamily includes all but one of the proteins known to methylate histones on lysine. Histone methylation is important in the regulation of chromatin and gene expression.

[PMID: 21958314]
vSET (a viral SET domain protein) is an attractive polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) surrogate to study the effect of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) methylation on gene transcription, as both catalyze histone H3K27 trimethylation. To control the enzymatic activity of vSET in vivo with an engineered S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) analogue as methyl donor cofactor, we have carried out structure-guided design, synthesis, and characterization of orthogonal vSET methyltransferase mutant/SAM analogue pairs using a "bump-and-hole" strategy.

[PMID: 11309147]
Angiosperms synthesize S-methylmethionine (SMM) from methionine (Met) and S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) in a unique reaction catalyzed by Met S-methyltransferase (MMT). SMM serves as methyl donor for Met synthesis from homocysteine, catalyzed by homocysteine S-methyltransferase (HMT). MMT and HMT together have been proposed to constitute a futile SMM cycle that stops the free Met pool from being depleted by an overshoot in AdoMet synthesis. Arabidopsis and maize have one MMT gene, and at least three HMT genes that belong to two anciently diverged classes and encode enzymes with distinct properties and expression patterns. SMM, and presumably its cycle, must therefore have originated before dicot and monocot lineages separated. Arabidopsis leaves, roots and developing seeds all express MMT and HMTs, and can metabolize [35S]Met to [35S]SMM and vice versa. The SMM cycle therefore operates throughout the plant. This appears to be a general feature of angiosperms, as digital gene expression profiles show that MMT and HMT are co-expressed in leaves, roots and reproductive tissues of maize and other species. An in silico model of the SMM cycle in mature Arabidopsis leaves was developed from radiotracer kinetic measurements and pool size data. This model indicates that the SMM cycle consumes half the AdoMet produced, and suggests that the cycle serves to stop accumulation of AdoMet, rather than to prevent depletion of free Met. Because plants lack the negative feedback loops that regulate AdoMet pool size in other eukaryotes, the SMM cycle may be the main mechanism whereby plants achieve short-term control of AdoMet level.

[PMID: 8123667]
Calmodulin (lysine 115) N-methyltransferase was purified from the cytosolic fraction of Paramecium tetraurelia by sequential dialysis, cellulose phosphate chromatography, Reactive Red 120 agarose chromatography, and calmodulin-Sepharose affinity chromatography. The enzyme was purified 6800-fold with a 15% yield. SDS-PAGE analysis of the purified enzyme invariably revealed a major protein of 37 kDa that was reproducibly obtained and minor proteins of 35 and 28 kDa that were sometimes obtained in variable yields. The enzyme formed a mixture of mono-, di-, and trimethyllysine residues at lysine 115 of calmodulin in vitro, had a Km for the methyl donor, S-adenosyl methionine (AdoMet), of about 1 microM and a pH optimum of about 7.5. The purified enzyme had an absolute requirement for the reductant DTT for activity, whereas the enzyme in crude fractions did not. The enzyme is a monomer with an estimated molecular mass of 33 kDa. Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, and Ni2+ stimulated calmodulin N-methyltransferase activity but Zn2+ did not. Calmodulin N-methyltransferase was inhibited by its reaction product S-adenosyl homocysteine (SAH), but not by sinefungin and tubercidin. The calmodulin antagonists calmidazolium and mellitin were inhibitory but W7 was not. The enzyme was not stimulated by Triton X-100 nor by NaCl. Only calmodulins with an unmethylated lysine at residue 115, including cam2 calmodulin, were substrates. Histones and calcium-binding proteins from Paramecium other than calmodulin did not act as substrates for the purified calmodulin N-methyltransferase and no other substrates in the cytosolic fraction were observed.

[PMID: 18790802]
Metnase is a human SET and transposase domain protein that methylates histone H3 and promotes DNA double-strand break repair. We now show that Metnase physically interacts and co-localizes with Topoisomerase IIalpha (Topo IIalpha), the key chromosome decatenating enzyme. Metnase promotes progression through decatenation and increases resistance to the Topo IIalpha inhibitors ICRF-193 and VP-16. Purified Metnase greatly enhanced Topo IIalpha decatenation of kinetoplast DNA to relaxed circular forms. Nuclear extracts containing Metnase decatenated kDNA more rapidly than those without Metnase, and neutralizing anti-sera against Metnase reversed that enhancement of decatenation. Metnase automethylates at K485, and the presence of a methyl donor blocked the enhancement of Topo IIalpha decatenation by Metnase, implying an internal regulatory inhibition. Thus, Metnase enhances Topo IIalpha decatenation, and this activity is repressed by automethylation. These results suggest that cancer cells could subvert Metnase to mediate clinically relevant resistance to Topo IIalpha inhibitors.

[PMID: 21736313]
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are important strategies used by eukaryotic organisms to modulate their phenotypes. One of the well-studied PTMs, arginine methylation, is catalyzed by protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) with SAM as the methyl donor. The functions of PRMTs have been broadly studied in different biological processes and diseased states, but the molecular basis for arginine methylation is not well-defined. In this study, we report the transient-state kinetic analysis of PRMT1 catalysis. The fast association and dissociation rates suggest that PRMT1 catalysis of histone H4 methylation follows a rapid equilibrium sequential kinetic mechanism. The data give direct evidence that the chemistry of methyl transfer is the major rate-limiting step and that binding of the cofactor SAM or SAH affects the association and dissociation of H4 with PRMT1. Importantly, from the stopped-flow fluorescence measurements, we have identified a critical kinetic step suggesting a precatalytic conformational transition induced by substrate binding. These results provide new insights into the mechanism of arginine methylation and the rational design of PRMT inhibitors.

[PMID: 21782458]
Protein lysine methyltransferases are important regulators of epigenetic signaling. These enzymes catalyze the transfer of donor methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to specific acceptor lysines on histones, leading to changes in chromatin structure and transcriptional regulation. These enzymes also methylate nonhistone protein substrates, revealing an additional mechanism to regulate cellular physiology. The oncogenic protein SMYD2 represses the functional activities of the tumor suppressor proteins p53 and Rb, making it an attractive drug target. Here we report the discovery of AZ505, a potent and selective inhibitor of SMYD2 that was identified from a high throughput chemical screen. We also present the crystal structures of SMYD2 with p53 substrate and product peptides, and notably, in complex with AZ505. This substrate competitive inhibitor is bound in the peptide binding groove of SMYD2. These results have implications for the development of SMYD2 inhibitors, and indicate the potential for developing novel therapies targeting this target class.

[PMID: 21779408]
The SET and MYND Domain (SMYD) proteins comprise a unique family of multi-domain SET histone methyltransferases that are implicated in human cancer progression. Here we report an analysis of the crystal structure of the full length human SMYD3 in a complex with an analog of the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) methyl donor cofactor. The structure revealed an overall compact architecture in which the "split-SET" domain adopts a canonical SET domain fold and closely assembles with a Zn-binding MYND domain and a C-terminal superhelical 9 α-helical bundle similar to that observed for the mouse SMYD1 structure. Together, these structurally interlocked domains impose a highly confined binding pocket for histone substrates, suggesting a regulated mechanism for its enzymatic activity. Our mutational and biochemical analyses confirm regulatory roles of the unique structural elements both inside and outside the core SET domain and establish a previously undetected preference for trimethylation of H4K20.