[PMID: 21430269]
Lung cancers harboring mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) respond to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, but drug resistance invariably emerges. To elucidate mechanisms of acquired drug resistance, we performed systematic genetic and histological analyses of tumor biopsies from 37 patients with drug-resistant non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) carrying EGFR mutations. All drug-resistant tumors retained their original activating EGFR mutations, and some acquired known mechanisms of resistance including the EGFR T790M mutation or MET gene amplification. Some resistant cancers showed unexpected genetic changes including EGFR amplification and mutations in the PIK3CA gene, whereas others underwent a pronounced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Surprisingly, five resistant tumors (14%) transformed from NSCLC into small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and were sensitive to standard SCLC treatments. In three patients, serial biopsies revealed that genetic mechanisms of resistance were lost in the absence of the continued selective pressure of EGFR inhibitor treatment, and such cancers were sensitive to a second round of treatment with EGFR inhibitors. Collectively, these results deepen our understanding of resistance to EGFR inhibitors and underscore the importance of repeatedly assessing cancers throughout the course of the disease.

[PMID: 22263058]
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as gefitinib and erlotinib are promising therapies for patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients with somatic activating mutations in the EGFR gene have dramatic response initially, but would eventually develop resistance to these TKIs. Subsequent studies found that a secondary mutation in the EGFR gene (T790M mutation) and amplification of the MET proto-oncogene could be the main resistance mechanisms involved. The current review is focused on T790M, which is thought to cause steric hindrance and impair the binding of gefitinib/erlotinib. The T790M is present as a minor allele before TKI therapy and accounts for about half of the acquired resistant cases. Conflicting results were reported for gefitinib-resistant, T790M-acquired patients who had switched to erlotinib treatment, which was proposed to be efficacious. The switch therapy was presumed to work for EGFR wild type patients and previously gefitinib responding patients. MET amplification accounts for about 20% of TKI acquired-resistant patients by a different molecular pathway from T790M; some of these patients will also concurrently have T790M mutation and might still not respond to irreversible TKI. As for the detection of T790M, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), especially mutant-enriched PCR was found to be more sensitive than direct DNA sequencing. In addition, whole genome amplification might also be useful and can be incorporated with future noninvasive method for detecting T790M. A better understanding of the mechanisms leading to TKI resistance is crucial in the development of effective treatment and the design of future clinical studies.

[PMID: 22738915]
Lung cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide. Adenocarcinomas, the most common histologic subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), are frequently associated with activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene. Although these patients often respond clinically to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib, relapse inevitably occurs, suggesting the development of escape mechanisms that promote cell survival. Using a loss-of-function, whole genome short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screen, we identified that the canonical Wnt pathway contributes to the maintenance of NSCLC cells during EGFR inhibition, particularly the poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase 1 and 2 that positively regulate canonical Wnt signaling. Inhibition of tankyrase and various other components of the Wnt pathway with shRNAs or small molecules significantly increased the efficacy of EGFR inhibitors both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings therefore reveal a critical role for tankyrase and the canonical Wnt pathway in maintaining lung cancer cells during EGFR inhibition. Targeting the Wnt-tankyrase-β-catenin pathway together with EGFR inhibition may improve clinical outcome in patients with NSCLC.

[PMID: 23332287]
Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) are frequently observed in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), occurring in about 40% to 60% of never-smokers and in about 17% of patients with adenocarcinomas. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, have transformed therapy for patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC and have proved superior to chemotherapy as first-line treatment for this patient group. Despite these benefits, there are currently 2 key challenges associated with EGFR inhibitor therapy for patients with NSCLC. First, only 85% to 90% of patients with the EGFR mutation derive clinical benefit from EGFR TKIs, with the remainder demonstrating innate resistance to therapy. Second, acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs inevitably occurs in patients who initially respond to therapy, with a median duration of response of about 10 months. Mutant EGFR activates various subcellular signaling cascades, including the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, which demonstrates maintained activity in a variety of TKI-resistant cancers. Given the fundamental role of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in tumor oncogenesis, proliferation, and survival, PI3K pathway inhibitors have emerged as a possible solution to the problem of EGFR TKI resistance. However resistance to EGFR TKIs is associated with considerable heterogeneity and complexity. Preclinical experiments investigating these phenomena suggest that in some patients, PI3K inhibitors will have to be paired with other targeted agents if they are to be effective. This review discusses the preclinical data supporting PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibitor combinations in EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC from the perspective of the various agents currently being investigated in clinical trials.

[PMID: 18799900]
Combination therapy with platinum preparations still occupies a central position in chemotherapy for lung cancer. Third-generation regimens that combine an anticancer drug and a platinum preparation that were published in the 1990s remain standard therapy for untreated non-small-cell lung cancer today. Cisplatin or carboplatin is used as the platinum preparation, but combination therapy with cisplatin has been found to have a greater antitumor effect than combination therapy with carboplatin. However, there is very little difference between them, and on balance, when adverse reactions, etc. are taken into consideration, we do not think that it makes much difference which one of them is used. Clinical studies of combinations between platinum preparations and pemetrexed and S-1, which have been developed since 2000, have been conducted recently. Docetaxel has been established as standard therapy for recurrent cases, but based on the results of recent comparative studies, a survival-prolonging effect has been shown for pemetrexed and for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib, erlotinib), which are molecularly targeted drugs, and it has now become possible to select treatment methods by choosing from a number of anticancer drugs. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been demonstrated to have a very high cytoreductive effect on lung cancers that have EGFR gene mutations. The frequency of EGFR gene mutations is high in East Asia, including Japan, whereas it is very low in Western countries. Thus, the future course of development of chemotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer may differ in Western countries and Asia, and the method of using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors is expected to have great implications in Asia.

[PMID: 19063875]
Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are associated with the responses to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although various methods for detecting EGFR gene mutations have been developed, they have several disadvantages. We attempted to establish a new method for the detection of EGFR gene mutations with the use of paraffin-embedded samples. The detections of T790M mutations in exon 20 and L858R mutations in exon 21 are based on the principle of allele-specific oligonucleotide polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We also designed PCR primers that enable to detect all types of deletions in exon 19. We assessed the basic performance efficiency of this method, and to confirm its clinical applicability, we performed PCR using DNA extracted from 66 tissue sections that were obtained from patients with NSCLC and embedded in paraffin. The sensitivity of this method for the detection of deletions or mutations was as low as 0.5%. In the 66 subjects whose samples were analyzed, we detected the following deletions and mutations in the EGFR gene: 11 deletions in exon 19, 8 L858R mutations, and 1 double mutation of L858R and T790M. The present method is sensitive and specific for the detection of deletions and mutations in the EGFR gene and is thus suitable for use in laboratory tests.

[PMID: 21777765]
Patients presenting with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and active EGFR mutation have a high response rate (60-70%) to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) with little immediate progression (primary resistance). However, progression on this treatment (secondary resistance) is inevitable even for those who responded initially. These two situations are distinct in terms of management. In case of primary resistance, screening for other associated molecular abnormalities (tumour heterogeneity) should be done, even resulting in a false positive in the initial screening of EGFR mutation. In case of secondary resistance, a new pathology sample should be taken insofar as is possible to determine the presence of an acquired mutation of EGFR resistance (T790M in 60% of cases) or c-Met amplification (20% of cases). The presence of a T790M mutation could respond to irreversible EGFR-TKI, while a c-Met amplification could be managed with a targeted anti-Met therapy. However, the gold standard is still cytotoxic chemotherapy at present if a clinical trial based on a targeted therapy is not possible.

[PMID: 19808904]
The development of resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) seems almost inevitable, even in patients with lung cancer that initially respond well to EGFR-TKIs. MET amplification was recently found to be a mechanism of escape from the anticancer effect of EGFR inhibitors. In the present study, we investigated the means whereby MET affects sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs in PC-9 cells. Gefitinib- or erlotinib-resistant sublines were established by exposing the parental PC-9 cell line to chronic, repeated treatments with these drugs. These resistant sublines showed more than 100-fold more resistance to gefitinib and erlotinib and acquired cross-resistance to other EGFR-TKIs. The T790M EGFR mutation was found by pyrosequencing, and this seemed to be the cause of drug resistance. Resistant cells also showed MET activation, although gene amplification was not detected. Furthermore, the induction of MET activity was not found to be associated with sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs. Interestingly, increased passage number without exposure to gefitinib or erlotinib caused MET activation, but this did not affect sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs. In addition, hepatocyte growth factor was found to block the ability of EGFR-TKIs to inhibit MET activation. However, sustained MET activation by hepatocyte growth factor did not modulate the cellular effects of gefitinib or erlotinib. Rather, activated MET enhanced migration and invasion abilities. Summarizing, MET activation may be acquired during cancer cell proliferation and enhances migratory and invasive abilities without affecting cellular sensitivity to EGFR-TKIs. Accordingly, the present study suggests that MET activation caused by factors other than MET gene amplification is not a suitable surrogate marker of resistance to EGFR-TKIs.

[PMID: 17575237]
Agents inhibiting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have shown clinical benefit in a subset of non-small cell lung cancer patients expressing amplified or mutationally activated EGFR. However, responsive patients can relapse as a result of selection for EGFR gene mutations that confer resistance to ATP competitive EGFR inhibitors, such as erlotinib and gefitinib. We describe here the activity of EXEL-7647 (XL647), a novel spectrum-selective kinase inhibitor with potent activity against the EGF and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase families, against both wild-type (WT) and mutant EGFR in vitro and in vivo. The activity of EGFR inhibitors against WT and mutant EGFRs and their effect on downstream signal transduction was examined in cellular assays and in vivo using A431 and MDA-MB-231 (WT EGFR) and H1975 (L858R and T790M mutant EGFR) xenograft tumors. EXEL-7647 shows potent and long-lived inhibition of the WT EGFR in vivo. In addition, EXEL-7647 inhibits cellular proliferation and EGFR pathway activation in the erlotinib-resistant H1975 cell line that harbors a double mutation (L858R and T790M) in the EGFR gene. In vivo efficacy studies show that EXEL-7647 substantially inhibited the growth of H1975 xenograft tumors and reduced both tumor EGFR signaling and tumor vessel density. Additionally, EXEL-7647, in contrast to erlotinib, substantially inhibited the growth and vascularization of MDA-MB-231 xenografts, a model which is more reliant on signaling through vascular endothelial growth factor receptors. These studies provide a preclinical basis for clinical trials of XL647 in solid tumors and in patients bearing tumors that are resistant to existing EGFR-targeted therapies.

[PMID: 17145836]
Recognition that the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was a therapeutic target in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and other cancers led to development of the small-molecule receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib. Clinical trials established that EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors produced objective responses in a minority of NSCLC patients. We examined the sensitivity of 23 NSCLC lines with wild-type or mutated EGFR to gefitinib to determine genes/proteins related to sensitivity, including EGFR and HER2 cell surface expression, phosphorylated EGFR expression, EGFR gene copy number, and EGFR mutational status. Downstream cell cycle and signaling events were compared with growth-inhibitory effects. We determined gefitinib sensitivity by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assays, EGFR expression by fluorescence-activated cell sorting and immunohistochemistry, phosphorylated EGFR by Western blotting, EGFR gene copy number by fluorescence in situ hybridization, and EGFR mutation by sequencing. The cellular effects of gefitinib on cell cycle were determined by flow cytometry and the molecular effects of gefitinib EGFR inhibition on downstream signal proteins by Western blotting. Gefitinib in vivo effects were evaluated in athymic nude mice bearing sensitive and resistant NSCLC xenografts. There was a significant correlation between EGFR gene copy number, EGFR gene mutations, and gefitinib sensitivity. EGFR protein was necessary but not sufficient for predicting sensitivity. Gefitinib-sensitive lines showed a G(1) cell cycle arrest and inactivation of downstream signaling proteins; resistant cell lines had no changes. The in vivo effects mirrored the in vitro effects. This panel of NSCLC lines characterized for gefitinib response was used to identify predictive molecular markers of response to gefitinib. Several of these have subsequently been shown to identify NSCLC patients likely to benefit from gefitinib therapy.

[PMID: 18997733]
Patients with advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma exhibiting overexpression or mutation of epidermal growth factor receptor tend to respond better to targeted therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib and erlotinib. There is no consensus regarding how these neoplasms should be routinely tested for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and whether the results of immunohistochemistry (IHC), mutation analysis and fluorescent in situ hybridization correlate with each other or are independent predictive variables. We tested 100 pulmonary adenocarcinomas from patients with stage III or IV disease for EGFR abnormalities using IHC, PCR and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and compared the results using kappa and other statistical methods. The sensitivity of each test to detect an EGFR abnormality and its negative predictive value to estimate the presence of an abnormal test result by the other two methods were calculated. Abnormal EGFR test results were found in 62, 40 and 24% by IHC, FISH and PCR, respectively. kappa statistics yielded poor concordance between the results of the EGFR tests (kappa=0.3, and 0.2 for IHC and PCR and for PCR and FISH, respectively). Strong membranous immunoreactivity in more than 90% of the tumor cells was found to correlate with amplification or polysomy. PCR when used as a single test is likely to underestimate the presence of EGFR abnormalities that may significantly predict response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The need to standardize the approach to EGFR testing in patients with advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma is discussed.

[PMID: 20647703]
Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur-uracil has become the standard of care for patients with completely resected stage I adenocarcinoma according to the positive result from phase III trial conducted in Japan. The effectiveness of tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is now under investigation in a phase III trial in the first-line treatment in combination with platinum agent as well as in second-line treatment as monotherapy. The evidence of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) such as gefitinib and erlotinib was first confirmed as the second-line treatment for non-selective patients with advanced NSCLC. However, now it is essential to examine some active EGFR gene mutations such as exon 19 deletion or L858R in exon 21, the novel predictive factor for high efficacy of EGFR-TKI, in terms of the risk-benefit balance. For patients with EGFR-mutated advanced NSCLC, the first-line treatment with gefitinib had achieved a significant prolongation of progression-free survival compared with standard platinum doublet chemotherapy in a few phase III trials, and became a new standard of care. Gefitinib is highly effective for patients with advanced NSCLC with EGFR mutation even if their performance status is poor, although one should always pay careful attention to fatal interstitial lung disease.

[PMID: 20705455]
Patients with lung adenocarcinoma who carry epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations respond remarkably well to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), gefitinib, or erlotinib. However, the effect of EGFR-TKI treatment on the prolongation of overall survival (OS) of these patients remains uncertain, although several recent studies have shown prolongation of progression free survival compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy. A total of 304 patients with lung adenocarcinoma who had postoperative recurrent disease were studied. To eliminate potential biases as possible, the matching of four potential predictive factors of responsiveness to EGFR-TKI led to the identification of 81 pairs of patients (those who were treated with gefitinib and those who were not). A deletion mutation in exon 19 and a point mutation (L858R) in exon 21 of the EGFR gene were also analyzed. We compared the OS between the two groups. OS in the gefitinib group was significantly longer than in the control group (median, 63 vs. 41 months; p = 0.015). EGFR mutations were detected in 65 out of 129 patients (50%) in the whole sample. EGFR mutational status was not an independent prognostic factor of gefitinib benefit; rather, it was a predictive factor. This study strongly suggested that gefitinib treatment improved OS of lung adenocarcinoma patients who had postoperative recurrence, especially those carrying EGFR mutations.

[PMID: 15737014]
Lung adenocarcinomas from patients who respond to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib (Iressa) or erlotinib (Tarceva) usually harbor somatic gain-of-function mutations in exons encoding the kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Despite initial responses, patients eventually progress by unknown mechanisms of "acquired" resistance. We show that in two of five patients with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib, progressing tumors contain, in addition to a primary drug-sensitive mutation in EGFR, a secondary mutation in exon 20, which leads to substitution of methionine for threonine at position 790 (T790M) in the kinase domain. Tumor cells from a sixth patient with a drug-sensitive EGFR mutation whose tumor progressed on adjuvant gefitinib after complete resection also contained the T790M mutation. This mutation was not detected in untreated tumor samples. Moreover, no tumors with acquired resistance had KRAS mutations, which have been associated with primary resistance to these drugs. Biochemical analyses of transfected cells and growth inhibition studies with lung cancer cell lines demonstrate that the T790M mutation confers resistance to EGFR mutants usually sensitive to either gefitinib or erlotinib. Interestingly, a mutation analogous to T790M has been observed in other kinases with acquired resistance to another kinase inhibitor, imatinib (Gleevec). In patients with tumors bearing gefitinib- or erlotinib-sensitive EGFR mutations, resistant subclones containing an additional EGFR mutation emerge in the presence of drug. This observation should help guide the search for more effective therapy against a specific subset of lung cancers.

[PMID: 16199108]
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations have been found in a subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with good clinical response to gefitinib therapy. A quick and sensitive method with large throughput is required to utilize the information to determine whether the molecular targeted therapy should be applied for the particular NSCLC patients. Using probes for the 13 different mutations including 11 that have already been reported, we have genotyped the EGFR mutation status in 94 NSCLC patients using the TaqMan PCR assay. We have also genotyped the EGFR mutations status in additional 182 NSCLC patients, as well as 63 gastric, 95 esophagus and 70 colon carcinoma patients. In 94 NSCLC samples, the result of the TaqMan PCR assay perfectly matched with that of the sequencing excluding one patient. In one sample in which no EGFR mutation was detected by direct sequencing, the TaqMan PCR assay detected a mutation. This patient was a gefitinib responder. In a serial dilution study, the assay could detect a mutant sample diluted in 1/10 with a wild-type sample. Of 182 NSCLC samples, 46 mutations were detected. EGFR mutation was significantly correlated with gender, smoking status, pathological subtypes, and differentiation of lung cancers. There was no mutation detected by the TaqMan PCR assay in gastric, esophagus and colon carcinomas. TaqMan PCR assay is a rapid and sensitive method of detection of EGFR mutations with high throughput, and may be useful to determine whether gefitinib should be offered for the treatment of NSCLC patients. The TaqMan PCR assay can offer us a complementary and confirmative test.

[PMID: 16730855]
Mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene have been reported in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), especially in patients with adenocarcinoma and never smokers. Some common somatic mutations in EGFR, including deletion mutations in exon 19 and leucine-to-arginine substitution at amino acid position 858 (L858R) in exon 21, have been examined for their ability to predict sensitivity to gefitinib or erlotinib, which are selective EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). On the other hand, reports have shown that the threonine-to-methionine substitution at amino acid position 790 (T790M) in exon 20 is related to gefitinib resistance. Some studies have indicated that high copy numbers of the EGFR gene may be a more effective molecular predictor to responsiveness and prolonged survival in patients treated with EGFR-TKIs. Here, we describe two NSCLC patients with the L858R mutation who did not respond to gefitinib. Case 1 harbored both the T790M and L858R mutations, and fluorescence in situ hybridization showed EGFR gene amplification. Case 2 harbored both the L858R and aspartic acid-to-tyrosine substitution at amino acid position 761 in exon 19 of EGFR mutations and had a high polysomy status for EGFR. In these two cases, tumors showed resistance to gefitinib treatment despite the presence of EGFR L858R mutation and increased copy number. Our findings encourage further molecular analysis to elucidate the relationship between the EGFR status, including mutations and amplifications, and the responsiveness of NSCLC to gefitinib.

[PMID: 16009451]
Mutations in the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene in non-small cell lung cancers are associated with increased sensitivity of these cancers to drugs that inhibit EGFR kinase activity such as gefitinib and erlotinib. Responses to TK inhibitors in the absence of EGFR gene mutation for BAC patients have not been reported. A case of a patient with BAC refractory to chemotherapy who responded to gefitinib in the absence of EGFR gene mutations is reported. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors may have a role in BAC in the absence of EGFR gene mutations. Additional studies on other molecular alterations of the EGFR family members are needed to better predict response to these agents.

[PMID: 22806307]
Several cases have been reported in which central nervous system (CNS) metastases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) resistant to gefitinib were improved by erlotinib. However, there has been no study in which cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of gefitinib and erlotinib are directly compared. Thus, we aimed to compare them. We examined 15 Japanese patients with NSCLC and CNS metastases with epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations who received CSF examinations during epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors treatment (250 mg daily gefitinib or 150 mg daily erlotinib). Plasma and CSF concentrations were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. The concentration and penetration rate of gefitinib (mean ± standard deviation) in the CSF were 3.7 ± 1.9 ng/mL (8.2 ± 4.3 nM) and 1.13 ± 0.36 %, respectively. The concentration and penetration rate of erlotinib in the CSF were 28.7 ± 16.8 ng/mL (66.9 ± 39.0 nM) and 2.77 ± 0.45 %, respectively. The CSF concentration and penetration rate of erlotinib were significantly higher than those of gefitinib (P = 0.0008 and <0.0001, respectively). The CNS response rates of patients with erlotinib treatment were preferentially (but not significantly) higher than those with gefitinib treatment. (1/3 vs. 4/7, respectively). Leptomeningeal metastases in one patient, which were refractory to gefitinib, dramatically responded to erlotinib. This study suggested that higher CSF concentration could be achieved with erlotinib and that erlotinib could be more effective for the treatment for CNS metastases, especially leptomeningeal metastases, than gefitinib.

[PMID: 23507588]
Although cancers may have many genetic alterations, there are only a few mutations actually associated with essential traits of cancer cells such as cell proliferation or evasion from apoptosis. Because cancer cells are "addicted" to these "drive genes" , pharmacologic inhibition of these gene function is highly effective. Epidermal growth factor receptor(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor(TKI)(such as gefitinib or erlotinib)treatment of lung cancer harboring EGFR gene mutation is one of the prototypes of such therapies. Several clinical trials clearly demonstrated that progression-free survival of patients treated with EGFR-TKI is significantly longer than that of those treated by conventional platinum doublet chemotherapy. EGFR-TKI therapy dramatically changed the paradigm of lung cancer treatment. Furthermore, in 2012, crizotinib was approved for lung cancer treatment with anaplastic lymphoma kinase(ALK)gene translocation. Targeted therapies for lung cancers "addicted" to other driver gene mutations including ROS1, RET or HER2 are also under development. Through these personalized approaches, lung cancer is changing from an acute fatal disease to a more chronic disease, and eventually we might be able to cure it.

[PMID: 16049312]
Somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are present in lung adenocarcinomas that respond to the EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib. Two types of mutations account for approximately 90% of mutated cases: short in-frame deletions in exon 19 and a specific point mutation in exon 21 at codon 858 (L858R). Screening for these mutations has been based mainly on direct sequencing. We report here the development and validation of polymerase chain reaction-based assays for these two predominant types of EGFR mutations. The assay for exon 19 mutations is based on length analysis of fluorescently labeled polymerase chain reaction products, and the assay for the exon 21 L858R mutation is based on a new Sau96I restriction site created by this mutation. Using serial dilutions of DNAs from lung cancer cell lines harboring either exon 19 or 21 mutations, we detected these mutations in the presence of up to approximately 90% normal DNA. In a test set of 39 lung cancer samples, direct sequencing detected mutations in 25 cases whereas our assays were positive in 29 cases, including 4 cases in which mutations were not apparent by sequencing. These assays offer higher sensitivity and ease of scoring and eliminate the need for sequencing, providing a robust and accessible approach to the rapid identification of most lung cancer patients likely to respond to EGFR inhibitors.

[PMID: 22920167]
Molecular targeted therapy based on tyrosine kinase inhibitors, directed at the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of novel options for management of NSCLC. EGFR gene mutations, exon 19 deletions and exon 21 point mutations (L858R) are good predictors of response to EGFR-TKI treatment. The aim of this study was to assess the incidence of EGFR mutations in a large cohort of Europeans with advanced NSCLC and subsequently to evaluate their impact on the effect of EGFR-TKI treatment. In total, 613 patients with advanced stage NSCLC (IIIB, IV) were genetically tested. The effect of treatment was evaluated in 410 patients treated with EGFR-TKI. Survival was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier method, and statistical comparison was performed using log-rank test. EGFR mutations were detected in 73 (11.9%) patients. Exon 19 deletions were detected in 49 patients, exon 21 point mutations (L858R) were detected in 22 patients, and both mutation types were detected in 2 patients. An increased incidence of EGFR mutations among patients with adenocarcinoma (14.9% vs 7.8%, p = 0.008), women (20.2% vs 7.1%, p < 0.001) and nonsmokers (29.9% vs 7.0%, p < 0.001) was demonstrated. Sixty patients with EGFR mutation and 350 patients with wild-type EGFR were treated with EGFR-TKI. Median PFS in patients harboring EGFR mutation was 7.2 vs 2.0 months in patients harboring wild-type EGFR (p < 0.001), median OS in patients harboring EGFR mutation was 14.5 vs 7.5 months in patients harboring wild-type EGFR (p = 0.019). The incidence of EGFR mutations in the studied population, their increased incidence among patients with adenocarcinoma, women and non-smokers correlated with data previously published. Results of survival analysis in patients treated with EGFR-TKI confirmed high potential of EGFR mutations to predict good effect of the EGFR-TKI treatment. Genetic testing in patients with NSCLC should be a standard part of diagnostic procedures

[PMID: 20948254]
EGFR-TKI yields a long survival period in cases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), especially those with EGFR gene mutations, but the effect is limited. The later treatment strategy is still a large problem. Efficacy by re-treatment with EGFR-TKI is sometimes reported, but its clinical significance is not clear. We reviewed retrospectively 22 cases (gefitinib 11 cases and erlotinib 11 cases) of NSCLC re-treated with EGFR-TKI in our hospital from August 2004 to August 2009. After re-treatment with gefitinib, four cases showed disease control. Efficacy of erlotinib was recognized in the cases in which disease control was obtained by initial treatment with gefitinib. The disease control rate was 36% (4/11) in the gefitinib group and 45% (5/11) in the erlotinib group. Median survival time was 212 days and 292 days from re-treatment with EGFR-TKI, respectively. Re-administration of EGFR-TKI was effective, and therefore is considered one of the treatment options for patients who once respond to gefitinib, until new anti-cancer drugs are available.

[PMID: 20512075]
The tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib are effective in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutations. The usual clinical dose of gefitinib (250 mg/d) is only one third of its maximum tolerated dose, whereas the dose of erlotinib (150 mg/d) is at its maximum tolerated dose. In NSCLC cell lines, both TKIs have similar micromolar inhibitory concentrations. We explored whether erlotinib at 25 mg/d (trough serum concentration similar to gefitinib 250 mg/d) would be efficacious in EGFR-mutated NSCLC. To study the inhibitory concentrations of gefitinib and erlotinib, we exposed EGFR-mutated cell lines (HCC827, H3255, PC-9, and H1975) to increasing concentrations of these TKIs. Further on, we performed a retrospective evaluation of seven patients with advanced EGFR-mutated (exon 19 deletions and L858R) NSCLC that were given erlotinib at 25 mg/d as their first EGFR TKI. Gefitinib and erlotinib generated similar inhibitory curves across our panel of EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines with overlapping mean 50% inhibitory concentration 95% confidence intervals for HCC827, PC-9, and H1975. Both drugs also displayed a high degree of correlation in mean 50% inhibitory concentration (Pearson's r = 0.99, p = 0.0417). Of the seven patients, five patients (71.5%) had partial responses to erlotinib 25 mg/d. Median progression-free survival was 17 months (95% confidence interval, 6-35 months). Toxicities were minimal, with only two (28.5%) patients having a rash and none experiencing (0%) diarrhea. In NSCLC cell lines, gefitinib and erlotinib have similar inhibitory profiles. In patients with NSCLC and EGFR-activating mutations, a dose of erlotinib 25 mg/d (equivalent to gefitinib 250 mg/d) leads to impressive response rates and progression-free survival similar to the growing experience with the approved doses of gefitinib (250 mg/d) and erlotinib (150 mg/d). Identifying prospectively the lowest and clinically active dose ranges of erlotinib and gefitinib will help further to personalize care for patients with tumors harboring EGFR mutations.

[PMID: 18726117]
It has been reported that the R497K polymorphism of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene has attenuated functions in ligand binding, tyrosine kinase activation, and growth stimulation. On other hand, EGFR gene mutations at kinase domain in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have been examined for their ability to predict sensitivity to gefitinib or erlotinib. We investigated the EGFR mutations and/or R497K polymorphism statuses in 225 surgically treated NSCLC cases. 192 adenocarcinoma cases were included. The presence or absence of EGFR polymorphism of exon 13 was analyzed by PCR-RFLP method. EGFR mutations at kinase domain were found from 95 of 225 lung cancer patients. In 86.2% of patients, homo- or heterozygous Lys497 allele was present. No correlation existed between R497K EGFR genotype and clinico-pathological features, such as gender, smoking status, and pathological subtypes. EGFR mutation status was not correlated with R497KEGFR genotype of lung cancers. In node-negative patients, R497KEGFR genotype was not correlated with disease outcome. In node-positive patients, however, R497K EGFR was significantly associated with better overall survival. This association was attributable to neo-adjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. In 46 total gefitinib treated NSCLC patients, the prognosis was not different between the EGFR wild type (GG) patients and AG+AA patients. R497KEGFR polymorphism might be associated with favorable prognosis of advanced lung cancers and correlated with chemosensitivity.

[PMID: 20007486]
Seventy-five percent of lung adenocarcinomas with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations respond to treatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib; however, drug-resistant tumors eventually emerge. In 60% of cases, resistant tumors carry a secondary mutation in EGFR (T790M), amplification of MET, or both. Here, we describe the establishment of erlotinib resistance in lung tumors, which were induced by mutant EGFR, in transgenic mice after multiple cycles of drug treatment; we detect the T790M mutation in five out of 24 tumors or Met amplification in one out of 11 tumors in these mice. This preclinical mouse model, therefore, recapitulates the molecular changes responsible for resistance to TKIs in human tumors and holds promise for the discovery of additional mechanisms of drug resistance in lung cancer.

[PMID: 21904575]
Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) are heterogeneous cancers. In 2004, the identification of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) somatic mutations provided the first glimpse of a clinically relevant NSCLC oncogene. Approximately 70% of NSCLCs with EGFR mutations (exon 19 deletions or the exon 21 L858R) attain responses to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib, with improved response rate (RR), progression-free survival (PFS) and in some reports overall survival (OS) when compared with EGFR wildtype (WT) cases. Three randomized trials of gefitinib versus chemotherapy (IPASS, WJTOG3405, NEJ002) in stage IV NSCLC have consistently demonstrated better RR and PFS (hazard ratios of 0.48 [IPASS], 0.49 [WJTOG3405] and 0.30 [NEJ002]) for EGFR-mutated NSCLCs treated with gefitinib. Novel irreversible EGFR TKIs (afatinib, XL647, PF00299804) show similar activity in EGFR-mutated patients. A translocation involving the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene with EML4, identified in 2007, is the most recent oncogene found in NSCLC. Crizotinib (PF02341066), an ALK TKI, has shown impressive activity against ALK translocated NSCLC in an expanded cohort of a phase I trial (NCT00585195). Over 80 patients have been treated and the RR is ∼60% with the 6-month PFS rate exceeding 70%. A registration phase III trial of crizotinib versus second-line chemotherapy (pemetrexed/docetaxel) is underway (PROFILE 1007, NCT00932893). KRAS, EGFR mutations and ALK translocations are mutually exclusive and few EGFR WT NSCLCs respond to EGFR TKIs. The promising results of EGFR and ALK TKIs in molecular subgroups of NSCLCs herald a new age of drug and clinical trial development for patients with NSCLC.

[PMID: 16705038]
Somatic mutations in exons encoding the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are found in human lung adenocarcinomas and are associated with sensitivity to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib. Nearly 90% of the EGFR mutations are either short, in-frame deletions in exon 19 or point mutations that result in substitution of arginine for leucine at amino acid 858 (L858R). To study further the role of these mutations in the initiation and maintenance of lung cancer, we have developed transgenic mice that express an exon 19 deletion mutant (EGFR(DeltaL747-S752)) or the L858R mutant (EGFR(L858R)) in type II pneumocytes under the control of doxycycline. Expression of either EGFR mutant leads to the development of lung adenocarcinomas. Two weeks after induction with doxycycline, mice that express the EGFR(L858R) allele show diffuse lung cancer highly reminiscent of human bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and later develop interspersed multifocal adenocarcinomas. In contrast, mice expressing EGFR(DeltaL747-S752) develop multifocal tumors embedded in normal lung parenchyma with a longer latency. With mice carrying either EGFR allele, withdrawal of doxycycline (to reduce expression of the transgene) or treatment with erlotinib (to inhibit kinase activity) causes rapid tumor regression, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging and histopathology, demonstrating that mutant EGFR is required for tumor maintenance. These models may be useful for developing improved therapies for patients with lung cancers bearing EGFR mutations.

[PMID: 15329413]
Somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are reportedly associated with sensitivity of lung cancers to gefitinib (Iressa), kinase inhibitor. In-frame deletions occur in exon 19, whereas point mutations occur frequently in codon 858 (exon 21). We found from sequencing the EGFR TK domain that 7 of 10 gefitinib-sensitive tumors had similar types of alterations; no mutations were found in eight gefitinib-refractory tumors (P = 0.004). Five of seven tumors sensitive to erlotinib (Tarceva), a related kinase inhibitor for which the clinically relevant target is undocumented, had analogous somatic mutations, as opposed to none of 10 erlotinib-refractory tumors (P = 0.003). Because most mutation-positive tumors were adenocarcinomas from patients who smoked <100 cigarettes in a lifetime ("never smokers"), we screened EGFR exons 2-28 in 15 adenocarcinomas resected from untreated never smokers. Seven tumors had TK domain mutations, in contrast to 4 of 81 non-small cell lung cancers resected from untreated former or current smokers (P = 0.0001). Immunoblotting of lysates from cells transiently transfected with various EGFR constructs demonstrated that, compared to wild-type protein, an exon 19 deletion mutant induced diminished levels of phosphotyrosine, whereas the phosphorylation at tyrosine 1092 of an exon 21 point mutant was inhibited at 10-fold lower concentrations of drug. Collectively, these data show that adenocarcinomas from never smokers comprise a distinct subset of lung cancers, frequently containing mutations within the TK domain of EGFR that are associated with gefitinib and erlotinib sensitivity.