[PMID: 20084102]
SET domain methyltransferases deposit methyl marks on specific histone tail lysine residues and play a major role in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. We solved the structures of the catalytic domains of GLP, G9a, Suv39H2 and PRDM2, four of the eight known human H3K9 methyltransferases in their apo conformation or in complex with the methyl donating cofactor, and peptide substrates. We analyzed the structural determinants for methylation state specificity, and designed a G9a mutant able to tri-methylate H3K9. We show that the I-SET domain acts as a rigid docking platform, while induced-fit of the Post-SET domain is necessary to achieve a catalytically competent conformation. We also propose a model where long-range electrostatics bring enzyme and histone substrate together, while the presence of an arginine upstream of the target lysine is critical for binding and specificity. This article can also be viewed as an enhanced version in which the text of the article is integrated with interactive 3D representations and animated transitions. Please note that a web plugin is required to access this enhanced functionality. Instructions for the installation and use of the web plugin are available in Text S1.

[PMID: 16292313]
Epigenetic modifications of histones regulate gene expression and chromatin structure. Here we show that Meisetz (meiosis-induced factor containing a PR/SET domain and zinc-finger motif) is a histone methyltransferase that is important for the progression of early meiotic prophase. Meisetz transcripts are detected only in germ cells entering meiotic prophase in female fetal gonads and in postnatal testis. Notably, Meisetz has catalytic activity for trimethylation, but not mono- or dimethylation, of lysine 4 of histone H3, and a transactivation activity that depends on its methylation activity. Mice in which the Meisetz gene is disrupted show sterility in both sexes due to severe impairment of the double-stranded break repair pathway, deficient pairing of homologous chromosomes and impaired sex body formation. In Meisetz-deficient testis, trimethylation of lysine 4 of histone H3 is attenuated and meiotic gene transcription is altered. These findings indicate that meiosis-specific epigenetic events in mammals are crucial for proper meiotic progression.

[PMID: 17355966]
We previously identified a mammalian Set1A complex analogous to the yeast Set1/COMPASS histone H3-Lys4 methyltransferase complex (Lee, J.-H., and Skalnik, D. G. (2005) J. Biol. Chem. 280, 41725-41731). Data base analysis indicates that human Set1A protein shares 39% identity with an uncharacterized SET domain protein, KIAA1076, hereafter denoted Set1B. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry reveal that Set1B associates with a approximately 450 kDa complex that contains all five non-catalytic components of the Set1A complex, including CFP1, Rbbp5, Ash2, Wdr5, and Wdr82. These data reveal two human protein complexes that differ only in the identity of the catalytic histone methyltransferase. In vitro assays demonstrate that the Set1B complex is a histone methyltransferase that produces trimethylated histone H3 at Lys(4). Both Set1A and Set1B are widely expressed. Inducible expression of the carboxyl terminus of either Set1A or Set1B decreases steady-state levels of both endogenous Set1A and Set1B protein, but does not alter the expression of the non-catalytic components of the Set1 complexes. A 123-amino acid fragment upstream of the Set1A SET domain is necessary for interaction with CFP1, Ash2, Rbbp5, and Wdr5. This protein domain is also required to mediate feedback inhibition of Set1A and Set1B expression, which is a consequence of reduced Set1A and Set1B stability when not associated with the methyltransferase complex. Confocal microscopy reveals that Set1A and Set1B each localize to a largely non-overlapping set of euchromatic nuclear speckles, suggesting that Set1A and Set1B each bind to a unique set of target genes and thus make non-redundant contributions to the epigenetic control of chromatin structure and gene expression.

[PMID: 18693240]
Polycomb gene silencing requires histone methyltransferase activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which methylates lysine 27 of histone H3. Information on how PRC2 works is limited by lack of structural data on the catalytic subunit, Enhancer of zeste (E(Z)), and the paucity of E(z) mutant alleles that alter its SET domain. Here we analyze missense alleles of Drosophila E(z), selected for molecular study because of their dominant genetic effects. Four missense alleles identify key E(Z) SET domain residues, and a fifth is located in the adjacent CXC domain. Analysis of mutant PRC2 complexes in vitro, and H3-K27 methylation in vivo, shows that each SET domain mutation disrupts PRC2 histone methyltransferase. Based on known SET domain structures, the mutations likely affect either the lysine-substrate binding pocket, the binding site for the adenosylmethionine methyl donor, or a critical tyrosine predicted to interact with the substrate lysine epsilon-amino group. In contrast, the CXC mutant retains catalytic activity, Lys-27 specificity, and trimethylation capacity. Deletion analysis also reveals a functional requirement for a conserved E(Z) domain N-terminal to CXC and SET. These results identify critical SET domain residues needed for PRC2 enzyme function, and they also emphasize functional inputs from outside the SET domain.

[PMID: 17259630]
SET domain genes have been identified in numbers of bacterial genomes based on similarity to SET domains of eukaryotic histone methyltransferases. Herein, a Chlamydophila pneumoniae SET domain gene was clarified to be coincidently expressed with hctA and hctB genes encoding chlamydial histone H1-like proteins, Hc1 and Hc2, respectively. The SET domain protein (cpnSET) is localized in chlamydial cells and interacts with Hc1 and Hc2 through the C-terminal SET domain. As expected from conservation of catalytic sites in cpnSET, it functions as a protein methyltransferase to murine histone H3 and Hc1. However, little is known about protein methylation in the molecular pathogenesis of chlamydial infection. cpnSET may play an important role in chlamydial cell maturation due to modification of chlamydial histone H1-like proteins.

[PMID: 15939934]
Methylation of lysine 9 (K9) in the N-terminus tail of histone H3 (H3) in chromatin is associated with transcriptionally silenced genes and is mediated by histone methyltransferases. Murine G9a is a 1263 amino acid H3-K9 methyltransferase that possesses characteristic SET domain and ANK repeats. In this paper, we have used a series of green fluorescent protein-tagged deletion constructs to identify two nuclear localization signals (NLS), the first NLS embedded between amino acids 24 and 109 and the second between amino acids 394 and 401 of murine G9a. Our data show that both long and short G9a isoforms were capable of entering the nucleus to methylate chromatin. Full-length or N-terminus-deleted G9a isoforms were also catalytically active enzymes that methylated recombinant H3 or synthetic peptides representing the N-terminus tail of H3. In vitro methylation reactions using N-terminus tail peptides resulted in tri-methylation of K9 that remained processive, even in G9a enzymes that lacked an N-terminus region by deletion. Co-expression of G9a and H3 resulted in di- and tri-methylation of H3-K9, while siRNA-mediated knockdown of G9a in HeLa cells resulted in reduction of global H3-K9 di- and tri-methylation. A recombinant deletion mutant enzyme fused with maltose-binding protein (MBP-G9aDelta634) was used for steady-state kinetic analysis with various substrates and was compared with full-length G9a (G9aFL). Turnover numbers of MBP-G9aDelta634 for various substrates was approximately 3-fold less compared with G9aFL, while their Michaelis constants (K(m)) for recombinant H3 were similar. The K(AdoMet)m for MBP-G9aDelta634 was approximately 2.3-2.65 microM with various substrates. Catalytic efficiencies (kcat/K(m)) for both MBP-G9aDelta634 and G9aFL were similar, suggesting that the N-terminus is not essential for catalysis. Furthermore, mutation of conserved amino acids R1097A, W1103A, Y1120A, Y1138A and R1162A, or the metal binding C1168A in the catalytic region, resulted in catalytically impaired enzymes, thereby confirming the involvement of the C-terminus of G9a in catalysis. Thus, distinct domains modulate nuclear targeting and catalytic functions of G9a.

[PMID: 16519522]
Histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation is a major component of gene regulation and chromatin organization. SUV39H1 methylates H3K9 at the pericentric heterochromatin region and participates in the maintenance of genome stability. In this study, a recombinant purified SUV39H1 is used for substrate specificity and steady-state kinetic analysis with peptides representing the un- or dimethylated lysine 9 histone H3 tail or full-length human recombinant H3 (rH3). Recombinant SUV39H1 methylated its substrate via a nonprocessive mechanism. Binding of either peptide or AdoMet first to the enzyme made a catalytically competent binary complex. Product inhibition studies with SUV39H1 showed that S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine is a competitive inhibitor of S-adenosyl-l-methionine and a mixed inhibitor of substrate peptide. Similarly, the methylated peptide was a competitive inhibitor of the unmethylated peptide and a mixed inhibitor of AdoMet, suggesting a random mechanism in a bi-bi reaction for recombinant SUV39H1 in which either substrate can bind to the enzyme first and either product can release first. The turnover numbers (k(cat)) for the H3 tail peptide and rH3 were comparable (12 and 8 h(-)(1), respectively) compared to the value of 1.5 h(-)(1) for an identical dimethylated lysine 9 H3 tail peptide. The Michaelis constant for the methylated peptide (K(m)(pep)) was 13-fold lower compared to that of the unmethylated peptide. The Michaelis constants for AdoMet (K(m)(AdoMet)) were 12 and 6 microM for the unmethylated peptide substrate and rH3, respectively. A reduction in the level of methylation was observed at high concentrations of rH3, implying substrate inhibition. Deletion of the chromodomain or point mutation of the conserved amino acids, W64A or W67A, of SUV39H1 impaired enzyme activity despite the presence of an intact catalytic SET domain. Thus, SUV39H1 utilizes both the chromodomain and the SET domain for catalysis.

[PMID: 12628190]
Dot1 is an evolutionarily conserved histone methyltransferase that methylates lysine-79 of histone H3 in the core domain. Unlike other histone methyltransferases, Dot1 does not contain a SET domain, and it specifically methylates nucleosomal histone H3. We have solved a 2.5 A resolution structure of the catalytic domain of human Dot1, hDOT1L, in complex with S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM). The structure reveals a unique organization of a mainly alpha-helical N-terminal domain and a central open alpha/beta structure, an active site consisting of a SAM binding pocket, and a potential lysine binding channel. We also show that a flexible, positively charged region at the C terminus of the catalytic domain is critical for nucleosome binding and enzymatic activity. These structural and biochemical analyses, combined with molecular modeling, provide mechanistic insights into the catalytic mechanism and nucleosomal specificity of Dot1 proteins.

[PMID: 20599755]
NSD3/WHSC1L1 histone methyltransferase gene aberrations are observed in leukemia and in breast and lung carcinomas, suggesting that NSD3 is implicated in carcinogenesis. In this study we examined in human breast cancer cells the NSD3L isoform which contains the catalytic histone methyltransferase SET-domain. siRNA directed depletion of NSD3L followed by genome-wide microarray analysis identified NSD3L regulated genes which could be functionally linked to cellular signaling pathways such as cell growth, cell cycle, cell motility, transcription, and apoptosis. Notably up-regulated genes are the cell cycle regulators E2F2 and Arl2. In accordance with a function of NSD3L in cell cycle regulation NSD3L depletion resulted in an increase in the number of cells in the S and G2/M cell cycle phases. Moreover, NSD3L depletion increased the invasiveness of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells indicating that NSD3L normally restrain cellular metastatic potential. Together the presented data indicates that NSD3L is a candidate tumor suppressor.

[PMID: 12398767]
Covalent modifications of histone tails play important roles in gene transcription and silencing. We recently identified an ERG ( ets -related gene)-associated protein with a SET (suppressor of variegation, enhancer of zest and trithorax) domain (ESET) that was found to have the activity of a histone H3-specific methyltransferase. In the present study, we investigated the interaction of ESET with other chromatin remodelling factors. We show that ESET histone methyltransferase associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2, and that ESET also interacts with the transcription co-repressors mSin3A and mSin3B. Deletion analysis of ESET reveals that an N-terminal region containing a tudor domain is responsible for interaction with mSin3A/B and association with HDAC1/2, and that truncation of ESET enhances its binding to mSin3. When bound to a promoter, ESET represses the transcription of a downstream luciferase reporter gene. This repression by ESET is independent of its histone methyltransferase activity, but correlates with its binding to the mSin3 co-repressors. In addition, the repression can be partially reversed by treatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Taken together, these data suggest that ESET histone methyltransferase can form a large, multi-protein complex(es) with mSin3A/B co-repressors and HDAC1/2 that participates in multiple pathways of transcriptional repression.

[PMID: 14522075]
ESET (ERG-associated protein with a SET domain, also called SETDB1) is a novel histone methyltransferase that catalyzes methylation of histone H3-lysine 9 (H3-K9). Here we describe the genomic structure and expression of the mouse ESET gene that gives rise to ESET protein and its alternative splicing product. ESET is a 36-kb single copy gene and full-length ESET transcript consisting of 22 exons. The splicing variant retains only the first 12 exons and thus lacks sequences encoding the methyl CpG-binding domain and the catalytic SET domain. The U2 type conserved GT/AG consensus sequence is present at all of the splicing junctions within the ESET gene. The transcription initiation site of the ESET gene was determined by 5'-RACE experiment and by primer extension. The 5'-flanking sequence of the ESET gene does not contain the consensus TATA box. Instead, this ESET promoter region has features such as SP1-binding sites that are typical of housekeeping genes. The ESET promoter was functionally active when tested in transfection and luciferase assay. Full-length ESET transcript appears to be ubiquitously expressed. While the SET domain-deficient splicing variant is present in immortalized cell lines, it is undetectable by RT-PCR in the majority of normal mouse tissues.

[PMID: 23453808]
Past studies have documented a crosstalk between H2B ubiquitylation (H2Bub) and H3K4 methylation, but little (if any) direct evidence exists explaining the mechanism underlying H2Bub-dependent H3K4 methylation on chromatin templates. Here, we took advantage of an in vitro histone methyltransferase assay employing a reconstituted yeast Set1 complex (ySet1C) and a recombinant chromatin template containing fully ubiquitylated H2B to gain valuable insights. Combined with genetic analyses, we demonstrate that the n-SET domain within Set1, but not Swd2, is essential for H2Bub-dependent H3K4 methylation. Spp1, a homolog of human CFP1, is conditionally involved in this crosstalk. Our findings extend to the human Set1 complex, underscoring the conserved nature of this disease-relevant crosstalk pathway. As not all members of the H3K4 methyltransferase family contain n-SET domains, our studies draw attention to the n-SET domain as a predictor of an H2B ubiquitylation-sensing mechanism that leads to downstream H3K4 methylation.

[PMID: 14633678]
Histone methyltransferase (HMT)(1) class enzymes that methylate lysine residues of histones or proteins contain a conserved catalytic core termed the SET domain, which shares sequence homology with an independently described sequence motif, the PR domain. Intact PR or SET sequence is required for tumor suppression functions, but it remains unclear whether it is histone methyltransferase activity that underlies tumor suppression. We now show that tumor suppressor RIZ1 (PRDM2) methylates histone H3 on lysine 9, and this activity is reduced by mutations in the PR domain found in human cancers. Also, S-adenosylhomocysteine or methyl donor deficiency inhibits RIZ1 and other H3 lysine 9 methylation activities. These results support the hypothesis that H3 lysine 9 methylation activities of a PR/SET domain have tumor suppression functions and may underlie carcinogenesis associated with dietary methyl donor deficiency.

[PMID: 12372304]
Methylation of lysine residues in the N-terminal tails of histones is thought to represent an important component of the mechanism that regulates chromatin structure. The evolutionarily conserved SET domain occurs in most proteins known to possess histone lysine methyltransferase activity. We present here the crystal structure of a large fragment of human SET7/9 that contains a N-terminal beta-sheet domain as well as the conserved SET domain. Mutagenesis identifies two residues in the C terminus of the protein that appear essential for catalytic activity toward lysine-4 of histone H3. Furthermore, we show how the cofactor AdoMet binds to this domain and present biochemical data supporting the role of invariant residues in catalysis, binding of AdoMet, and interactions with the peptide substrate.

[PMID: 15933069]
Methylation of lysine residues of histones is an important epigenetic mark that correlates with functionally distinct regions of chromatin. We present here the crystal structure of a ternary complex of the enzyme Pr-Set7 (also known as Set8) that methylates Lys 20 of histone H4 (H4-K20). We show that the enzyme is exclusively a mono-methylase and is therefore responsible for a signaling role quite distinct from that established by other enzymes that target this histone residue. We provide evidence from NMR for the C-flanking domains of SET proteins becoming ordered upon addition of AdoMet cofactor and develop a model for the catalytic cycle of these enzymes. The crystal structure reveals the basis of the specificity of the enzyme for H4-K20 because a histidine residue within the substrate, close to the target lysine, is required for completion of the active site. We also show how a highly variable component of the SET domain is responsible for many of the enzymes' interactions with its target histone peptide and probably also how this part of the structure ensures that Pr-Set7 is nucleosome specific.

[PMID: 21124902]
Histone H3 lysine 4 (K4) methylation is a prevalent mark associated with transcription activation and is mainly catalyzed by the MLL/SET1 family histone methyltransferases. A common feature of the mammalian MLL/SET1 complexes is the presence of three core components (RbBP5, Ash2L and WDR5) and a catalytic subunit containing a SET domain. Unlike most other histone lysine methyltransferases, all four proteins are required for efficient H3 K4 methylation. Despite extensive efforts, mechanisms for how three core components regulate MLL/SET1 methyltransferase activity remain elusive. Here we show that a heterodimer of Ash2L and RbBP5 has intrinsic histone methyltransferase activity. This activity requires the highly conserved SPRY domain of Ash2L and a short peptide of RbBP5. We demonstrate that both Ash2L and the MLL1 SET domain are capable of binding to S-adenosyl-L- [methyl-(3)H] methionine in the MLL1 core complex. Mutations in the MLL1 SET domain that fail to support overall H3 K4 methylation also compromise SAM binding by Ash2L. Taken together, our results show that the Ash2L/RbBP5 heterodimer plays a critical role in the overall catalysis of MLL1 mediated H3 K4 methylation. The results we describe here provide mechanistic insights for unique regulation of the MLL1 methyltransferase activity. It suggests that both Ash2L/RbBP5 and the MLL1 SET domain make direct contacts with the substrates and contribute to the formation of a joint catalytic center. Given the shared core configuration among all MLL/SET1 family HMTs, it will be interesting to test whether the mechanism we describe here can be generalized to other MLL/SET1 family members in the future.

[PMID: 19187761]
The mixed-lineage leukemia protein MLL1 is a transcriptional regulator with an essential role in early development and hematopoiesis. The biological function of MLL1 is mediated by the histone H3K4 methyltransferase activity of the carboxyl-terminal SET domain. We have determined the crystal structure of the MLL1 SET domain in complex with cofactor product AdoHcy and a histone H3 peptide. This structure indicates that, in order to form a well-ordered active site, a highly variable but essential component of the SET domain must be repositioned. To test this idea, we compared the effect of the addition of MLL complex members on methyltransferase activity and show that both RbBP5 and Ash2L but not Wdr5 stimulate activity. Additionally, we have determined the effect of posttranslational modifications on histone H3 residues downstream and upstream from the target lysine and provide a structural explanation for why H3T3 phosphorylation and H3K9 acetylation regulate activity.

[PMID: 23652029]
The ESET (also called SETDB1) protein contains an N-terminal tudor domain that mediates protein-protein interactions and a C-terminal SET domain that catalyzes methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9. We report here that ESET protein is transiently upregulated in prehypertrophic chondrocytes in newborn mice. To investigate the in vivo effects of ESET on chondrocyte differentiation, we generated conditional knockout mice to specifically eliminate the catalytic SET domain of ESET protein only in mesenchymal cells. Such deletion of the ESET gene caused acceleration of chondrocyte hypertrophy in both embryos and young animals, depleting chondrocytes that are otherwise available to form epiphyseal plates for endochondral bone growth. ESET-deficient mice are thus characterized by defective long bone growth and trabecular bone formation. To understand the underlying mechanism for ESET regulation of chondrocytes, we carried out co-expression experiments and found that ESET associates with histone deacetylase 4 to bind and inhibit the activity of Runx2, a hypertrophy-promoting transcription factor. Repression of Runx2-mediated gene transactivation by ESET is dependent on its H3-K9 methyltransferase activity as well as its associated histone deacetylase activity. In addition, knockout of ESET is associated with repression of Indian hedgehog gene in pre- and early hypertrophic chondrocytes. Together, these results provide clear evidence that ESET controls hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes and endochondral ossification during embryogenesis and postnatal development.

[PMID: 12389038]
The SET domain contains the catalytic center of lysine methyltransferases that target the N-terminal tails of histones and regulate chromatin function. Here we report the structure of the SET7/9 protein in the absence and presence of its cofactor product, S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (AdoHcy). A knot within the SET domain helps form the methyltransferase active site, where AdoHcy binds and lysine methylation is likely to occur. A structure-guided comparison of sequences within the SET protein family suggests that the knot substructure and active site environment are conserved features of the SET domain.

[PMID: 15659850]
The SET domain, first identified within and named after proteins encoded by three Drosophila genes [Su(var)3-9, E(z), and Trithorax], is recognized as a signature motif for histone methyltransferases that are involved in epigenetic processes. The SUV39H family of SET domain proteins methylate specifically the residue lysine 9 of histone H3, creating a code for gene silencing. This family of proteins contain at their C termini a unique catalytic domain consisting of pre-SET, SET, and post-SET domains. Sequence homology-based searches identified 15 Arabidopsis, 14 maize, and 12 rice proteins that can be assigned to the SUV39H family. These high numbers in plants are in marked contrast to the situation in animals, in which each species appears to contain only two to three proteins of this family. Our phylogenetic analyses revealed that plant proteins can be classified into seven orthology groups. Representative members of each group can be found in single plant species, suggesting that different group members are evolutionarily conserved to perform specific functions.

[PMID: 17338551]
Processive versus distributive methyl group transfer was assessed for pea Rubisco large subunit methyltransferase, a SET domain protein lysine methyltransferase catalyzing the formation of trimethyllysine-14 in the large subunit of Rubisco. Catalytically competent complexes between an immobilized form of des(methyl) Rubisco and Rubisco large subunit methyltransferase were used to demonstrate enzyme release that was co-incident with and dependent on formation of trimethyllysine. Catalytic rate constants determined for formation of trimethyllysine were considerably lower ( approximately 10-fold) than rate constants determined for total radiolabel incorporation from [3H-methyl]-S-adenosylmethionine. Double-reciprocal velocity plots under catalytic conditions favoring monomethyllysine indicated a random or ordered reaction mechanism, while conditions favoring trimethyllysine suggested a hybrid ping-pong mechanism. These results were compared with double-reciprocal velocity plots and product analyses obtained for HsSET7/9 (a monomethyltransferase) and SpCLR4 (a dimethyltransferase) and suggest a predictive ability of double-reciprocal velocity plots for single versus multiple methyl group transfers by SET domain protein lysine methyltransferases. A model is proposed for SET domain protein lysine methyltransferases in which initial binding of polypeptide substrate and S-adenosylmethionine is random, with polypeptide binding followed by deprotonation of the epsilon-amine of the target lysyl residue and subsequent methylation. Following methyl group transfer, S-adenosylhomocysteine and monomethylated polypeptide dissociate from monomethyltransferases, but di- and trimethyltransferases begin a successive and catalytically obligatory deprotonation of enzyme-bound methylated lysyl intermediates, which along with binding and release of S-adenosylmethionine and S-adenosylhomocysteine is manifested as a hybrid ping-pong-like reaction mechanism.

[PMID: 12514135]
The methylation of lysine residues of histones plays a pivotal role in the regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression. Here, we report two crystal structures of SET7/9, a histone methyltransferase (HMTase) that transfers methyl groups to Lys4 of histone H3, in complex with S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) determined at 1.7 and 2.3 A resolution. The structures reveal an active site consisting of: (i) a binding pocket between the SET domain and a c-SET helix where an AdoMet molecule in an unusual conformation binds; (ii) a narrow substrate-specific channel that only unmethylated lysine residues can access; and (iii) a catalytic tyrosine residue. The methyl group of AdoMet is directed to the narrow channel where a substrate lysine enters from the opposite side. We demonstrate that SET7/9 can transfer two but not three methyl groups to unmodified Lys4 of H3 without substrate dissociation. The unusual features of the SET domain-containing HMTase discriminate between the un- and methylated lysine substrate, and the methylation sites for the histone H3 tail.

[PMID: 17517655]
Methylation of certain lysine residues in the N-terminal tails of core histone proteins in nucleosome is of fundamental importance in the regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression. Such histone modification is catalyzed by protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs). PKMTs contain a conserved SET domain in almost all of the cases and may transfer one to three methyl groups from S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) to the epsilon-amino group of the target lysine residue. Here, quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical molecular dynamics and free-energy simulations are performed on human PKMT SET7/9 and its mutants to understand two outstanding questions for the reaction catalyzed by PKMTs: the mechanism for deprotonation of positively charged methyl lysine (lysine) and origin of product specificity. The results of the simulations suggest that Tyr-335 (an absolute conserved residue in PKMTs) may play the role as the general base for the deprotonation after dissociation of AdoHcy (S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine) and before binding of AdoMet. It is shown that conformational changes could bring Y335 to the target methyl lysine (lysine) for proton abstraction. This mechanism provides an explanation why methyl transfers could be catalyzed by PKMTs processively. The free-energy profiles for methyl transfers are reported and analyzed for wild type and certain mutants (Y305F and Y335F) and the active-site interactions that are of importance for the enzyme's function are discussed. The results of the simulations provide important insights into the catalytic process and lead to a better understanding of experimental observations concerning the origin of product specificity for PKMTs.

[PMID: 10949293]
The organization of chromatin into higher-order structures influences chromosome function and epigenetic gene regulation. Higher-order chromatin has been proposed to be nucleated by the covalent modification of histone tails and the subsequent establishment of chromosomal subdomains by non-histone modifier factors. Here we show that human SUV39H1 and murine Suv39h1--mammalian homologues of Drosophila Su(var)3-9 and of Schizosaccharomyces pombe clr4--encode histone H3-specific methyltransferases that selectively methylate lysine 9 of the amino terminus of histone H3 in vitro. We mapped the catalytic motif to the evolutionarily conserved SET domain, which requires adjacent cysteine-rich regions to confer histone methyltransferase activity. Methylation of lysine 9 interferes with phosphorylation of serine 10, but is also influenced by pre-existing modifications in the amino terminus of H3. In vivo, deregulated SUV39H1 or disrupted Suv39h activity modulate H3 serine 10 phosphorylation in native chromatin and induce aberrant mitotic divisions. Our data reveal a functional interdependence of site-specific H3 tail modifications and suggest a dynamic mechanism for the regulation of higher-order chromatin.

[PMID: 16055700]
The ESC-E(Z) complex of Drosophila melanogaster Polycomb group (PcG) repressors is a histone H3 methyltransferase (HMTase). This complex silences fly Hox genes, and related HMTases control germ line development in worms, flowering in plants, and X inactivation in mammals. The fly complex contains a catalytic SET domain subunit, E(Z), plus three noncatalytic subunits, SU(Z)12, ESC, and NURF-55. The four-subunit complex is >1,000-fold more active than E(Z) alone. Here we show that ESC and SU(Z)12 play key roles in potentiating E(Z) HMTase activity. We also show that loss of ESC disrupts global methylation of histone H3-lysine 27 in fly embryos. Subunit mutations identify domains required for catalytic activity and/or binding to specific partners. We describe missense mutations in surface loops of ESC, in the CXC domain of E(Z), and in the conserved VEFS domain of SU(Z)12, which each disrupt HMTase activity but preserve complex assembly. Thus, the E(Z) SET domain requires multiple partner inputs to produce active HMTase. We also find that a recombinant worm complex containing the E(Z) homolog, MES-2, has robust HMTase activity, which depends upon both MES-6, an ESC homolog, and MES-3, a pioneer protein. Thus, although the fly and mammalian PcG complexes absolutely require SU(Z)12, the worm complex generates HMTase activity from a distinct partner set.

[PMID: 12887887]
In this issue of Molecular Cell, Zhang et al. report the structure of a ternary complex between the SET domain histone methyltransferase DIM-5, its cofactor, and a histone H3 peptide. The insight gained from analysis of a key amino acid provides an exciting opportunity to dissect the possible functional meaning of mono-, di-, and trimethylation of histone lysine residues in vivo that will complement existing approaches in the quest to crack the histone methylation code.

[PMID: 21196496]
The Sotos syndrome gene product, NSD1, is a SET domain histone methyltransferase that primarily dimethylates nucleosomal histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36). To date, the intrinsic properties of NSD1 that determine its nucleosomal substrate selectivity and dimethyl H3K36 product specificity remain unknown. The 1.7 Å structure of the catalytic domain of NSD1 presented here shows that a regulatory loop adopts a conformation that prevents free access of H3K36 to the bound S-adenosyl-L-methionine. Molecular dynamics simulation and computational docking revealed that this normally inhibitory loop can adopt an active conformation, allowing H3K36 access to the active site, and that the nucleosome may stabilize the active conformation of the regulatory loop. Hence, our study reveals an autoregulatory mechanism of NSD1 and provides insight into the molecular mechanism of the nucleosomal substrate selectivity of this disease-related H3K36 methyltransferase.

[PMID: 21564555]
A survey of the human genome was performed to understand the constituency of protein methyltransferases (both protein arginine and lysine methyltransferases) and the relatedness of their catalytic domains. We identified 51 protein lysine methyltransferase proteins based on similarity to the canonical Drosophila Su(var)3-9, enhancer of zeste (E(z)), and trithorax (trx) domain. Disruptor of telomeric silencing-1-like, a known protein lysine methyltransferase, did not fit within the protein lysine methyltransferase family, but did group with the protein arginine methyltransferases, along with 44 other proteins, including the METTL and NOP2/Sun domain family proteins. We show that a representative METTL, METTL11A, demonstrates catalytic activity as a histone methyltransferase. We also solved the co-crystal structures of disruptor of telomeric silencing-1-like with S-adenosylmethionine and S-adenosylhomocysteine bound in its active site. The conformation of both ligands is virtually identical to that found in known protein arginine methyltransferases, METTL and NOP2/Sun domain family proteins and is distinct from that seen in the Drosophila Su(var)3-9, enhancer of zeste (E(z)), and trithorax (trx) domain protein lysine methyltransferases. We have developed biochemical assays for 11 members of the protein methyltransferase target class and have profiled the affinity of three ligands for these enzymes: the common methyl-donating substrate S-adenosylmethionine; the common reaction product S-adenosylhomocysteine; and the natural product sinefungin. The affinity of each of these ligands is mapped onto the family trees of the protein lysine methyltransferases and protein arginine methyltransferases to reveal patterns of ligand recognition by these enzymes.