[PMID: 17005396]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a congenital muscle disorder caused by mutations in the MTM1 gene. Affected males usually present at birth with severe hypotonia and respiratory insufficiency, and most of them die within the first few years of life. We report here on a 68-year-old patient with a very mild form of the disease who was diagnosed after his grandson showed muscular weakness and respiratory problems at birth. The E404K mutation in the MTM1 gene was found in both patients. To our knowledge, this grandfather is one of the oldest and most mildly affected known patients with an MTM1 mutation to date. Thus, this family represents a remarkable phenotypic variation of XLMTM ranging from a congenital to a mild adult form.

[PMID: 20434914]
X-linked centronuclear myopathy (XLMTM), also called myotubular myopathy, is a severe congenital myopathy characterized by generalized hypotonia and weakness at birth and the typical histological finding of centralization of myo-nuclei. It is caused by mutations in the MTM1 gene encoding the 3-phosphoinositides phosphatase myotubularin. Mutations in dynamin 2 and amphiphysin 2 genes lead to autosomal forms of centronuclear myopathy (CNM). While XLMTM is the most frequent and severe form of CNM, no mutations are found in about 30% of patients by sequencing all MTM1 exons. Moreover, the impact of MTM1 sequence variants is sometimes difficult to assess. It is thus important to devise a complete molecular diagnostic strategy that includes analysis of the myotubularin transcript and protein expression. We therefore developed novel antibodies against human myotubularin and showed that they are able to detect the endogenous protein by direct Western blot from muscle samples and from cultured cells. In conjunction with RT-PCR analysis we validated the consequences of missense and splice mutations on transcript integrity and protein level. We also detected and characterized a novel deep intronic mutation consisting of a single nucleotide change that induces exonisation of a conserved intronic sequence. Patients with centronuclear myopathy and no molecular diagnosis should be investigated for MTM1 defects at the cDNA and protein level.

[PMID: 10714588]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) characteristically causes severe or fatal muscle weakness in male infants. Mutations in the gene MTM1, encoding the protein myotubularin, can be identified in most families. Prior to this report, XLMTM was thought not to cause symptomatic manifestations in female carriers. We describe an adult female from a large family with typical XLMTM. The patient had progressive disabling muscle weakness of later onset and lesser severity than that observed in affected males. The distribution of weakness resembled typical XLMTM with facial weakness, marked limb-girdle weakness, respiratory muscle involvement and dysphagia. Analysis of the MTM1 gene identified a heterozygous missense mutation (G378R) within the highly conserved tyrosine phosphatase site of myotubularin. We did not identify significantly skewed X-inactivation. We conclude that XLMTM is capable of causing significant disability in heterozygotes.

[PMID: 17621527]
Myotubular myopathy is a well-defined entity within the centronuclear myopathy subgroup of congenital myopathies. The authors present a patient with the most severe X-linked recessive type (XLMTM). A baby boy presented at birth with severe hypotonia, weak spontaneous movements, arthrogryposis, and respiratory insufficiency. Muscle biopsy showed features of myotubular myopathy. The diagnosis was confirmed and further specified by genetic analysis, revealing a novel frameshift mutation (1314-1315insT) of the myotubularin-coding MTM1 gene. This case underlines the importance of interdisciplinary analysis of congenital muscle diseases, including histomorphological and genetic investigations.

[PMID: 9450905]
X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (XLMTM; MTM1) is a severe neonatal disorder often causing perinatal death of the affected males. The responsible gene, designated MTM1, was localized to proximal Xq28 and recently isolated. The characterization of MTM1 allowed us to screen for causing mutations in three families, previously investigated by linkage analysis. Using exon amplification, single strand conformation polymorphism, and subsequent sequencing analysis, three new mutations and their mutational origin were characterized by analyzing 10 exons. An acceptor splice site and a frameshift mutation were correlated with the concurrent appearance of XLMTM in two families. A third intronic mutation was also analyzed by reverse transcription PCR and revealed a cryptic splice site mutation cosegregating with the presumed XLMTM haplotype in the third family. These results further support the implication of the MTM1 gene in XLMTM and allow efficient and reliable carrier and prenatal diagnosis in these families. Direct mutational diagnosis of families at risk in combination with haplotype analysis avoid the drawbacks using only linkage analysis, make genetic counselling far more reliable, and early clinical management of this disease more appropriate. Moreover, pedigree analyses provide first information on de novo mutation frequency in this newly identified human disease gene.

[PMID: 19084976]
Mutations in the gene encoding the phosphoinositide phosphatase myotubularin 1 protein (MTM1) are usually associated with severe neonatal X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM). However, mutations in MTM1 have also been recognized as the underlying cause of "atypical" forms of XLMTM in newborn boys, female infants, female manifesting carriers and adult men. We reviewed systematically the biopsies of a cohort of patients with an unclassified form of centronuclear myopathy (CNM) and identified four patients presenting a peculiar histological alteration in some muscle fibers that resembled a necklace ("necklace fibers"). We analyzed further the clinical and morphological features and performed a screening of the genes involved in CNM. Muscle biopsies in all four patients demonstrated 4-20% of fibers with internalized nuclei aligned in a basophilic ring (necklace) at 3 microm beneath the sarcolemma. Ultrastructurally, such necklaces consisted of myofibrils of smaller diameter, in oblique orientation, surrounded by mitochondria, sarcoplasmic reticulum and glycogen granules. In the four patients (three women and one man), myopathy developed in early childhood but was slowly progressive. All had mutations in the MTM1 gene. Two mutations have previously been reported (p.E404K and p.R241Q), while two are novel; a c.205_206delinsAACT frameshift change in exon 4 and a c.1234A>G mutation in exon 11 leading to an abnormal splicing and the deletion of nine amino acids in the catalytic domain of MTM1. Necklace fibers were seen neither in DNM2- or BIN1-related CNM nor in males with classical XLMTM. The presence of necklace fibers is useful as a marker to direct genetic analysis to MTM1 in CNM.

[PMID: 8664565]
The research work presented at this the 2nd Workshop of the International Consortium on X-linked Myotubular Myopathy has clearly shown the benefits to be gained from a multinational research consortium with a common interest in identifying and cloning the MTM1 gene. The clinicians have rapid access to knowledge about the current state of the detailed physical map encompassing the disease gene, which is of particular importance when asked to carry out a linkage-based carrier risk assessment in such families, and the molecular geneticists benefit by having access to a large panel of samples from clinically well-documented XMTM patients, and their families, for the rapid testing of any new potential candidate genes. Strategies for the rapid exchange of information and material between members of the consortium to facilitate the cloning of the MTM gene were generated in the hope that the next Workshop will see the consortium discussing the clinical and histological implications of the mutations found. To this end it was decided to set up a Register, based in Cardiff, of all XMTM patients from whom tissue and DNA samples had been made available to the consortium. A decision was also made to collect samples from the very rare families with possible autosomal MTM for future study.

[PMID: 12391329]
Myotubularin is a ubiquitously expressed phosphatase that acts on phosphatidylinositol 3-monophosphate [PI(3)P], a lipid implicated in intracellular vesicle trafficking and autophagy. It is encoded by the MTM1 gene, which is mutated in X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a muscular disorder characterized by generalized hypotonia and muscle weakness at birth leading to early death of most affected males. The disease was proposed to result from an arrest in myogenesis, as the skeletal muscle from patients contains hypotrophic fibers with centrally located nuclei that resemble fetal myotubes. To understand the physiopathological mechanism of XLMTM, we have generated mice lacking myotubularin by homologous recombination. These mice are viable, but their lifespan is severely reduced. They develop a generalized and progressive myopathy starting at around 4 weeks of age, with amyotrophy and accumulation of central nuclei in skeletal muscle fibers leading to death at 6-14 weeks. Contrary to expectations, we show that muscle differentiation in knockout mice occurs normally. We provide evidence that fibers with centralized myonuclei originate mainly from a structural maintenance defect affecting myotubularin-deficient muscle rather than a regenerative process. In addition, we demonstrate, through a conditional gene-targeting approach, that skeletal muscle is the primary target of murine XLMTM pathology. These mutant mice represent animal models for the human disease and will be a valuable tool for understanding the physiological role of myotubularin.

[PMID: 20682747]
Mutations in the MTM1 gene encoding myotubularin cause X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a well-defined subtype of human centronuclear myopathy. Seven male Labrador Retrievers, age 14-26 wk, were clinically evaluated for generalized weakness and muscle atrophy. Muscle biopsies showed variability in fiber size, centrally placed nuclei resembling fetal myotubes, and subsarcolemmal ringed and central dense areas highlighted with mitochondrial specific reactions. Ultrastructural studies confirmed the centrally located nuclei, abnormal perinuclear structure, and mitochondrial accumulations. Wild-type triads were infrequent, with most exhibiting an abnormal orientation of T tubules. MTM1 gene sequencing revealed a unique exon 7 variant in all seven affected males, causing a nonconservative missense change, p.N155K, which haplotype data suggest derives from a recent founder in the local population. Analysis of a worldwide panel of 237 unaffected Labrador Retrievers and 59 additional control dogs from 25 other breeds failed to identify this variant, supporting it as the pathogenic mutation. Myotubularin protein levels and localization were abnormal in muscles from affected dogs, and expression of GFP-MTM1 p.N155K in COS-1 cells showed that the mutant protein was sequestered in proteasomes, where it was presumably misfolded and prematurely degraded. These data demonstrate that XLMTM in Labrador Retrievers is a faithful genetic model of the human condition.

[PMID: 22068590]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (MTM) is a severe neuromuscular disease of infancy caused by mutations of MTM1, which encodes the phosphoinositide lipid phosphatase, myotubularin. The Mtm1 knockout (KO) mouse has a severe phenotype and its short lifespan (8 weeks) makes it a challenge to use as a model in the testing of certain preclinical therapeutics. Many MTM patients succumb early in life, but some have a more favorable prognosis. We used human genotype-phenotype correlation data to develop a myotubularin-deficient mouse model with a less severe phenotype than is seen in Mtm1 KO mice. We modeled the human c.205C>T point mutation in Mtm1 exon 4, which is predicted to introduce the p.R69C missense change in myotubularin. Hemizygous male Mtm1 p.R69C mice develop early muscle atrophy prior to the onset of weakness at 2 months. The median survival period is 66 weeks. Histopathology shows small myofibers with centrally placed nuclei. Myotubularin protein is undetectably low because the introduced c.205C>T base change induced exon 4 skipping in most mRNAs, leading to premature termination of myotubularin translation. Some full-length Mtm1 mRNA bearing the mutation is present, which provides enough myotubularin activity to account for the relatively mild phenotype, as Mtm1 KO and Mtm1 p.R69C mice have similar muscle phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate levels. These data explain the basis for phenotypic variability among human patients with MTM1 p.R69C mutations and establish the Mtm1 p.R69C mouse as a valuable model for the disease, as its less severe phenotype will expand the scope of testable preclinical therapies.

[PMID: 12031625]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM; OMIM# 310400) is a severe congenital muscle disease caused by mutations in the myotubularin (MTM1) gene. This gene encodes for a lipid phosphatase belonging to a large gene family involved in the regulation of phosphatidylinositide-3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) pathway and membrane trafficking. To date, more than 130 different mutations, distributed in all exons, have been identified in a large number of families. The majority of MTM1 mutations are private and rare, generating high allelic diversity, with a restricted number of recurrent mutations. We set up and formatted a denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) method to allow high throughput, greater accuracy and high resolution in detecting myotubularin mutations. The entire coding sequence of the gene was screened in 10 XLMTM patients using this technique. We identified seven mutated alleles [R37X, (137-11) A, (592-593) insA, T197I, R253X, G378R, G402R] previously characterised by SSCP and DNA sequencing, plus two novel mutations which are reported here [P199S, (1644+2) insG]. In addition we detected a common polymorphism within intron 11 (1314+3A/G). Our results suggest that denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography provides an accurate method for the rapid identification of MTM1 mutations.

[PMID: 9736772]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a severe congenital muscle disorder due to mutations in the MTM1 gene. The corresponding protein, myotubularin, contains the consensus active site of tyrosine phosphatases (PTP) but otherwise shows no homology to other phosphatases. Myotubularin is able to hydrolyze a synthetic analogue of tyrosine phosphate, in a reaction inhibited by orthovanadate, and was recently shown to act on both phosphotyrosine and phosphoserine. This gene is conserved down to yeast and strong homologies were found with human ESTs, thus defining a new dual specificity phosphatase (DSP) family. We report the presence of novel members of the MTM gene family in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Caenorhabditis elegans, zebrafish, Drosophila, mouse and man. This represents the largest family of DSPs described to date. Eight MTM-related genes were found in the human genome and we determined the chromosomal localization and expression pattern for most of them. A subclass of the myotubularin homologues lacks a functional PTP active site. Missense mutations found in XLMTM patients affect residues conserved in a Drosophila homologue. Comparison of the various genes allowed construction of a phylogenetic tree and reveals conserved residues which may be essential for function. These genes may be good candidates for other genetic diseases.

[PMID: 9541111]
A family with two male cousins affected with myotubular myopathy (MTM) was referred to us for genetic counselling. Linkage analysis appeared to exclude the Xq28 region. As a gene for X linked MTM was recently identified in Xq28, we screened the obligatory carrier mothers for mutation. We found a 4 bp deletion in exon 4 of the MTM1 gene, which originated from the grandfather of the affected children and which was transmitted to three daughters. This illustrates the importance of mutation detection to avoid pitfalls in linkage analysis that may be caused by such cases of germinal mosaicism.

[PMID: 14660569]
MTM1, the gene encoding myotubularin (MTM1), is mutated in the X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a severe genetic muscular disorder. MTM1 is a phosphoinositide phosphatase hydrolyzing phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns(3)P) in yeast and in vitro. Because this lipid is implicated in the regulation of vesicular trafficking, we used established cell lines from XLMTM patients to evaluate whether the lack of endogenous MTM1 expression could affect PtdIns(3)P labeling patterns. Our results showed that the vesicular trafficking related to early endosomes was not significantly affected in the XLMTM cell lines compared with control cells. However, in addition to PtdIns(3)P, we found that MTM1 can hydrolyze phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate both in vitro and in mammalian cells. Using a mass assay, we demonstrated that the product generated is phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate (PtdIns(5)P), a recently discovered phosphoinositide, the function of which is still unknown. In L6 myotubes overexpressing MTM1, hyperosmotic shock induced an increase in the mass level of PtdIns(5)P that was reduced by 50% upon overexpression of the MTM1 inactive mutant D278A. These data demonstrate for the first time a role for MTM1 in the production of PtdIns(5)P in mammalian cells, suggesting that the lack of transformation of phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate into PtdIns(5)P might be an important component in the etiology of myotubular myopathy.

[PMID: 11456308]
Mutations in the MTM1 gene cause X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (XLMTM; MIM310400). Myotubularin, the implicated protein, is a phosphoinositide phosphatase that belongs to a large protein family conserved through evolution that also includes the antiphosphatase Sbfl and the protein hMTMR2 mutated in Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4B. Myotubularin is detectable in a variety of cell lines by immunoprecipitation followed by Western blotting. We screened 29 independant patients with XLMTM phenotype and four with centronuclear myopathy. 87% (21/24) of patients with known MTM1 mutations showed abnormal myotubularin levels, including some with missense mutations. Moreover, myotubularin was also undetectable in a patient for whom no mutation could be identified by SSCP screening. The centronuclear cases investigated have a normal level of protein, suggesting that the centronuclear form is not the result of a decrease in myotubularin level. Thus, immunoprecipitation of myotubularin from cultured cells represents a rapid and helpful method for classifying those cases where no mutation was found. On the other hand, the amount of expression may be of diagnostic value for disease course in patients with a mutation.

[PMID: 10063835]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a congenital muscle disorder mainly affecting newborn males. Neonatal muscle weakness and hypotonia usually leads to a rapid demise. The responsible gene, MTM1, was isolated in 1996, and mutational data derived from 90 patients have been published. We report on our findings in a further 53 patients, using genomic DNA and mRNA screening protocols. Thirty-four novel mutations were identified in 37 cases, and six known mutations found in 10 other patients. The 34 new mutations include five large deletions, eight nonsense, six frameshift, five missense, and eight splice-site mutations, whereas two intronic variants causing partial exon skipping represent the first report on such a mechanism in MTM1. Two deletions, one involving exon 1, and the second exon 15, are the first defects to be identified in these exons. The heterogeneity of the mutations, their mutational origins, and the varied ethnic backgrounds of the patients, indicate that the majority of XLMTM families are affected by unique MTM1 mutations.

[PMID: 18434328]
Myotubular myopathy (XLMTM, OMIM 310400) is a severe congenital muscular disease due to mutations in the myotubularin gene (MTM1) and characterized by the presence of small myofibers with frequent occurrence of central nuclei. Myotubularin is a ubiquitously expressed phosphoinositide phosphatase with a muscle-specific role in man and mouse that is poorly understood. No specific treatment exists to date for patients with myotubular myopathy. We have constructed an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector expressing myotubularin in order to test its therapeutic potential in a XLMTM mouse model. We show that a single intramuscular injection of this vector in symptomatic Mtm1-deficient mice ameliorates the pathological phenotype in the targeted muscle. Myotubularin replacement in mice largely corrects nuclei and mitochondria positioning in myofibers and leads to a strong increase in muscle volume and recovery of the contractile force. In addition, we used this AAV vector to overexpress myotubularin in wild-type skeletal muscle and get insight into its localization and function. We show that a substantial proportion of myotubularin associates with the sarcolemma and I band, including triads. Myotubularin overexpression in muscle induces the accumulation of packed membrane saccules and presence of vacuoles that contain markers of sarcolemma and T-tubules, suggesting that myotubularin is involved in plasma membrane homeostasis of myofibers. This study provides a proof-of-principle that local delivery of an AAV vector expressing myotubularin can improve the motor capacities of XLMTM muscle and represents a novel approach to study myotubularin function in skeletal muscle.

[PMID: 10323249]
X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a muscle disorder usually affecting newborn males. In the majority of cases, muscle weakness and hypotonia lead to a rapid demise at neonatal age. The responsible MTM1 gene is located in proximal Xq28. Heterozygous carriers are described as being asymptomatic but, in a few cases, mild facial weakness has been reported. We report a family in which a 39-year old female showed severe progressive muscle weakness. XLMTM was initially diagnosed in the male offspring of one of the patient's sisters. The patient, one of her sisters, and their mother were heterozygous carriers for a common MTM1 gene mutation. We found an extremely skewed X-inactivation pattern in the patient and, in the opposite direction, in her non-manifesting carrier mother, thus explaining her normal phenotype and indicating a possible inheritance of skewed X-inactivation. Linkage analysis excluded a possible involvement of the XIST locus at Xq13.

[PMID: 19846786]
Skeletal muscle contraction is triggered by the excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling machinery residing at the triad, a membrane structure formed by the juxtaposition of T-tubules and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) cisternae. The formation and maintenance of this structure is key for muscle function but is not well characterized. We have investigated the mechanisms leading to X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a severe congenital disorder due to loss of function mutations in the MTM1 gene, encoding myotubularin, a phosphoinositide phosphatase thought to have a role in plasma membrane homeostasis and endocytosis. Using a mouse model of the disease, we report that Mtm1-deficient muscle fibers have a decreased number of triads and abnormal longitudinally oriented T-tubules. In addition, SR Ca(2+) release elicited by voltage-clamp depolarizations is strongly depressed in myotubularin-deficient muscle fibers, with myoplasmic Ca(2+) removal and SR Ca(2+) content essentially unaffected. At the molecular level, Mtm1-deficient myofibers exhibit a 3-fold reduction in type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) protein level. These data reveal a critical role of myotubularin in the proper organization and function of the E-C coupling machinery and strongly suggest that defective RyR1-mediated SR Ca(2+) release is responsible for the failure of muscle function in myotubular myopathy.

[PMID: 22987702]
We established a colony of dogs that harbor an X-linked MTM1 missense mutation.Muscle from affected male dogs exhibits reduction and altered localization of the MTM1 gene product, myotubularin, and provides a model analogous to X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM). We studied hindlimb muscle function in age-matched canine XLMTM genotypes between ages 9 and 18 weeks. By the end of the study, affected dogs produce only ∼15% of the torque generated by normals or carriers (0.023 ± 0.005 vs. 0.152 ± 0.007 and 0.154 ± 0.003 N-m/kg body mass, respectively, P < 0.05) and are too weak to stand unassisted. At this age, XLMTM dogs also demonstrate an abnormally low twitch:tetanus ratio, a right-shifted torque-frequency relationship and an increase in torque during repetitive stimulation (P < 0.05). We hypothesize that muscle weakness results from impaired excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling. Interventions that improve E-C coupling might be translated from the XLMTM dog model to patients.

[PMID: 22435031]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare congenital myopathy, usually characterized by severe hypotonia and respiratory insufficiency at birth, in affected, male infants. The disease is causally associated with mutations in the MTM1 gene, coding for phosphatase myotubularin. We report a severe case of XLMTM with a novel mutation, at a donor splicing site (c.1467+1G) previously associated with severe phenotype. The mutation was also identified in the patient's mother, providing an opportunity for sound genetic counseling.

[PMID: 18358876]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a recessive disorder, is caused by mutations affecting the myotubulatin (MTM1) gene located on the X chromosome. Most of the affected males die in the early postnatal period whereas female carriers are usually asymptomatic. We report a family in which two females (45 and 27 years old) in two different generations, presented unilateral weakness which had worsened since adolescence, and one 48-year-old woman presented minimal symptoms. In agreement with the computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging findings, the EMG was compatible with myopathy. Serum creatine kinase was elevated in the second patient. The histological study showed centronuclear myopathy aspects, more severe in the second patient. Both presented c.1420C>T, p.Arg474X in exon 13 of the MTM1 gene, whereas the third patients with less pronounced manifestation, had a skewed pattern of X chromosome inactivation. Symptomatic female carriers of XLMTM can present with asymmetric malformations, which must be distinguished from an autosomal-dominant centronuclear myopathy. Unilateral presentation of weakness cannot rule out a diagnosis of myopathy. Detection of symptomatic female carriers of an X linked recessive disease, with a severe presentation in males, is important for genetic counselling.

[PMID: 23390130]
Manipulation of the mouse genome by site-specific mutagenesis has been extensively used to study gene function and model human disorders. Mouse models of myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a severe congenital muscular disorder due to loss-of-function mutations in the MTM1 gene, have been generated by homologous recombination and shown that myotubularin is essential for skeletal muscle. However, since the Mtm1 deletion occurred constitutively or shortly after birth in these mice, it is not known whether myotubularin is required during adulthood, an important issue in the context of not only muscle biology but also therapies. To delete the Mtm1 gene in adult muscle fibers, we constructed a recombinant adeno-associated vector (AAV) that expresses the Cre recombinase under the muscle-specific desmin promoter. We report that a single injection of this vector into muscles of 3-month-old Mtm1 conditional mice leads to a myotubular myopathy phenotype with myofiber atrophy, disorganization of organelle positioning, such as mitochondria and nuclei, T-tubule defects and severe muscle weakness. In addition, our results show that MTM1-related atrophy and dysfunction correlate with abnormalities in satellite cell number and markers of autophagy, protein synthesis and neuromuscular junction transmission. The expression level of atrogenes was also analyzed. Therefore, we provide a valuable tissue model that recapitulates the main features of the disease, and it is useful to study pathogenesis and evaluate therapeutic strategies. We establish the proof-of-concept that myotubularin is required for the proper function of skeletal muscle during adulthood, suggesting that therapies will be required for the entire life of XLMTM patients.

[PMID: 9781038]
X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a very severe congenital muscular disease characterised by an impaired maturation of muscle fibres, and caused by defects in the MTM1 gene. This gene defines a new family of putative tyrosine phosphatases conserved through evolution. We have determined intronic flanking sequences for all the 15 exons to facilitate the detection of mutations in patients and genetic counselling. We characterised a new polymorphic marker in the immediate vicinity of the gene, which might prove useful for linkage analysis. Sequencing of the TATA-less predicted promoter provides the basis for transcriptional regulatory studies.

[PMID: 9305655]
X-linked recessive myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is characterized by severe hypotonia and generalized muscle weakness, with impaired maturation of muscle fibres. The gene responsible, MTM1, was identified recently by positional cloning, and encodes a protein (myotubularin) with a tyrosine phosphatase domain (PTP). Myotubularin is highly conserved through evolution and defines a new family of putative tyrosine phosphatases in man. We report the identification of MTM1 mutations in 55 of 85 independent patients screened by single-strand conformation polymorphism for all the coding sequence. Large deletions were observed in only three patients. Five point mutations were found in multiple unrelated patients, accounting for 27% of the observed mutations. The possibility of detecting mutations and determining carrier status in a disease with a high proportion of sporadic cases is of importance for genetic counselling. More than half of XLMTM mutations are expected to inactivate the putative enzymatic activity of myotubularin, either by truncation or by missense mutations affecting the predicted PTP domain. Additional mutations are missenses clustered in two regions of the protein. Most of these affect amino acids conserved in the homologous yeast and Caenorhabditis elegans proteins, thus indicating the presence of other functional domains.

[PMID: 10502779]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a congenital muscular disease characterized by severe hypotonia and generalized muscle weakness, leading in most cases to early postnatal death. The gene responsible for the disease, MTM1, encodes a dual specificity phosphatase, named myotubularin, which is highly conserved throughout evolution. To date, 139 MTM1 mutations in independent patients have been reported, corresponding to 93 different mutations. In this report we describe the identification of 21 mutations (14 novel) in XLMTM patients. Seventeen mutations are associated with a severe phenotype in males, with death occurring mainly before the first year of life. However, four mutations-three missense (R241C, I225T, and novel mutation P179S) and one single-amino acid deletion (G294del)-were found in patients with a much milder phenotype. These patients, while having a severe hypotonia at birth, are still alive at the age of 4, 7, 13, and 15 years, respectively, and display mild to moderate muscle weakness.

[PMID: 23346162]
Myotubular myopathy (MTM) is a congenital myopathy characterized by centrally placed nuclei in muscle fibers. Mutations in the myotubularin 1 gene (MTM1) have been identified in the most of the patients with the X-linked recessive form. This report describes two male infants with X-linked MTM (XLMTM). Both patients presented with generalized hypotonia and respiratory difficulties since birth. We did not perform a muscle biopsy in either patient, but their conditions were diagnosed by genetic testing of MTM1. One splicing mutation, c.63+1G>C, and a frame-shift mutation, c.473delA (p. Lys158SerfxX28), were identified. Neither mutation has been reported previously. Genetic testing for MTM1 is helpful for the differential diagnosis of floppy male infants. We suggest that advanced molecular genetic testing may permit a correct diagnosis while avoiding invasive procedures.

[PMID: 21488203]
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare congenital muscle disorder, caused by mutations in the MTM1 gene. Affected male infants present severe hypotonia, and generalized muscle weakness, and the disorder is most often complicated by respiratory failure. Herein, we describe a family with 2 infants with XLMTM which was diagnosed by gene analysis and muscle biopsy. In both cases, histological findings of muscle showed severely hypoplastic muscle fibers with centrally placed nuclei. From the family gene analysis, the Arg486STOP mutation in the MTM1 gene was confirmed.

[PMID: 11001925]
Myotubular myopathy (MTM1) is an X-linked disease, characterized by severe neonatal hypotonia and generalized muscle weakness, with pathological features suggesting an impairment in maturation of muscle fibres. The MTM1 gene encodes a protein (myotubularin) with a phosphotyrosine phosphatase consensus. It defines a family of at least nine genes in man, including the antiphosphatase hMTMR5/Sbf1 and hMTMR2, recently found mutated in a recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Myotubularin shows a dual specificity protein phosphatase activity in vitro. We have performed an in vivo test of tyrosine phosphatase activity in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, indicating that myotubularin does not have a broad specificity tyrosine phosphatase activity. Expression of active human myotubularin inhibited growth of S.pombe and induced a vacuolar phenotype similar to that of mutants of the vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) pathway and notably of mutants of VPS34, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). In S.pombe cells deleted for the endogenous MTM homologous gene, expression of human myotubularin decreased the level of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P). We have created a substrate trap mutant which shows relocalization to plasma membrane projections (spikes) in HeLa cells and was inactive in the S.pombe assay. This mutant, but not the wild-type or a phosphatase site mutant, was able to immunoprecipitate a VPS34 kinase activity. Wild-type myotubularin was also able to directly dephosphorylate PI3P and PI4P in vitro. Myotubularin may thus decrease PI3P levels by down-regulating PI3K activity and by directly degrading PI3P.