[PMID: 11897647]
Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a life-threatening disease for which continuous intravenous prostacyclin has proven to be effective. However, this treatment requires a permanent central venous catheter with the associated risk of serious complications such as sepsis, thromboembolism, or syncope. Treprostinil, a stable prostacyclin analogue, can be administered by a continuous subcutaneous infusion, avoiding these risks. We conducted a 12-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial in 470 patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, either primary or associated with connective tissue disease or congenital systemic-to-pulmonary shunts. Exercise capacity improved with treprostinil and was unchanged with placebo; the between treatment group difference in median six-minute walking distance was 16 m (p = 0.006). Improvement in exercise capacity was greater in the sicker patients and was dose-related, but independent of disease etiology. Concomitantly, treprostinil significantly improved indices of dyspnea, signs and symptoms of pulmonary hypertension, and hemodynamics. The most common side effect attributed to treprostinil was infusion site pain (85%) leading to premature discontinuation from the study in 8% of patients. Three patients in the treprostinil treatment group presented with an episode of gastrointestinal hemorrhage. We conclude that chronic subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil is an effective treatment with an acceptable safety profile in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension.

[PMID: 22480736]
The prostacyclin analogues, iloprost and treprostinil are extensively used in treating pulmonary hypertension. Their binding profile and corresponding biochemical cellular responses on human prostanoid receptors expressed in cell lines, have now been compared. Iloprost had high binding affinity for EP1 and IP receptors (Ki 1.1 and 3.9 nM, respectively), low affinity for FP, EP3 or EP4 receptors, and very low affinity for EP2, DP1 or TP receptors. By contrast, treprostinil had high affinity for the DP1, EP2 and IP receptors (Ki 4.4, 3.6 and 32 nM, respectively), low affinity for EP1 and EP4 receptors and even lower affinity for EP3, FP and TP receptors. In functional assays, iloprost had similar high activity in elevating cyclic AMP levels in cells expressing the human IP receptor and stimulating calcium influx in cells expressing EP1 receptors (EC50 0.37 and 0.3 nM, respectively) with the rank order of activity on the other receptors comparable to the binding assays. As with binding studies, treprostinil elevated cyclic AMP with a similar high potency in cells expressing DP1, IP and EP2 receptors (EC50 0.6, 1.9 and 6.2 nM, respectively), but had low activity at the other receptors. Activation of IP, DP1 and EP2 receptors, as with treprostinil, can all result in vasodilatation of human pulmonary arteries. However, activation of EP1 receptors can provoke vasoconstriction, and hence may offset the IP-receptor mediated vasodilator effects of iloprost. Treprostinil may therefore differ from iloprost in its overall beneficial pulmonary vasorelaxant profile and other pharmacological actions, especially in diseases where the IP receptor is down-regulated.

[PMID: 22918043]
{4-[(5,6-Diphenylpyrazin-2-yl)(isopropyl)amino]butoxy}acetic acid (ACT-333679) is the main metabolite of the selective prostacyclin (PGI(2)) receptor (IP receptor) agonist selexipag. The goal of this study was to determine the influence of IP receptor selectivity on the vasorelaxant efficacy of ACT-333679 and the PGI(2) analog treprostinil in pulmonary artery under conditions associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Selexipag and ACT-333679 evoked full relaxation of pulmonary artery from control and monocrotaline (MCT)-PAH rats, and ACT-333679 relaxed normal pulmonary artery contracted with either endothelin-1 (ET-1) or phenylephrine. In contrast, treprostinil evoked weaker relaxation than ACT-333679 of control pulmonary artery and failed to induce relaxation of pulmonary artery from MCT-PAH rats. Treprostinil did not evoke relaxation of normal pulmonary artery contracted with either ET-1 or phenylephrine. Expression of prostaglandin E(3) (EP(3)) receptor mRNA was increased in pulmonary artery from MCT-PAH rats. In contraction experiments, the selective EP(3) receptor agonist sulprostone evoked significantly greater contraction of pulmonary artery from MCT-PAH rats compared with control rats. The presence of a threshold concentration of ET-1 significantly augmented the contractile response to sulprostone in normal pulmonary artery. ACT-333679 did not evoke direct contraction of rat pulmonary artery, whereas treprostinil evoked concentration-dependent contraction that was inhibited by the EP(3) receptor antagonist (2E)-3-(3',4'-dichlorobiphenyl-2-yl)-N-(2-thienylsulfonyl)acrylamide. Antagonism of EP(3) receptors also revealed a relaxant response to treprostinil in normal pulmonary artery contracted with ET-1. These data demonstrate that the relaxant efficacy of the selective IP receptor agonist selexipag and its metabolite ACT-333679 is not modified under conditions associated with PAH, whereas relaxation to treprostinil may be limited in the presence of mediators of disease.

[PMID: 12082102]
Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is characterized by increased pulmonary arterial pressure and vascular resistance. We and others have observed that inflammatory cytokines and infiltrates are present in the lung tissue, but the significance is uncertain. Treprostinil (TRE), a prostacyclin analogue with extended half-life and chemical stability, has shown promise in the treatment of PPH. We hypothesize that TRE might exert beneficial effects in PPH by antagonizing inflammatory cytokine production in the lung. Here we show that TRE dose-dependently inhibits inflammatory cytokine (tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1beta, interleukin-6, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor) secretion and gene expression by human alveolar macrophages. TRE blocks NFkappaB activation, but IkappaB-alpha phosphorylation and degradation are unaffected. Moreover, TRE does not affect the formation of the NFkappaB.DNA complex but blocks nuclear translocation of p65. These results are the first to illustrate the anti-cytokine actions of TRE in down-regulating NFkappaB, not through its inhibitory component or by direct binding but by blocking nuclear translocation. These data indicate that inflammatory mechanisms may be important in the pathogenesis of PPH and cytokine antagonism by blocking NFkappaB may contribute to the efficacy of TRE therapy in PPH.

[PMID: 23328389]
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive vascular disease that ultimately leads to right ventricular failure and death. Treprostinil diolamine is an oral prostacyclin analogue; sustained release tablets of oral treprostinil are currently being evaluated for efficacy and safety as a potential therapy in patients with PAH. Previous attempts at developing an oral prostanoid have been limited by rapid absorption and short plasma half-life; thus, the aim of this study was to characterize the pharmacokinetic profile of treprostinil diolamine in PAH patients after chronic dosing. The study enrolled 74 PAH patients who had been taking treprostinil diolamine for a minimum of 4 weeks (range: 0.5-16 mg). We collected plasma samples over 12 hours and estimated pharmacokinetic parameters using noncompartmental methods. Seventy patients had complete data. After chronic twice-daily oral dosing of treprostinil diolamine, mean area under the curve (AUC0-12) of treprostinil increased from 5244 to 20,4086 pg·hr-·mL- and mean maximum observed plasma concentration (Cmax) increased from 1383 to 33588 pg/mL. The apparent clearance (CL/F) was similar across all doses, indicating a linear dose-exposure relationship after twice-daily dosing. We conclude that twice-daily oral treprostinil provides sustained and proportional treprostinil concentrations over a wide range of doses during chronic administration to PAH patients.

[PMID: 23597147]
Treprostinil diethanolamine is an innovative salt form of the prostacyclin analogue, treprostinil sodium, developed as an oral sustained release (SR) osmotic tablet. The availability of a formulation permitting convenient systemic delivery might have applicability to scleroderma vascular complications. We evaluated pharmacokinetics and perfusion in scleroderma patients with digital ischemia following escalating twice-daily doses of treprostinil diethanolamine SR. Scleroderma patients with digital ulcers were enrolled in this dual-center, open-label, phase I pharmacokinetic study. Drug concentrations and perfusion, quantified by laser Doppler imaging, were measured over 12 hours at the 2 mg and 4 mg (or maximally tolerated) doses. Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined from individual plasma concentration versus time profiles using non-compartmental analysis methods. Digital perfusion and skin temperature were modeled as a function of log-transformed drug concentration and other covariates by performing repeated measures analyses using random effects models. Nineteen scleroderma patients (84% female, 53% limited scleroderma) received treprostinil diethanolamine SR with dose titration up to 4 mg twice daily as tolerated. Peak concentrations (mean maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) = 1,176 and 2,107 pg/mL) occurred approximately 3.6 hours after dose administration, and overall exposure (under the plasma concentration-time curve from time 0 to 12 hours post dose (AUC0-12) = 7,187 and 12,992 hr*pg/mL) was linear between the 2 mg and 4 mg doses. Perfusion and digital skin temperature were positively associated with log-transformed plasma concentration at the 4 mg dose (P = 0.015 and P = 0.013, respectively). The most frequent adverse events were similar to those seen with prostacyclin analogues. Oral treprostinil diethanolamine was effectively absorbed in patients with scleroderma. Drug administration was temporally associated with improved cutaneous perfusion and temperature. Treprostinil diethanolamine may provide a new therapeutic option for Raynaud's phenomenon and the peripheral vascular disease of scleroderma. ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00848939.

[PMID: 17261956]
Intravenous epoprostenol improves exercise capacity and survival in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH); however, chemical instability and a short half-life have caused limitations in its use. The chemically stable prostacyclin analogue treprostinil has a longer half-life, and improves hemodynamics and signs/symptoms of PAH. This study investigated the feasibility of transitioning patients with PAH from intravenous epoprostenol to intravenous treprostinil using a rapid switch protocol. Twelve PAH patients were enrolled in a 12 week prospective open label study. Patients were switched from intravenous epoprostenol to intravenous treprostinil (1:1 ng/kg/min) by a direct switch of the medication reservoir from epoprostenol to treprostinil. The dose of treprostinil was adjusted throughout the study to achieve a 2-fold increase of treprostinil compared with the baseline epoprostenol dose. Rapid transition to treprostinil was achieved without serious adverse events and, baseline clinical status was maintained over 12 weeks. The mean baseline epoprostenol dose was 28 +/- 14 ng/kg/min. At week 12, the mean treprostinil dose was 62 +/- 30 ng/kg/min. All patients reported less prostacyclin-related side effects with treprostinil and remained on treprostinil after study completion. Selected patients with PAH can be safely transitioned from intravenous epoprostenol to intravenous treprostinil using a rapid switch protocol.

[PMID: 22814427]
Among pleiotropic effects, the capacity of prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogues to affect adaptive immunity remains poorly characterised. The purpose of this study was to assess whether PGI(2) analogues could affect T helper (Th) cell responses in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) and healthy donors (HD). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained from 33 patients with SSc and 29 HD. Cytokine levels in PBMC and monocyte/CD4 T cell cultures were quantified by immunoassays. The frequencies of interleukin (IL)-17A, IL-22, interferon γ (IFNγ) and IL-4-producing CD4 T cells were assessed by multiparametric flow cytometry. Selective receptor antagonists, cytokine blocking antibodies and signalling protein inhibitors were used to identify the receptors and signalling pathways mediating PGI(2) analogue effects. Th17 and Th22 cells were more abundant in individuals with SSc than in HD. PGI(2) analogues (iloprost, treprostinil and beraprost) significantly increased IL-17A and IL-22 in vitro while decreasing IFNγ production both in SSc and HD PBMC. These effects relied on the specific expansion of Th17 and Th22 and inhibition of Th1 cells. The enhanced Th17 cell responses depended on increased IL-23 production by monocytes, involved the IP prostacyclin receptor and required protein kinase A activation. Importantly, in vivo administration of iloprost in individuals with SSc presenting with digital ulcers resulted in a significant increase in the frequency of Th17 cells. These findings demonstrate that PGI(2) analogues affect Th cell differentiation/expansion programmes, favouring Th17 and inhibiting Th1 cell responses in SSc. The impact of these changes on the disease course needs to be taken into consideration and further exploited to improve SSc.

[PMID: 23231023]
Treprostinil is a synthetic prostacyclin analogue with antiplatelet and vasodilatory properties. It is the only prostacyclin analogue with different options of delivery, i.e. subcutaneous, intravenous, inhaled or oral. Subcutaneous treprostinil has been shown in short- and long-term studies to improve exercise capacity, functional class, haemodynamics and survival in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Pain at the infusion site has been a major drawback of subcutaneous treprostinil, hampering dose titration, and ultimately leading to increased discontinuation rates. The additional clinical interest in treprostinil as an alternative intravenous prostacyclin has developed due to its favourable properties, including longer half-life, chemical stability, the possibility of intravenous infusion without the need for ice packs, and easy drug preparation. Intravenous treprostinil improves exercise capacity, functional class and haemodynamics in patients with PAH, over the period of 12 weeks. If patients are switched to intravenous treprostinil, they usually need to double the dose to attain the same efficacy. Whether the effect of intravenous treprostinil remains clinically relevant beyond 12 weeks is not known, and a longer follow-up would be required to investigate this. Inhaled treprostinil is an efficacious treatment in PAH patients who are moderately symptomatic on background oral therapy. Oral treprostinil on top of background therapy did not lead to an improvement in 6-minute walking distance after 16 weeks of treatment.

[PMID: 21278326]
Fibrocytes comprise a recently described cell type of blood-derived, fibroblast-like cells that are recruited from the circulation to sites of wound repair, vascular remodeling, or fibrotic tissue remodeling. We recently showed that the stable prostacyclin analogue treprostinil, a clinically approved drug for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), significantly reduced the recruitment of fibrocytes to sites of vascular remodeling in experimental hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Here we report on the molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory action of treprostinil on the adhesion and differentiation of human fibrocytes. Human fibrocytes expressed the prostanoid receptors, prostaglandin I (IP) receptors and prostaglandin E subtype receptors (EP2 and EP4). The generation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by treprostinil reduced the expression of the integrins CD49 and CD29 when freshly isolated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were treated with treprostinil. Cell-matrix adhesion was significantly impaired by treatment with treprostinil. We present evidence for a treprostinil/cAMP-induced downstream suppression of extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) that is transmitted via a protein kinase A-independent pathway through Rap proteins, which sequester Ras. The resulting dephosphorylated state of c-Raf limits the activity of ERK. The cell-matrix adhesion assay with the ERK inhibitor further confirmed that the adhesion of fibrocytes was impaired. Thus our data suggest that treprostinil inhibits the adhesion and differentiation of fibrocytes by limiting the activity of ERK via the cAMP-Rap axis.

[PMID: 20195728]
Chemokines for neutrophils such as growth-related oncogene-alpha (GRO-alpha) are important in patients with refractory or severe asthma. Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogues were regarded as potential treatments for asthma. Dendritic cells (DCs) are the professional antigen-presenting cells and play a critical role in regulating immune response. However, it is unknown whether PGI(2) analogues have regulatory effects on GRO-alpha expression in human monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs). The human MDDCs were pretreated with iloprost and treprostinil (two PGI(2) analogues) or forskolin, a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) activator, before stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In some cases, I prostanoid (IP) receptor and E prostanoid (EP) antagonists were pretreated before PGI(2) analogue treatment. To investigate the intracellular signaling, nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB inhibitor and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors were pretreated before PGI(2) analogue treatment. GRO-alpha was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Intracellular signaling was also investigated by Western blot. Iloprost and treprostinil enhanced LPS-induced GRO-alpha expression in MDDCs. This effect could be reversed by an I prostanoid receptor antagonist, CAY10449, but not EP receptor antagonists. Forskolin conferred a similar modulating effect as that noted in iloprost- and treprostinil-treated MDDCs. PGI(2) analogue-enhanced LPS-induced GRO-alpha expression was reduced by MAPK-p38 inhibitor, SB203580. PGI(2) analogues enhanced LPS-induced phospho-p38 expression. PGI(2) analogues enhanced LPS-induced GRO-alpha expression via the IP receptor-cAMP and p38-MAPK pathways in human MDDCs, which may further recruit neutrophil accumulation and adversely affect patients with refractory or severe asthma because of airway neutrophilia. These effects should be considered for PGI(2) analogues as candidates for the treatment of asthma.

[PMID: 23429588]
Treprostinil, a stable prostacyclin analogue used in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension, is in development as a sustained release oral tablet, treprostinil diolamine (United Therapeutics Corp, Research Triangle Park, NC). As combination therapy yields additional benefit in pulmonary arterial hypertension, treprostinil diolamine may be used with sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor. This study was designed to evaluate the presence of a pharmacokinetic drug interaction between treprostinil diolamine and sildenafil. Treprostinil is primarily metabolized by cytochrome (CYP) P450 2C8 with minor contribution from CYP2C9. Sildenafil is metabolized by CYP3A4 with minor contribution from CYP2C9. Eighteen healthy volunteers were randomized to receive 4.5 days each of (1) treprostinil diolamine alone, (2) sildenafil alone, and (3) combination treprostinil diolamine and sildenafil in an open-label, 3-period, 3-sequence crossover study. The geometric mean ratio (90% confidence intervals) for combination/agent alone of steady state area under the concentration-time curve and peak concentration (Cmax) were 0.972 (0.824-1.145) and 1.030 (0.900, 1.1-9), respectively, for treprostinil diolamine and were 0.881 (0.804-0.966) and 0.910 (0.876-0.946), respectively, for sildenafil. The results suggest lack of a metabolic interaction between treprostinil diolamine and sildenafil, as geometric mean ratio 90% confidence intervals were within 0.8-1.25. Combination therapy was well tolerated but had slightly higher rates of nausea, headache, and extremity pain than monotherapy.

[PMID: 21085923]
Chemokines play important roles in asthma. Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogue is recently suggested as a candidate for treating asthma. However, the effects of PGI(2) analogues on the expression of Th1- and Th2-related chemokines are unknown. To this end, we investigated the in vitro effects of PGI(2) analogues on the expression of Th1-related chemokine interferon-γ-inducible protein-10 (IP-10/CXCL10) and Th2-related chemokine macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC/CCL22) in human monocytes. The human monocytes were pretreated with iloprost and treprostinil before lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. IP-10 and MDC were measured by ELISA. Intracellular signaling was investigated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) assay, western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation. PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC, but suppressed IP-10 expression in LPS-stimulated monocytes. These effects were reversed by the I prostanoid (IP) receptor antagonist (CAY10449), peroxisomal proliferators-activated receptor (PPAR)-α antagonist (GW6741) and PPAR-γ antagonist (GW9662). PGI(2) analogues increased intracellular cAMP levels. Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred similar effects. PGI(2) analogue-enhanced MDC expression was reduced by nuclear factor (NF) κB inhibitor (BAY 117085) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-p38 inhibitor (SB203580). PGI(2) analogues up-regulated phospho-p65 and phospho-p38 but down-regulated phospho-ERK expression. Iloprost enhanced H3 acetylation in MDC promoter area and suppressed H3 acetylation, H3K4, and H3K36 trimethylation in IP-10 promoter area. PGI(2) analogues enhanced MDC expression via the I prostanoid-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-α and PPAR-γ, NFκB-p65, MAPK-p38-ATF2 pathways and increasing histone acetylation, and suppressed IP-10 expression via the IP-receptor-cAMP, PPAR-γ, MAPK-ERK-ELK1 pathways and inhibiting histone acetylation and trimethylation in LPS-stimulated monocytes. PGI(2) analogues may therefore increase Th2 recruitment and inflammation.

[PMID: 12437507]
Pulmonary artery hypertension is a life-threatening disease characterised by a pulmonary vasculopathy and progressive right ventricular failure. Major advances were made with the development of continuous intravenous epoprostenol (Flolan trade mark ) as a treatment modality. Nevertheless, it is far from ideal as treatment for this disease. Subcutaneous treprostinil has been FDA approved for the treatment of New York Heart Association Functional Class II - IV pulmonary artery hypertension. It is a longer acting subcutaneous prostacyclin analogue that offers an additional mode of therapy for this disease. A discussion of the pharmacology of this prostacyclin analogue as compared to its related compounds, the clinical studies which led to its approval, a review of some additional basic studies and the practical use of this drug in the treatment modalities for precapillary pulmonary artery hypertension in 2002 in light of other available therapies is discussed.

[PMID: 23307827]
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive, fatal disease with no cure. Parenteral and inhaled prostacyclin analogue therapies are effective for the treatment of PAH, but complicated administration requirements can limit the use of these therapies in patients with less severe disease. This study was designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the oral prostacyclin analogue treprostinil diolamine as initial treatment for de novo PAH. Three hundred forty-nine patients (intent-to-treat population) not receiving endothelin receptor antagonist or phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitor background therapy were randomized (treprostinil, n=233; placebo, n=116). The primary analysis population (modified intent-to-treat) included 228 patients (treprostinil, n=151; placebo, n=77) with access to 0.25-mg treprostinil tablets at randomization. The primary end point was change from baseline in 6-minute walk distance at week 12. Secondary end points included Borg dyspnea index, clinical worsening, and symptoms of PAH. The week 12 treatment effect for 6-minute walk distance (modified intent-to-treat population) was 23.0 m (P=0.0125). For the intent-to-treat population, 6-minute walk distance improvements were observed at peak (26.0 m; P=0.0001) and trough (17.0 m; P=0.0025) plasma study drug concentrations. Other than an improvement in the combined 6-minute walk distance/Borg dyspnea score, there were no significant changes in secondary end points. Oral treprostinil therapy was generally well tolerated; the most common adverse events (intent-to-treat) were headache (69%), nausea (39%), diarrhea (37%), and pain in jaw (25%). Oral treprostinil improves exercise capacity in PAH patients not receiving other treatment. Oral treprostinil could provide a convenient, first-line prostacyclin treatment option for PAH patients not requiring more intensive therapy. URL: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT00325403.

[PMID: 24402297]
Inflammation plays critical roles in atherosclerosis. Chemokines are responsible for leukocyte trafficking and involve in inflammatory diseases. Macrophage inflammatory protein 1α (MIP-1α) has been implicated in atherosclerotic lesion formation. Prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) analog, used in pulmonary hypertension, has been reported to have anti-inflammatory functions. However, little is known about its role in the MIP-1α production in human monocytes. We investigated the effects of 3 conventional (iloprost, beraprost, and treprostinil) and 1 new (ONO-1301) PGI2 analogs, on the expression of MIP-1α expression in human monocytes. Human primary monocytes from control subjects and THP-1 cell line were treated with PGI2 analogs, with or without lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. Supernatants were harvested to measure MIP-1α levels by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. To explore which receptors involved the effects of PGI2 analogs on the expression of MIP-1α expression, I prostanoid (IP) and E prostanoid, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-α, and PPAR-r receptor antagonists were used to pretreat THP-1 cells. Forskolin, a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) activator, was also used to further confirm the cAMP involvement on the effect of PGI2 analogs in MIP-1α production. Three PGI2 analogs could suppress LPS-induced MIP-1α production in THP-1 cells and human primary monocytes. ONO-1301 had a similar effect. CAY 10449, an IP receptor antagonist, could reverse the suppressive effects on MIP-1α production of iloprost. Forskolin, a cAMP activator, also suppressed MIP-1α production in THP-1 cells. Prostaglandin I2 analogs suppressed LPS-induced MIP-1α production in human monocytes via the IP receptor and cAMP pathway. The PGI2 analog may be potential in the treatment for atherosclerosis.

[PMID: 20045181]
Molecular conjugates comprising targeting ligands hold great promise for site-specific gene delivery to distant tumors and individual organs including the lung. Here we show that prostaglandin I2 analogues can be used to improve gene transfer efficiency of polyethylenimine (PEI) gene vectors on bronchial and alveolar epithelial cells in vitro and lungs of mice in vivo. Prostacyclin (IP1) receptor expression was confirmed in pulmonary epithelial cell lines by western blot. Iloprost (ILO) and treprostinil (TRP), two prostaglandin I2 analogues, were conjugated to fluorescein-labeled BSA (FLUO-BSA) and compared for IP1 receptor binding/uptake in different lung cell lines. Binding of FLUO-BSA-ILO was 2-4-fold higher than for FLUO-BSA-TRP and could be specifically inhibited by free ILO and IP1 receptor antagonist CAY10449. Internalization of FLUO-BSA-ILO was confirmed by confocal microscopy. Molecular conjugates of PEI and ILO (PEI-g-ILO) were synthesized with increasing coupling degree (F(ILO) (ILO:PEI) = 2, 5, 8, 16) and analyzed for DNA binding, particle formation and transfection efficiency. At optimized conditions (N/P 4, F(ILO) = 5), gene expression using PEI-g-ILO was significantly up to 46-fold higher than for PEI gene vectors and specifically inhibited by CAY10449. Gene expression in the lungs of mice after aerosol delivery was 14-fold higher with PEI-g-ILO F(ILO) = 5 than for PEI. We suggest that targeting of IP1 receptor using ILO represents a promising approach to improve pulmonary gene transfer.

[PMID: 21400214]
Although treatment for asthma control has improved a lot recently, refractory asthma is still a challenge for clinicians. Evidence revealed that anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α therapy may have potential in treating refractory asthma. Recently in an animal model, prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analogues can suppress the cardinal feature of asthma. However, whether PGI(2) analogues can regulate TNF-α expression in monocytes and the mechanism is not well-known. The human monocytes were pretreated with beraprost, iloprost and treprostinil, three PGI(2) analogues, before stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). TNF-α concentration of the cell supernatants was measured by ELISA. Intracellular signaling was investigated by Western blot. PGI(2) analogues suppressed LPS-induced TNF-α expression in THP-1 cells. CAY10449, an I prostanoid receptor antagonist, could reverse these effects. Beraprost increased intracellular cAMP level in THP1 cells. Forskolin, an adenylyl cyclase activator, could confer similar effect. LPS-induced TNF-α expression in THP-1 cells could be reversed by mitogen-activator protein kinase (MAPK)-p38, extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors. Western blot revealed that beraprost suppressed MAPK phospho-p38, phosphor-JNK and phosphor-ERK expression. PGI(2) analogues suppressed LPS-induced TNF-α expression in THP-1 cells via the IP receptor-cAMP and the MAPK pathways. PGI(2) analogues may have potentiality to treat asthma.

[PMID: 12689580]
The treatment of pulmonary hypertension associated with infection by human immunodeficiency virus has not been well defined. Treprostinil is a prostacyclin analogue that has recently been shown to be useful for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension, whether primary, secondary to congenital heart disease, or associated with collagen disease, in a 12-week, double-blind study. We report the results of a one-year follow-up of three patients with pulmonary hypertension associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection who are being treated with treprostinil at our center. After secondary causes of pulmonary hypertension were excluded by a routine work-up, patients started treatment with subcutaneous prostacyclin (treprostinil) with progressive up-titration of the dose. Functional status and effort capacity were assessed every three months and an echocardiographic study was performed every six months. All patients showed improvement in clinical status, as shown by the NYHA functional class and the results of the six-minute walking test (increase of at least 75 meters). All the patients remain alive after one year of follow-up. Echocardiographic systolic pulmonary pressure decreased in two patients. No serious adverse events were observed. Subcutaneous prostacyclin (treprostinil) seems to be an effective and safe therapeutic option for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection.

[PMID: 23927483]
Treprostinil diolamine (oral treprostinil) is a prostacyclin analogue currently being evaluated for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension as a sustained-release (SR) oral tablet. Previous data have demonstrated that the oral bioavailability of treprostinil was improved when taken with a meal containing at least 500 calories. As twice-daily intake of a high-fat, high-calorie meal may be undesirable or not feasible for some patients, this open-label, randomized, crossover study evaluated the effect of different meal compositions [a 500-calorie well-balanced meal (WB500), a 250-calorie well-balanced meal (WB250), a 250-calorie high-fat meal (HF250) and a 250-calorie well-balanced liquid meal (Ensure®)] on the relative bioavailability of oral treprostinil. Thirty-two healthy volunteers were administered a single 1-mg SR tablet of oral treprostinil immediately following each study meal. Each dose of oral treprostinil was separated by a 7-day washout period. Serial plasma samples were obtained over a 36-h postdose. Safety was assessed in all patients who received study drug. Treprostinil plasma exposure (Cmax and AUC0-inf) decreased only slightly, 5-15% with decreasing caloric and increasing fat content. Headache was the most commonly reported prostacyclin-related adverse event (three reports). Overall, there were no clinically significant differences in the relative bioavailability of oral treprostinil when administered immediately after meals containing 250-500 calories and 30-50% fat. These data support the administration of oral treprostinil with a meal containing as few as 250 calories and 30-50% fat, which is significant for ensuring patient convenience and compliance, particularly as consistency with regard to meals may impact oral treprostinil pharmacokinetics.

[PMID: 24033615]
Treprostinil diolamine (oral treprostinil) is a prostacyclin analogue under evaluation for the treatment for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). This study assessed the pharmacokinetics (PK) and safety of treprostinil following oral administration of a single sustained-release 1 mg dose in subjects with hepatic impairment. Four cohorts, including healthy volunteers, and subjects with mild, moderate and severe hepatic impairment were enrolled. Thirty subjects completed the study. Mean treprostinil clearance values (CL/F) decreased with the severity of hepatic impairment. The decrease in CL/F resulted in a marked increase in exposure levels of treprostinil. Relative to healthy subjects, mean area under the curve from time zero to 24 h after dosing interval (AUC0-24) values in subjects with mild, moderate and severe hepatic impairment increased by approximately 2·2-, 4·9- and 7·6-fold, respectively. The most frequent adverse events (AEs) exhibited in this study were similar to those seen with prostacyclin and its analogues and with AEs seen in other clinical studies with oral treprostinil (e.g. headache, diarrhoea and nausea). The overall incidence of all AEs and the specific events of headache and nausea increased with severity of hepatic impairment. Based on these results, dosage adjustments should be performed in subjects with hepatic impairment.

[PMID: 22231731]
Prostaglandin I(2) (PGI(2)) analog is regarded as a potential candidate for treating asthma. Human myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) play a critical role in the pathogenesis of asthma. However, the effects of PGI(2) analog on human mDCs are unknown. In the present study, circulating mDCs were isolated from six healthy subjects. The effects of PGI(2) analogs iloprost and treprostinil on cytokine production, maturation and T-cell stimulatory function of human mDCs were investigated. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-10 were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The expression of costimulatory molecules was investigated by flow cytometry. T-cell stimulatory function was investigated by measuring interferon (IFN)-γ, IL-13 and IL-10 production by T cells cocultured with iloprost-treated mDCs. Intracellular signaling was investigated by Western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation. We found that iloprost and treprostinil induced IL-10, but suppressed TNF-α production in polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C)-stimulated mDCs. This effect was reversed by the I-prostanoid (IP), E-prostanoid (EP) receptor antagonists or intracellular free calcium (Ca(2+)) chelator. Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred a similar effect. Iloprost and treprostinil increased intracellular adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) levels, and iloprost also increased intracellular Ca(2+). Iloprost suppressed poly I:C-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phospho-p38 and phospho-activating transcription factor (ATF)2 expression. Iloprost downregulated poly I:C-induced histone H3K4 trimethylation in the TNFA gene promoter region via suppressing translocation of histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4)-specific methyltransferases MLL (mixed lineage leukemia) and WDR5 (WD repeat domain 5). Iloprost-treated mDCs inhibited IL-13, IFN-γ and IL-10 production by T cells. In conclusion, PGI(2) analogs enhance IL-10 and suppress TNF-α expression through the IP/EP2/EP4 receptors-cAMP and EP1 receptor-Ca(2+) pathway. Iloprost suppressed TNF-α expression via the MAPK-p38-ATF2 pathway and epigenetic regulation by downregulation of histone H3K4 trimethylation.

[PMID: 18378784]
Prostacyclin and its analogues (prostanoids) are potent vasodilators and possess antithrombotic, antiproliferative and anti-inflammatory properties. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is associated with vasoconstriction, thrombosis and proliferation, and the lack of endogenous prostacyclin may considerably contribute to this condition. This supports a strong rationale for prostanoid use as therapy for this disease. The first experiences of prostanoid therapy in PH patients were published in 1980. Epoprostenol, a synthetic analogue of prostacyclin, and the chemically stable analogues iloprost, beraprost and treprostinil were tested in randomised controlled trials. The biological actions are mainly mediated by activation of specific receptors of the target cells; however, new data suggest effects on additional intracellular pathways. In the USA and some European countries, intravenous infusion of epoprostenol and treprostinil, as well as subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil and inhalation of iloprost, have been approved for therapy of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Iloprost infusion and beraprost tablets have been approved in few other countries. Ongoing clinical studies investigate oral treprostinil, inhaled treprostinil and the combination of inhaled iloprost and sildenafil in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Combination of other targeted therapies with prostanoids appears to be effective and safe. After 25 yrs of continued knowledge, prostanoids remain a mainstay in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension.

[PMID: 15920997]
We report a case of severe digital ulcerations associated with systemic sclerosis, successfully treated with treprostinil (Remodulin). There was improvement within days of the treatment initiation; complete healing was accomplished after 16 weeks of therapy. Patients with systemic sclerosis and peripheral small vessel disease have limited therapeutic options. Treprostinil is a prostacyclin analogue that can be delivered by subcutaneous infusion and is approved in the USA only for treatment of primary pulmonary hypertension. This report provides an impressive example of an alternative, complementary indication for the use of treprostinil.

[PMID: 23872196]
The prostacyclin (IP) receptor agonists, treprostinil, iloprost and the selexipag metabolite, MRE-269 (ACT-333679) were evaluated in rat distal pulmonary blood vessels. Small pulmonary arteries and veins were pre-contracted with the thromboxane mimetic, U46619 (25 and 100nM, respectively), and relaxation determined with and without IP receptor antagonists, RO1138452 and RO3244794. In arteries, treprostinil was a more potent vasorelaxant than iloprost, while the efficacy of iloprost was greater. In pulmonary arteries, treprostinil-induced relaxation was essentially abolished by both IP antagonists (1μM), while responses to iloprost were partially inhibited. Both treprostinil and iloprost were equipotent, prominently relaxing pulmonary veins with responses being similarly and partially sensitive to IP antagonists. In contrast, RO1138452 failed to inhibit relaxations to MRE-269 in either pulmonary arteries or veins, suggesting no involvement of typical IP receptors. Thus, rat pulmonary tissues cannot be considered appropriate to assess classical IP receptors using the proposed highly selective non-prostanoid agonist MRE-269, contrasting with the IP receptor agonism profile of prostacyclin analogues, iloprost and treprostinil.

[PMID: 21185823]
Prostanoid IP receptors coupled to Gs are thought to be the primary target for prostacyclin (PGI(2)) analogues. However, these agents also activate prostanoid EP(1-4) receptor subtypes to varying degrees, which are positively (EP(2/4)) or negatively (EP(3)) coupled to adenylate cyclase through Gs or Gi, respectively. We investigated the role of these receptors in modulating relaxation to PGI(2) analogues cicaprost, iloprost and treprostinil in pre-contracted segments of rat tail artery. Prostanoid IP (RO1138452), EP(4) (GW627368X), EP(3) (L-798106), EP(1-3) (AH6809), and EP(1) (SC-51322) receptor antagonists were used to determine each receptor contribution. The role of G(i/o) was investigated using pertussis toxin (PTX), while dependence on cAMP was determined using adenylate cyclase (2'5'dideoxyadenosine, DDA) and protein kinase A (2'-O-monobutyryladenosine- 3',5'-cyclic monophosphorothioate, Rp- isomer, Rp-2'-O-MB-cAMPS) inhibitors, and by measurement of tissue cAMP. All analogues caused relaxation which was significantly (P<0.01) inhibited by RO1138452; with maximum response to cicaprost, iloprost and treprostinil reduced by 51%, 66% and 37%, respectively. GW627368X had no effect when used alone, but in combination with RO1138452, caused a rightward shift of the curves for cicaprost and iloprost but not treprostinil. PTX treatment potentiated relaxation to all 3 analogues (P<0.01), as did L798106 and AH6809 but not SC-51322. Basal cAMP levels were higher in PTX-treated tissues and DDA- and Rp-2'-O-MB-cAMPs--sensitive responses increased to analogue concentrations <0.1μM. In conclusion, prostanoid EP(3) receptors via G(i/o) negatively modulate prostanoid IP receptor-mediated relaxation to cicaprost, iloprost and treprostinil. However, other pathways contribute to analogue-induced vasorelaxation, the nature of which remains unclear for treprostinil.

[PMID: 15302727]
To assess the efficacy and safety of continuous subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil, a stable prostacyclin analogue, for treating pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in patients with connective tissue disease (CTD). Two multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, prospective trials of treprostinil vs placebo in 470 patients with PAH. A subset of 90 patients with PAH and CTD, including systemic lupus erythematosus, diffuse scleroderma, limited scleroderma, and mixed CTD/overlap syndrome. Patients received either treprostinil (initiated at 1.25 ng/kg/min, and titrated upward) or placebo via continuous subcutaneous infusion. The maximum dose of treprostinil allowed was 22.5 ng/kg/min. Six-minute walk (6MW) distance and dyspnea-fatigue scores were determined at baseline, and at 6 weeks and 12 weeks. Hemodynamic measures were obtained at baseline and at 12 weeks. At baseline, most patients had New York Heart Association class III symptoms. The mean baseline 6MW distance was 289 m (range, 60 to 448 m). The mean dose of treprostinil at week 12 was 8.4 ng/kg/min (range, 1.25 to 17.5 ng/kg/min). After 12 weeks, the change in cardiac index from baseline was + 0.2 +/- 0.08 L/min/m(2) in the treprostinil group and - 0.07 +/- 0.07 L/min/m(2) in the placebo group (p = 0.007). The pulmonary vascular resistance index decreased by 4 +/- 2 U x m(2) in the treprostinil group and increased by 1 +/- 1 U x m(2) in the placebo group (p = 0.006). The placebo-corrected median improvement from baseline in 6MW distance was 25 m in treprostinil-treated patients (p = 0.055); this improvement appeared to be dose related. Dyspnea fatigue scores also improved in the treprostinil group compared with the placebo group (p = 0.014). Adverse events included infusion site pain and typical side effects related to prostaglandins, and were tolerated by most patients. Continuous subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil in patients with PAH associated with CTD improved exercise capacity, symptoms of PAH, and hemodynamics.

[PMID: 16253609]
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by abnormalities in endothelial and smooth muscle cell function. Prostacyclin released by endothelial cells is a potent vasodilator by increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Sildenafil, an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase-5, increases cyclic guanosine monophosphate in the lungs, producing vasodilation. To test for a therapeutic benefit of the combination of a prostacyclin analogue, subcutaneous treprostinil, and sildenafil, a proof-of-concept, open-label investigational trial was initiated. Subjects with PAH in World Health Organization (WHO) functional classes II to IV receiving subcutaneous treprostinil for > or =6 months were evaluated with an exercise treadmill test using the Naughton-Balke protocol at baseline and after 12 weeks. Sildenafil 50 mg 3 times daily was added to the treprostinil. Mean treadmill times in seconds were compared before and after 12 weeks of therapy. Nine subjects enrolled in the trial; 7 were women (mean age 35 years). At baseline, 3 subjects were in WHO functional class II and 6 subjects were in WHO functional class III. The mean treadmill time at baseline was 465 +/- 167 seconds and at 12 weeks was 656 +/- 205 seconds (42% improvement, p = 0.049). All patients had symptomatic improvement. In conclusion, this pilot study of subcutaneous treprostinil with sildenafil for PAH suggests additive beneficial effects.

[PMID: 17578162]
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a serious primary illness of the pulmonary arterioles, characterised by progressive precapillary pulmonary hypertension. The conventional therapy for this condition is so-called specific pharmacotherapy, which addresses the key mechanisms in the pathophysiology of the illness, making use of drugs from the prostanoid group, endothelin receptor antagonists and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. Treprostinil is a stable analogue of prostacyclin, which can be administered subcutaneously, intravenously or by inhalation. In the centre for pulmonary hypertension in the Second Internal Clinic of Cardiology and Angiology of 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, and the General Teaching Hospital in Prague, 22 patients with PAH (idiopathic PAH, familial PAH, PAH associated with congenital heart disease and PAH associated with systemic connective tissue disease) were treated with trerpostinil, 18 patients with a continuous subcutaneous infusion and 4 patients with a continuous intravenous infusion. The indicators followed were the distance reached in a 6-minute walking test, functional capacity assessed by NYHA classification and mortality. The patients for whom treprostinil treatment was indicated had an average pressure in the right atrium of 11.9 +/- 4.2 mm Hg, average pressure in the pulmonary artery of 56.8 +/- 10.7 mm Hg, a cardiac index of 1.78 +/- 0.25 l/min/m2 and a total pulmonary resistance of 16.26 +/- 4.48 WU. 15 patients were functionally NYHA III and 7 patients were NYHA IV. The average distance achieved in a 6-minute walk test before the start of treatment was 326 +/- 83 m. When treated with gradually increasing doses of treprostinil the distance achieved in the 6-minute walk test improved. After 6 months, the group that received subcutaneous treatment had extended their distance to 359 m, after 12 months it was 393 m, after 24 months 447 m and after 36 months 494 m. After 6 months, the group that received intravenous treatment had extended their distance to 473 m, which increased to 451 m after 12 months and 489 m after 24 months. Functional capacity also improved. In total 5 patients were unable to tolerate the subcutaneous infusion, of whom 3 were placed on intravenous treprostinil and 2 on oral bosentan. 7 of the patients died in the period examined (31.8%). Treprostinil improves symptoms and hemodynamics for PAH patients and reduces mortality.