[PMID: 21610562]
To assess the incidence of iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks in 23-gauge vitrectomy for macular diseases and to compare it with 20-gauge vitrectomy. Retrospective, comparative, interventional case series. We compared the incidence of iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks in 176 eyes undergoing 23-gauge vitrectomy between January 2007 and November 2009 (23-gauge group) and 153 eyes undergoing 20-gauge vitrectomy between January 2004 and June 2006 (20-gauge group) for either idiopathic macular holes or idiopathic epiretinal membranes. All surgeries were performed by one surgeon at a single hospital. Main outcome measure was the incidence rate of iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks discovered intraoperatively and postoperatively. Iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks occurred in 1 eye in the 23-gauge group and in 11 eyes in the 20-gauge group during surgery. Additional iatrogenic retinal breaks were found in 1 eye in the 23-gauge group and in 2 eyes in the 20-gauge group within 1 month after surgery. The overall incidence of iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks was 1.1% (2 of 176) in the 23-gauge group and 8.5% (13 of 153) in the 20-gauge group. The difference was statistically significant (P = 0.0023). The incidence of iatrogenic peripheral retinal breaks during vitrectomy for macular diseases is significantly lower in 23-gauge vitrectomy than in 20-gauge vitrectomy.

[PMID: 26767158]
Baastrup's Syndrome is a condition that occurs when there is abnormal contact between two adjacent spinous processes resulting in back pain. An alteration in lumbar spinal alignment and/or adjacent segment compensatory motion is thought to be potential causative factors. The objective of this study was to present a case series of what appears to be iatrogenic Baastrup's Syndrome as a mid-to-late term complication following anterior lumbar interbody surgery. A retrospective chart review was performed of all patients undergoing anterior lumbar surgery for either fusion or disc replacement to determine the prevalence of Baastrup's Syndrome. Over a 12-year period, 855 patients who had undergone an anterior approach for lumbar spine surgery were identified. Of them 8 patients with evidence of Baastrup's Syndrome were found; this demonstrated a prevalence of 0.9%. Diagnostic injection was a helpful clinical tool in confirming the diagnosis of iatrogenic Baastrup's Syndrome. The partial removal of the impinging spinous processes resulted in excellent clinical relief. Iatrogenic Baastrup's Syndrome may be an iatrogenic result of anterior lumbar surgery in small group of patients. Spinous process excision is a suggested treatment option. Further studies are necessary to explore the above phenomenon. This study is a Level 3 retrospective case series.

[PMID: 10979347]
Iatrogenic illness, defined as a disease that results from a diagnostic procedure or from any form of therapy, is a well-recognized phenomenon in clinical practice. To study and evaluate major cardiac iatrogenic disease as the cause of admission to the intensive cardiac care unit in the modern era. We assessed 64 critically ill patients suffering from major cardiac iatrogenic problems among a total of 2,559 patients admitted to the intensive cardiac care unit during 3 years. Iatrogenic illness was defined as any problem that resulted from therapy. Only cardiac problems were included in the study. Complications of interventional cardiovascular procedures, suicide attempts or accidental intoxications were excluded. There was evidence of a major cardiac iatrogenic problem as the cause for admission in 64 patients (2.5%): 58 (91%) suffered from arrhythmias (mainly bradyarrhythmias) secondary to beta-blockers, amiodarone, calcium antagonists, electrolyte imbalance or a combination, and 6 (9%) had non-arrhythmic events (hypotension, syncope or acute heart failure). In 41 patients (64%) the iatrogenic event was considered preventable. Major cardiac iatrogenic complications are an important factor among patients admitted to the intensive cardiac care unit. Most of the events are bradyarrhythmias related to anti-arrhythmic agents. Almost two-thirds of events are preventable.

[PMID: 25660151]
We aimed to determine the prevalence of iatrogenic aortic dissection in chronic total occlusion (CTO) recanalization procedures, and to assess the management strategy and outcome of such a complication. This study was a retrospective analysis of CTO percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) cases performed by a single CTO experienced operator. Iatrogenic aortic dissection was defined as persistent contrast staining in the aortic cusp or root. Among 956 CTO PCI cases, iatrogenic aortic dissection occurred in 8 patients for an overall frequency of 0.83%. The right coronary artery was the CTO involved vessel in all cases with ostial location and severe calcifications in 37.5% and 62.5% of cases, respectively. Four patients underwent the antegrade approach and a retrograde strategy was adopted in the remaining 4 patients. The iatrogenic aortic dissection started from the right sinus of Valsalva in 87.5% of cases and catheter trauma was the presumed mechanism of dissection in most cases. Stenting of the entry point was performed in all cases, and dissection was limited (< 40 mm) in all patients. No patients required emergency surgery. One cardiac death was observed 12 days after the index procedure (12.5%), and a mean follow-up of 31.5 months was uneventful in the remaining 7 patients. CTO recanalization procedures might be associated with a greater incidence of iatrogenic aortic dissection than non-CTO PCI. The therapeutic strategy and outcome depend on the rapidity of the entry point sealing and the degree of extension of the dissection into the aorta in serial imaging assessment.

[PMID: 19063792]
A detailed hierarchal nomenclature of arrhythmias is offered with definition of its applications to diagnosis and complications. The conceptual and organizational approach to discussion of arrhythmias employs the following sequence: location--mechanism--aetiology--duration. The classification of arrhythmias is heuristically divided into an anatomical hierarchy: atrial, junctional, ventricular, or atrioventricular. Mechanisms are most simplistically classified as either reentrant, such as macro-reentrant atrial tachycardia, previously described as atrial flutter, or focal, such as automatic or micro-reentrant tachycardia, for example, junctional ectopic tachycardia. The aetiology of arrhythmias can be either iatrogenic, such as postsurgical, or non-iatrogenic, such as genetic or congenital, and in many cases is multi-factorial. Assigning an aetiology to an arrhythmia is distinct from understanding the mechanism of the arrhythmia, yet assignment of a possible aetiology of an arrhythmia may have important therapeutic implications in certain clinical settings. For example, postoperative atrial arrhythmias in patients after cardiac transplantation may be harbingers of rejection or consequent to remediable imbalances of electrolytes. The duration, frequency of, and time to occurrence of arrhythmia are temporal measures that further refine arrhythmia definition, and may offer insight into ascription of aetiology. Finally, arrhythmias do not occur in a void, but interact with other organ systems. Arrhythmias not only can result from perturbations of other organ systems, such as renal failure, but can produce dysfunction in other organ systems due to haemodynamic compromise or embolic phenomena.

[PMID: 2173098]
Nearly 30 years have elapsed since Rowe and Weller and their colleagues discovered human cytomegalovirus (CMV). Because of its complex structure, long replicative cycle, low yield in vitro, and highly species-specific cell-substrate requirement, the cellular and molecular biologic analyses of human CMV have been slow, but recombinant DNA and monoclonal antibody technologies are bringing about rapid changes. Because of the long period of latency and wide range of disease presentations, epidemiologic and medical insights have also come slowly. However, the clinical events that occur during iatrogenic immunosuppression (transplantation and cancer therapy) and as a result of immunocompromise due to human immunodeficiency virus infection are currently promoting our understanding of the epidemiology of CMV disease and the definition of its clinical spectrum. Rapid diagnostic methods, antiviral drugs, and vaccines for CMV are becoming available. We may not yet understand completely the impact of this agent on the nonimmunosuppressed or aspects of its pathogenesis: e.g., the immune functions controlling recrudescence and the possibility of increased disease severity in those with no detectable immune defect. With the availability of new approaches, other issues should be clarified, such as the functions of host and virus involved in the mechanism of persistence.

[PMID: 8133999]
The authors observed one case of an iatrogenic subarachnoid-pleural fistula secondary to the resection of an upper lobe carcinoma of the lung. The clinical presentation was characterized by a sudden deterioration of mental status and level of consciousness immediately after the removal of the thoracotomy chest tube. The diagnosis was substantiated by the demonstration of pneumocephalus by a computed tomographic scan of the head and by the identification of a left T5 nerve root fistula by a postmyelographic computed tomographic scan. The excellent anatomical definition achieved by this modality emphasizes its usefulness in the identification and therapeutic management of these lesions. Operative treatment consisted of the suture ligature of the nerve root and a chest drain. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the outcome was excellent, with the only finding of sensory loss in the T5 nerve root territory. A review of the literature disclosed 11 similar cases, with some differences in the choice of the most appropriate diagnostic procedure and significant differences in the therapeutic options, which were related to the various mechanisms of injury.

[PMID: 17091219]
Epilepsy is a common chronic neurological disorder, usually requiring long-term treatment with anti-epileptic drugs (AED). Many studies have reported that AED therapy is associated with metabolic bone disease and is a major iatrogenic risk factor for fractures. There remains uncertainty about the type(s) of bone disease due to AED treatment, and the pathogenesis of AED-associated fractures. Deficits in bone mineral density (BMD) are widely reported in AED-treated patient populations. However, much of the research conducted to date has been limited by factors such as small sample size, potentially biased subject selection, a lack of selection of appropriate control data, and failure to take account of important confounding influences. The pathogenesis of AED-associated fractures is likely to be multifactorial, due to factors including reduced BMD, impaired bone quality (due to osteoporosis and/or osteomalacia), increased propensity to fall, and fractures associated with seizures or loss of consciousness. Patients receiving long-term AED should be monitored for indices of bone health, including BMD and vitamin D status. Lifestyle factors should be optimized, vitamin D status maintained, and fall prevention strategies introduced as appropriate. Good seizure control is important. The use of additional, specific osteoporosis therapy is not evidence-based in this setting, but would appear reasonable in patients with clinically significant decreases in BMD, applying current treatment guidelines for osteoporosis. There is a pressing need for improved understanding of the pathogenesis of AED-associated bone disease, for better definition of the risk associated with specific AED regimens, and for the development of evidence-based preventive and treatment approaches in this common but neglected disorder.

[PMID: 8642152]
To determine the prevalence, risk factors, clinical course, and prognosis of iatrogenic congestive heart failure in older patients. Prospective observational study at a university teaching hospital. A total of 401 patients 70 years of age or older hospitalized with congestive heart failure. The mean age was 80 +/- 6 years; 59% were female, and 65% were white. Comprehensive data, including an assessment of the etiology and precipitating factors leading to the development of heart failure, were collected at the time of diagnosis. Iatrogenic heart failure was defined as heart failure precipitated by medications or excessive fluid administration, or occurring as a procedural complication. All patients were followed for 1 year, and the primary outcome measure was total mortality. Using strict criteria, 28 patients (7.0%) were considered to have iatrogenic heart failure. Compared with noniatrogenic patients (n = 373), iatrogenic cases had less severe premorbid cardiac disease but more marked noncardiac disability and longer hospital stays (29 +/- 24 vs 13 +/- 12 days, P < .001). Hospital mortality was 32% in iatrogenic heart failure patients compared with 9% in noniatrogenic cases (P < .001). Cumulative mortality at 1 year was 68% in iatrogenic patients versus 39% in noniatrogenic patients (P < .01). Using a Cox proportional hazards model, iatrogenic congestive heart failure was associated with a relative mortality risk during follow-up of 2.5 (95% confidence interval 1.5-4.3) after adjusting for age, sex, prior history of heart failure, New York Heart Association class, diabetes mellitus, systolic blood pressure, hemoglobin, blood urea nitrogen, and serum albumin. Frail, debilitated older patients are at increased risk for developing iatrogenic heart failure, even in the absence of clinically evident cardiac disease. In this population, iatrogenic heart failure serves as a marker for poor short- and long-term prognosis, but further study is required to determine the optimal approach to management of these patients.

[PMID: 8608668]
Restenosis following angioplasty is an iatrogenic disease of increasing frequency. Restenosis may be defined in terms of either angiographic or clinical criteria. Definitions of angiographic restenosis have varied in different studies, accounting in part for the differences in reported restenosis rates. Most studies now define angiographic restenosis as either a > 50% loss of initial gain or an absolute lesion stenosis of > or = 50% at follow-up angiogram. Common clinical end points used in defining restenosis include recurrent angina, need for repeat revascularization, or myocardial infarction. Despite technical advances and multiple pharmacologic interventions, most studies have found that the incidence of angiographic restenosis remains in the range of 40%; in none of these studies, however, was complete angiographic follow-up obtained, and thus actual restenosis rates may be somewhat higher. In several studies, clinical restenosis has been found to occur in approximately 36-40% of patients. Thus, a minority of patients with angiographic restenosis have no clinical manifestations. Most patients who develop symptoms of restenosis develop these symptoms within the first 3 months after angioplasty. The presenting symptom in the majority of these patients is progressive exertional angina. Patients occasionally will present with unstable angina and only rarely with acute myocardial infarction. In patients who present with recurrent chest pain, several features have been found to be helpful in predicting whether they will have angiographic restenosis at follow-up angiography. Patients who present 1-6 months after angioplasty with typical anginal symptoms have a high likelihood of having angiographic restenosis. By contrast, patients who present more than 6 months after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty with recurrent chest pain are more likely to have new, significant coronary lesions to account for their symptoms. Noninvasive testing in patients with clinical presentations suggestive of restenosis can, in general, add only modest information in predicting whether restenosis is indeed present. A negative exercise thallium test appears to have a high specificity in ruling out restenosis and may be helpful in patients who present with more atypical symptoms. Repeat angioplasty is the therapy most frequently utilized to treat restenosis, although coronary artery bypass surgery or medical therapy may be reasonable alternative therapies. Clinical success rates with repeat angioplasty are > 90%, and major complications are rare; however, restenosis will recur in a significant percentage of these patients. Some patients who develop such recurrent restenoses will ultimately benefit from a strategy of repeat angioplasties, although many will require surgical revascularization.

[PMID: 18176826]
This study was designed to determine whether incidental splenectomy for iatrogenic injury affects long-term cancer-specific survival in patients having resection of an adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid or rectum. A retrospective case-matched review of patients undergoing surgery for colorectal cancer with incidental splenectomy between January 1, 1990 and December 31, 1999 was undertaken. Data were analysed for age, American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status, gender, disease stage, operation type, and outcome. These cases were matched with patients from the same center, of the same age and gender, with the same stage of disease and operation, who did not require a splenectomy at the time of their surgery. Fifty-five patients were identified who had an iatrogenic splenectomy. Matched gender, stage, and American Society of Anesthesiologists-matched controls were identified. Follow-up from time of surgery to death or last follow-up ranged from 2 to 205 (median, 43) months. A Kaplan-Meier survival analysis using the Cox proportional hazards model to define the statistical significance found a significant difference between the groups favoring those without splenectomy (hazard ratio, 1.8; 95 percent confidence interval (CI), 1-3.3; P=0.0399). Cancer-specific survival at five years was 70 vs. 47 percent and at ten years was 55 vs. 38 percent. Patients with colorectal cancer who had splenectomy as a result of iatrogenic damage of the spleen while undergoing resection of the sigmoid or rectum for adenocarcinoma had a significantly worse prognosis.

[PMID: 18242414]
Iatrogenic events are increasingly recognised as an important problem in all people admitted to hospital. However, few epidemiological data are available for iatrogenic events in neonatal high-risk units. We aimed to assess the incidence, nature, preventability, and severity of iatrogenic events in a neonatal centre and to establish the association of patient characteristics with the occurrence of iatrogenic events in neonates. We undertook an observational, prospective study from Jan 1, 2005, to Sept 1, 2005, including all neonates admitted in the Division of Neonatology of an academic, tertiary neonatal centre in southern France. Iatrogenic events were defined as any event that compromised the safety margin for the patient, in the presence or absence of harm. The report of an iatrogenic event was voluntary, anonymous, and non-punitive. The primary outcome was the rate of iatrogenic events per 1000 patient days. A total of 388 patients were studied during 10 436 patient days. We recorded 267 iatrogenic events in 116 patients. The incidence of iatrogenic events was 25.6 per 1000 patient days. 92 (34%) were preventable and 78 (29%) were severe. Two iatrogenic events (1%) were fatal, but neither was preventable. The most severe iatrogenic events were nosocomial infections (49/62 [79%]) and respiratory events (nine of 26 [35%]). Cutaneous injuries were frequent (n=94) but generally minor (89 [95%]), as were medication errors (15/19 [76%]). Most medication errors occurred during administration stage (12/19 [63%]) and were ten-fold errors (nine of 19 [47%]). The major risk factors were low birthweight and gestational age (both p<0.0001), length of stay (p<0.0001), a central venous line (p<0.0001), mechanical ventilation (p=0.0021), and support with continuous positive airwary pressure (p=0.0076). Iatrogenic events occur frequently and are often serious in neonates, especially in infants of low birthweight. Improved knowledge of the incidence and characteristics of iatrogenic events, and continuous monitoring could help to improve quality of health care for this vulnerable population.

[PMID: 3961454]
Iatrogenic diseases are defined as illnesses due to diagnostic or therapeutic procedures. The authors explore the possibility of recording iatrogenic diseases by a physician self-monitoring system. The responsible physician himself records his/her patients' iatrogenic complications on hospital discharge, after which the authors examine retrospectively all charts of the patients involved and a random sample of patients not included. The results show that in one year 208 of 1618 patients were recorded as having an iatrogenic disease which was severe in 88. 7.1% of these cases were not confirmed retrospectively (false positives). On the other hand, about one third of iatrogenic illnesses were not recorded (false negatives), though these were less severe cases only. We calculated that 17% of our patients had iatrogenic diseases, 22% of these were predictable. About a third of the patients had iatrogenic disease before hospital admission, and these patients had more severe, and other, iatrogenic diseases than those who acquired them during hospitalization. Iatrogenic complications affect other organ systems than non-iatrogenic acquired diseases. On average, patients with iatrogenic diseases were 6 years older and hospitalized 10 days longer than other patients. Although not all cases may be recorded, we believe that physician self-monitoring is preferable to other systems for recording iatrogenic diseases, since it may have a direct teaching effect on those who cause the illness.

[PMID: 2534534]
We report a case of acne secondary to amineptine (Survector) in a 54-year-old woman. Clinical picture and relationship with excessive drug intake of this drug define this new iatrogenic acne. To our knowledge, this is the first case described in Spain.

[PMID: 25600788]
Advances in neonatology have markedly improved prognosis for premature babies in recent years. However, they have also entailed the need for recourse to considerable intensive care involving potentially iatrogenic diagnostic and therapeutic acts. Among the resulting iatrogenic events, cutaneous lesions are the most frequent but have been the subject of very few studies. Our own study thus aimed to assess the rate of iatrogenic cutaneous events in premature infants born at less than 33 weeks of amenorrhea and hospitalised at Besançon university hospital and to identify the factors associated with the occurrence of these events. This was a prospective study carried out in the department of paediatric intensive care and neonatology at Besançon university hospital between May 2011 and April 2012. All babies born before 33 weeks of amenorrhea hospitalised over this period were included. An iatrogenic event was defined as "an adverse event related to a medical procedure". Iatrogenic cutaneous events were reported to the dermatologist by medical and paramedical staff. One hundred and thirthteen newborn babies were included during the study period. Twenty-six iatrogenic cutaneous events were recorded in 19 infants, representing 16.8% of the population involved: nine were associated with ventilation techniques, six with the use of intravenous catheters, five with electrodes, two involved pressure sores, two were linked to the birth, one to disinfectants and one to dressings. The main risk factor was low birth weight (P=0.016). High prematurity and the duration of ventilation increased the risk, although not significantly. The death rate was higher in children with iatrogenic events but the difference was not significant. The duration of hospitalisation was unaffected by the presence or absence of an iatrogenic event. The frequency of iatrogenic cutaneous events is high in hospital departments in charge of very premature infants. Awareness by the medical and paramedical staff of the frequency of such iatrogenic events should improve the quality of care.

[PMID: 24719163]
An increase in the incidence of intraoperative aortic dissection has been reported recently, attributed to the increasingly elderly patient population undergoing cardiac surgery and more off-pump coronary artery bypass. We performed this study to examine current trends, identify risk factors for iatrogenic dissection, and compare iatrogenic intraoperative aortic dissection with spontaneous aortic dissection. The 15,144 consecutive patients who underwent cardiac surgery from April 1999 to April 2011 were studied retrospectively on data collected prospectively. Iatrogenic type A aortic dissection following cardiac surgery was diagnosed intraoperatively in 7 (0.04%) patients. Of the 4784 patients who had off-pump coronary artery bypass, only 2 (0.04%) developed iatrogenic intraoperative aortic dissection. Patients in the iatrogenic aortic dissection group were older by a decade (median age 72 vs. 62 years, p = 0.01). The cannulation site in conventional coronary artery bypass grafting and injury by the side-biting clamp in off-pump coronary artery bypass were the most common causes of dissection. Atheromatous disease was identified at the site of cannulation in 5 (71.4%) of the 7 cases. Intraoperative aortic dissection remains a rare and unpredictable complication of cardiac surgery, with worse outcomes than spontaneous aortic dissection. Increased age and atheromatous disease at the site of cannulation are significant risk factors for iatrogenic dissection. In this series, off-pump coronary artery bypass did not appear to be a risk factor for iatrogenic aortic dissection.

[PMID: 22197283]
Hallux valgus is a common forefoot pathology often requiring surgical intervention for symptomatic relief. One complication of hallux valgus correction is flexible hallux varus. Iatrogenic flexible hallux varus often requires surgical repair; however, the most advantageous surgical procedure for repair of iatrogenic flexible hallux varus and their sustainability remains unclear. Therefore, we performed a systematic review to determine the sustainability of soft-tissue release with tendon transfer for the correction of iatrogenic flexible hallux varus. Studies were eligible for inclusion only if they involved failure of soft-tissue release with tendon transfer for flexible iatrogenic hallux varus. Eight studies met our inclusion criteria, seven of which were evidence-based medicine level IV studies and one was level V. A total of 52 patients, all female, involving 68 feet, were included. All studies included soft-tissue release of the first metatarsal-phalangeal joint capsule and 1 of the following procedures: Johnson transfer of the extensor hallucis longus tendon with arthrodesis of the hallux interphalangeal joint (41 feet); Hawkins transfer of the abductor hallucis tendon (9 feet); reverse Hawkins transfer (7 feet); Valtin transfer of the first dorsal interosseous tendon (7 feet); and Myerson transfer of the extensor hallucis brevis tendon (4 feet). The weighted mean age of the patients was 50.4 years, and the weighted mean follow-up was 30.2 months. A total of 11 complications (16.2%) occurred. Of note, only 3 cases (4.4%) of recurrent hallux varus deformity developed, all of which occurred after Johnson transfer of the extensor hallucis longus tendon, with arthrodesis of the hallux interphalangeal joint. Our results support that sustainable correction of iatrogenic flexible hallux varus can be achieved with soft-tissue release of the first metatarsal-phalangeal joint combined with a variety of tendon transfer procedures. However, given the limited data available, potential areas for additional prospective investigation remain.

[PMID: 12561154]
A rare complication of laparoscopic cholecystectomy is defined: iatrogenic injuries to hepatic artery system which may evolve to pseudoaneurysms in the late postoperative period. This rare phenomenon may be overlooked and pose a challenge to surgeons. We will describe three cases with iatrogenic pseudoaneurysms after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The onset of symptoms and the course of the disease was not uniform. Diagnosis was made after a considerable delay. In the first case, a small, uncomplicated extrahepatic pseudoaneurysm was successfully treated with coil embolization. The second patient who had an intrahepatic pseudoaneurysm with multiple injuries to the common bile duct and portal vein, did not survive despite surgical and endovascular interventions. In the latter, surgical treatment for a large pseudoaneurysm that had ruptured into the liver parenchyma was successfully conducted. Review of the literature reveals fifty-four more cholecystectomy-related pseudoaneurysms. The site of injury was the right hepatic artery in 61% of the cases and the presenting symptom was upper gastrointestinal bleeding (haemobilia) in two-third of the patients. Embolization was performed in 82% of the cases, and surgery was undertaken in the remaining 18%. Pseudoaneurysm is an uncommon complication of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Prompt attention is necessary since the lesion has a high risk of rupture. Embolization is the first line of treatment and surgery is reserved for more complex injuries and cases with life-threatening rupture of the aneurysm.

[PMID: 17497458]
Radiological procedures require the intravascular administration of iodinated contrast media, which are becoming a great source of an iatrogenic disease known as contrast-induced nephropathy. The development of contrast-induced nephropathy is associated with prolonged hospitalization, the potential need for renal replacement therapy, and increased mortality. Despite numerous clinical and experimental studies, several important issues regarding contrast-induced nephropathy remain controversial. One of the controversial points is its very definition: a universally accepted definition of contrast-induced nephropathy does not exist. This can be a major problem. Differing definitions of contrast-induced nephropathy and the clinical importance of these definitions were discussed in this letter.

[PMID: 21481093]
To investigate the incidence, causes and delivery methods of iatrogenic preterm births. A retrospective study was conducted to review a cohort of preterm birth records to learn the incidence, causes and delivery methods of 828 iatrogenic preterm births from January 2004 to June 2007. The chi-squared and two tailed Student's t-test were used for statistical analysis. During the 3.5-year study period, the total incidence of iatrogenic preterm birth was 6.4%, accounting for 49.8% of the total recorded preterm births. Specifically, the proportion of iatrogenic preterm births to the total recorded preterm births in 2005 was 51.9%, the highest during the study. The top three etiologies of iatrogenic preterm birth were intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, hemorrhage and hypertensive disorder complicating pregnancy. Among the preterm births studied, 62 pregnancies delivered prior to term were for no recorded indications. Seven hundred and twenty-nine iatrogenic preterm births underwent cesarean section. Iatrogenic preterm birth has become the main reason for preterm births and no recorded indications have become one cause of it. Cesarean delivery was the main delivery method among iatrogenic preterm births. Obstetricians should choose the delivery method strictly.

[PMID: 417541]
A 3-year-old child diagnosed as having acute lymphatic leukemia (ALL), developed meningeal leukemia 36 months after the onset of the disease. He was twice subjected to cranial irradiation plus intrathecal methotrexate (i.t. MTX). Skull radiology showed bilateral gyriform calcification of both cerebral hemispheres. Hematological relapse was first detected 5 years after diagnosis and the child died 5 months later. The most striking findings of a right frontal lobe biopsy and the postmortem examination were wide calcium deposits located in the cortex and in the adjacent white matter. Intense demyelination as well as areas of neuron poverty were apparent in the necropsy but in the biopsy specimen. The possible interrelationship between such deposition and cranial irradiation and/or i.t. MTX suggests a new iatrogenic disorder.

[PMID: 2240392]
With the increased use of prophylactic and broad-spectrum antibiotics, pseudomembranous colitis has emerged as a significant clinical problem. Management with specific anti-Clostridium difficile therapy (vancomycin or metronidazole) has reduced mortality to less than 2%. Nevertheless, the disease may progress to a fulminant toxic colitis or colonic perforation. Additionally, another subset of patients will present with a dramatic clinical picture, suggesting acute peritonitis, eventuating in unnecessary laparotomy. This report reviews both the medical and surgical literature during the past 15 years of patients treated for pseudomembranous colitis. Analysis of this clinical data has provided us with the opportunity to both define the role of surgery in this disorder and illustrate the necessity for a combined medical and surgical cooperative approach in the early management of this iatrogenic disease.

[PMID: 21701137]
Iatrogenic injury to the spleen is not an uncommon complication. Left nephrectomy has been reported as the second commonest cause of iatrogenic splenectomy with a reported incidence between 1.3 and 24%. Iatrogenic splenectomy is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. We reviewed the occurrence of iatrogenic splenectomy during left nephrectomy at our centre. Our aims were to determine the incidence of iatrogenic splenectomy within the Mid Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust in order to understand the nature of the splenic injury and the morbidity and mortality associated with it. All splenectomy and nephrectomy histology reports from January 2000 to December 2007 were reviewed retrospectively. Indications for splenectomy and nephrectomy were identified. Patients' demographic data, tumour characteristics, operative details, length of hospital stay and any reported morbidity or mortality were collected. A total of 447 nephrectomies were identified which included 234 left nephrectomies. Within the same period 136 cases of splenectomy were performed. Thirty-four cases were iatrogenic splenectomies and 12 were caused by left nephrectomy. The incidence was 5.13%. The male to female ratio was 1:1 with an average age of 66 years. Grade 2 and stage pT2 renal cancer were the commonest tumour characteristics. All iatrogenic injuries occurred during mobilisation of the colon or division of adhesion. The average operative time was 4.7 h. Average length of hospital stay was 14 days. Five patients had postoperative complications and 1 died of respiratory failure and sepsis. Splenic injury during left nephrectomy is a morbid complication. A good understanding of anatomy and surgical approach may reduce the incidence, morbidity and mortality of iatrogenic splenectomy during left nephrectomy.

[PMID: 355046]
It is difficult to truly define iatrogenic complications in the postsurgical state in that the surgery is a condition originated by physician intervention and thus any problems that occur may be technically considered as physician created. In this article we attempt to demonstrate problems that occur both due to technical errors and the choice of operative procedure. In addition, unusual postsurgical anatomy is illustrated with the hope of avoiding further iatrogenic problems from lack of recognition.

[PMID: 17470323]
Failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS) is well known and physicians often fear this outcome. Its definition is difficult to understand because it is multifactorial. However, we analyze its etiology in order to determine if it is from iatrogenic causes. This syndrome can be categorized as follows: mistaken diagnoses, transoperative error, technique error, poor application, poor indication. We undertook a prospective, observational and lineal study in 20 patients, 313 surgeries and 4,500 consultations. Age and gender variables were analyzed, number of prior surgeries, and diagnosis prior to first surgery, as well as predominant symptoms for the last surgery, surgical time, and involved segment. Patients were evaluated with Oswestry preoperative scale and followed up for 2 years. There were 16 females and 4 males with an average age of 53.2 years. Eight patients had 1 prior surgery, 8 patients had 2 prior surgeries, 3 patients had 3 prior surgeries, and 1 patient had 4 prior surgeries. According to the Oswestry preoperative scale, 12 patients had scores higher than 60% and at 2-year follow-up, 11 patients had scores lower than 20%. Despite the persistent symptomatology and complications, in almost all patients the satisfaction index was 100%. According to the evaluation, the main cause was poor indication in three patients, poor indication + technique error in 10, and technique error in 7 patients. The most reported initial etiology was lumbar disc hernia with minimally invasive treatment with questionable surgical indication.

[PMID: 8420729]
a) To evaluate the frequency, types, severity, and morbidity of iatrogenic complications; b) determine associated factors that favor iatrogenic complications; and c) suggest new or more efficient protective measures that may be taken to improve patient safety. Prospective, observational study. Two ICUs in France. The study included 382 patients (age > or = 15 yrs; 400 consecutive admissions). Patients were monitored by two physicians in each ICU to assess all iatrogenic complications occurring during their ICU stay, with the exception of adverse effects of drugs. An iatrogenic complication was defined as an adverse event that was independent of the patient's underlying disease. We observed 316 iatrogenic complications in 124 (31%) of the 400 admissions. Of these iatrogenic complications, 107 (in 53 [13%] of the 400 admissions) complications were major, three leading to death. Severe hypotension, respiratory distress, pneumothorax, and cardiac arrest represented 78% of the major iatrogenic complications. Fifty-nine percent of the major iatrogenic complications had clearly identified associated factors. Human errors accounted for 67% of these factors. Patients > 65 yrs (adjusted odds ratio = 2.6, 95% confidence interval: 1.4 to 4.9) and those patients admitted with two or more organ failures (adjusted odds ratio = 4.8, 95% confidence interval: 2.5 to 9.2) were more likely to develop major iatrogenic complications. High or excessive nursing workload also led to an increased risk of major iatrogenic complications. Persistent morbidity, secondary to iatrogenic complications at the time of discharge, was present in five survivors. The risk of ICU death was about two-fold higher for the patients with major iatrogenic complications than in the remaining patients after adjusting for the Organ System Failure Score and the prognosis of the disease (relative risk = 1.92, 95% confidence interval: 1.28 to 2.56). Major iatrogenic complications were frequent, associated with increased morbidity and mortality rates, related to high or excessive nursing workload, and were often secondary to human errors. To improve patient safety in our ICUs, preventive measures should be targeted primarily on the elderly and the most severely ill patients. Special attention should be given to improving the organization of workload and training, and promoting wider use of noninvasive monitoring.

[PMID: 26386902]
Iatrogenic neurologic deficits after lumbar spine surgery are rare complications, but important to recognize and manage. Complications such as radiculopathy, spinal cord compression, motor deficits (i.e. foot drop with L5 radiculopathy), and new onset radiculitis, while uncommon do occur. Attempts at mitigating these complications with the use of neuromonitoring have been successful. Guidance in the literature as to the true rate of iatrogenic neurologic deficit is limited to several case studies and retrospective designed studies describing the management, prevention and treatment of these deficits. The authors review the lumbar spinal surgery literature to examine the incidence of iatrogenic neurologic deficit in the lumbar spinal surgery literature. An advanced MEDLINE search conducted on May 14th, 2015 from January 1, 2004 through May 14, 2015, using the following MeSH search terms "postoperative complications," then subterms "lumbar vertebrae," treatment outcome," "spinal fusion," and "radiculopathy" were included together with "postoperative complications" in a single search. Postoperative complications including radiculopathy, weakness, and spinal cord compression were included. The definition of iatrogenic neurologic complication was limited to post-operative radiculopathy, motor weakness or new onset pain/radiculitis. An advanced MEDLINE search conducted on May 14th, 2015 using all of the above terms together yielded 21 results. After careful evaluation, 11 manuscripts were excluded and 10 were carefully reviewed. The most common indications for surgery were degenerative spondylolisthesis, spondylosis, scoliosis, and lumbar stenosis. In 2783 patients in 12 total studies, there were 56 patients who had reported a postoperative neurologic deficit for a rate of 5.7. The rates of deficits ranged from 0.46% to 17% in the studies used. The average rate of reported neurologic complications within these papers was 9% (range 0.46-24%). Thirty patients of a total of 731 (4.1%) had a new onset neurologic injury after anterior lumber interbody fusion or lateral lumber interbody fusion. Thirty-seven out of 2052 (1.9%) patients had a neurologic injury after posterior decompression and fusion. Screw malposition was responsible for 11 deficits. Spinal surgery for lumbar degenerative disease carries a low but definite rate of neurologic deficits. Despite the introduction of neuromonitoring, these complications still occur. Interpretation of neurologic injury rates for lumbar surgery is limited by the few prospective and cohort-matched controlled studies. Likewise, most injuries were associated with the placement of instrumentation despite the type of approach.

[PMID: 20650043]
A recent meta-analysis in this journal showed incidences between 3.4 and 33.9%. Studies performed by pharmacists and epidemiologists produced lower incidences than internists' studies. We reassessed the prevalence of iatrogenic admissions in a study of internists. Iatrogenic disease was defined as adverse drug reactions according to the World Health Organization Definition and complications induced by non-drug medical interventions. Subsequent admissions at the Departments of Medicine/Cardiology/Pulmonology in a 1,250 bed general hospital in the Netherlands from May 2007 to August 2007 were studied. 2,000 consecutive admissions were studied: 576 (29%, 26-32%) were classified as possibly iatrogenic; out of these 380 (19%, 17-22%) as definitely iatrogenic, out of whom 229 (12%, 10-14%) had already been classified as iatrogenic by the admitting physicians. Patients with cardiac disease, hypertension, gastrointestinal conditions, anticoagulant treatment and use of NSAIDs were, particularly, at risk of iatrogenic admission with percentages of 22 (16-24), 13 (11-18), 12 (9-15), and 7 (5-11) %. An independent predictor of iatrogenic admissions was age with an odds ratio of 1.27 per 10 years (p = 0.0001). 1. At least 19% of admissions to the Departments of Internal Medicine/Cardiology/Pulmonology, and, maybe, even percentages up to 29% were due to adverse drug effects. 2. A large difference between the numbers of iatrogenic admission according to the physicians in charge of admission and the investigators, 229 versus 380 patients, was observed. 3. Most often iatrogenic admissions were observed with cardiac disease, hypertension, gastrointestinal conditions, anticoagulant treatment, and use of NSAIDs.

[PMID: 133304]
A report of a patient with granulomatous peritonitis following general surgery is presented. Laparoscopy was performed as the final diagnostic procedure. Prevention is the remedy for this iatrogenic problem.