[PMID: 34339547]
Favipiravir is a promising treatment candidate for managing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Warfarin has many drug interactions, but no interactions with favipiravir have been reported. Our patient was taking warfarin for deep vein thrombosis. The international normalized ratio (INR) was stable (1.65 to 2.0); however, it increased to 4.63 after administering favipiravir. The patient had no other factors justifying this change. Favipiravir and warfarin might have previously unidentified drug interactions that elevated the INR. Therefore, INR must be closely monitored when they are concomitantly administered in COVID-19 patients.

[PMID: 22809499]
Human noroviruses are the primary cause of foodborne gastroenteritis. Potent and safe inhibitors are needed for the treatment/prophylaxis of norovirus infections. We demonstrate that Favipiravir [T-705, a drug in advanced clinical development for the treatment of infections with the influenza virus] inhibits in vitro murine norovirus replication. Time-of-drug addition studies reveal that T-705 exerts its activity at a time-point that coincides with onset of viral RNA synthesis, which is in line with the viral polymerase as the presumed target.

[PMID: 34497279]
Transporters in the human liver play a major role in the clearance of endo- and xenobiotics. Apical (canalicular) transporters extrude compounds to the bile, while basolateral hepatocyte transporters promote the uptake of, or expel, various compounds from/into the venous blood stream. In the present work we have examined the in vitro interactions of some key repurposed drugs advocated to treat COVID-19 (lopinavir, ritonavir, ivermectin, remdesivir and favipiravir), with the key drug transporters of hepatocytes. These transporters included ABCB11/BSEP, ABCC2/MRP2, and SLC47A1/MATE1 in the canalicular membrane, as well as ABCC3/MRP3, ABCC4/MRP4, SLC22A1/OCT1, SLCO1B1/OATP1B1, SLCO1B3/OATP1B3, and SLC10A1/NTCP, residing in the basolateral membrane. Lopinavir and ritonavir in low micromolar concentrations inhibited BSEP and MATE1 exporters, as well as OATP1B1/1B3 uptake transporters. Ritonavir had a similar inhibitory pattern, also inhibiting OCT1. Remdesivir strongly inhibited MRP4, OATP1B1/1B3, MATE1 and OCT1. Favipiravir had no significant effect on any of these transporters. Since both general drug metabolism and drug-induced liver toxicity are strongly dependent on the functioning of these transporters, the various interactions reported here may have important clinical relevance in the drug treatment of this viral disease and the existing co-morbidities.

[PMID: 34044777]
Favipiravir possesses high utility for treating patients with COVID-19. However, research examining the efficacy and safety of favipiravir for patients with COVID-19 is limited. We conducted a systematic review of published studies reporting the efficacy of favipiravir against COVID-19. Two investigators independently searched PubMed, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, MedRxiv, and ClinicalTrials.gov (inception to September 2020) to identify eligible studies. A meta-analysis was performed to measure viral clearance and clinical improvement as the primary outcomes. Among 11 eligible studies, 5 included a comparator group. Comparing to the comparator group, the favipiravir group exhibited significantly better viral clearance on day 7 after the initiation of treatment (odds ratio [OR] = 2.49, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.19-5.22), whereas no difference was noted on day 14 (OR = 2.19, 95% CI = 0.69-6.95). Although clinical improvement was significantly better in the favipiravir group on both days 7 and 14, the improvement was better on day 14 (OR = 3.03, 95% CI = 1.17-7.80) than on day 7 (OR = 1.60, 95% CI = 1.03-2.49). The estimated proportions of patients with viral clearance in the favipiravir arm on days 7 and 14 were 65.42 and 88.9%, respectively, versus 43.42 and 78.79%, respectively, in the comparator group. The estimated proportions of patients with clinical improvement on days 7 and 14 in the favipiravir group were 54.33 and 84.63%, respectively, compared with 34.40 and 65.77%, respectively, in the comparator group. Favipiravir induces viral clearance by 7 days and contributes to clinical improvement within 14 days. The results indicated that favipiravir has strong possibility for treating COVID-19, especially in patients with mild-to-moderate illness. Additional well-designed studies, including examinations of the dose and duration of treatment, are crucial for reaching definitive conclusions.

[PMID: 33191372]
We herein report the first case of a fever induced by favipiravir, a potential coronavirus disease 2019 therapeutic drug. An 82-year-old man diagnosed with bilateral pneumonia was transferred to our hospital following a positive severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 polymerase chain reaction test. He was treated with compassionate use of favipiravir. Both his oxygen demand and fever gradually improved after admission; however, his fever relapsed, and the C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increased on day 7. We diagnosed his fever as being favipiravir-induced. The fever resolved a few days after favipiravir discontinuation, demonstrating the accuracy of the diagnosis. This case revealed that favipiravir can induce a fever.

[PMID: 24563658]
Favipiravir and oseltamivir are antiviral compounds used for the treatment of influenza infections. We have aimed to investigate the efficacy of the compounds in combination to treat influenza H1N1 virus infections in mice. Mice infected with pandemic influenza A/California/04/2009 (H1N1pdm) virus or an oseltamivir-resistant (H275Y neuraminidase mutation) influenza A/Mississippi/ 3/2001 (H1N1) virus were treated orally with inhibitors twice a day for 5 days starting 4 h after infection. Complete protection from death was afforded by favipiravir treatments of 100 mg/kg/day, but lower doses were less effective. Combinations of oseltamivir (1 and 3 mg/kg/day) with favipiravir (3, 10 and 30 mg/kg/day) resulted in a synergistic improvement in survival rates against H1N1pdm infections. Significant reductions in lung virus titers also occurred. Against the H275Y virus infection, oseltamivir alone was only 30% protective from death at 100 mg/kg/day, but combinations of the two compounds produced a synergistic improvement in survival rate. The utility of treating H1N1 influenza virus infections with oseltamivir and favipiravir in combination has been established.

[PMID: 33364790]
COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus emerged as an unprecedented challenge to discover effective drugs for its prevention and cure. Hyperinflammation-induced lung damage is one of the poor prognostic indicators causing a higher rate of morbidity and mortality of COVID-19 patients. Favipiravir, an antiviral drug, is being used for COVID-19 treatment, and we currently have limited information regarding its efficacy and safety. Thus, the present study was undertaken to evaluate the adverse drug events (ADEs) reported in the WHO pharmacovigilance database. This study analyzed all suspected ADEs related to favipiravir reported from 2015. The reports were analyzed based on age, gender, and seriousness of ADEs at the System Organ Classification (SOC) level and the individual Preferred Term (PT) level. This study is based on 194 ADEs reported from 93 patients. Most frequent ADEs suspected to be caused by the favipiravir included increased hepatic enzymes, nausea and vomiting, tachycardia, and diarrhea. Severe and fatal ADEs occurred more frequently in men and those over the age of 64 years. Blood and lymphatic disorders, cardiac disorders, hepatobiliary disorders, injury poisoning, and procedural complications were more common manifestations of severe ADEs. This study revealed that favipiravir appears to be a relatively safe drug. An undiscovered anti-inflammatory activity of favipiravir may explain the improvement in critically ill patients and reduce inflammatory markers. Currently, the data is based on very few patients. A more detailed assessment of the uncommon ADEs needs to be analyzed when more information will be available.

[PMID: 32097670]
Favipiravir has been developed as an anti-influenza drug and licensed as an anti-influenza drug in Japan. Additionally, favipiravir is being stockpiled for 2 million people as a countermeasure for novel influenza strains. This drug functions as a chain terminator at the site of incorporation of the viral RNA and reduces the viral load. Favipiravir cures all mice in a lethal influenza infection model, while oseltamivir fails to cure the animals. Thus, favipiravir contributes to curing animals with lethal infection. In addition to influenza, favipiravir has a broad spectrum of anti-RNA virus activities in vitro and efficacies in animal models with lethal RNA viruses and has been used for treatment of human infection with life-threatening Ebola virus, Lassa virus, rabies, and severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome. The best feature of favipiravir as an antiviral agent is the apparent lack of generation of favipiravir-resistant viruses. Favipiravir alone maintains its therapeutic efficacy from the first to the last patient in an influenza pandemic or an epidemic lethal RNA virus infection. Favipiravir is expected to be an important therapeutic agent for severe influenza, the next pandemic influenza strain, and other severe RNA virus infections for which standard treatments are not available.

[PMID: 33042544]
The combination therapy of Lopinavir/Ritonavir plus Favipiravir might be a treatment option for patients with COVID-19. Serum ferritin levels and lymphocytopenia are promising markers for disease severity and disease progression that are commonly available in general clinical practice.

[PMID: 34592006]
Favipiravir (FVP) has been used for treatment of COVID-19 in many countries. We analysed the incidence of FVP-induced cutaneous adverse reactions (CARs) in patients infected with COVID-19 who were hospitalized at Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute, a principal centre of emerging infectious disease in Thailand, and who presented with cutaneous eruption following FVP prescription. We identified five cases of FVP-induced CARs: two patients with maculopapular rash, two with urticarial rash, and one with Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The median interval between FVP treatment and rash occurrence was 7 days and the mean duration of the rash was 5 days. This report highlights that FVP can induce CARs, particularly eruptions, in COVID-19-infected patients. Clinicians should be aware of this possible drug-related allergy, and it should be excluded as a cause of rash during FVP treatment of COVID-19.

[PMID: 24084488]
Favipiravir (T-705; 6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) is an antiviral drug that selectively inhibits the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of influenza virus. It is phosphoribosylated by cellular enzymes to its active form, favipiravir-ribofuranosyl-5'-triphosphate (RTP). Its antiviral effect is attenuated by the addition of purine nucleic acids, indicating the viral RNA polymerase mistakenly recognizes favipiravir-RTP as a purine nucleotide. Favipiravir is active against a broad range of influenza viruses, including A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H5N1) and the recently emerged A(H7N9) avian virus. It also inhibits influenza strains resistant to current antiviral drugs, and shows a synergistic effect in combination with oseltamivir, thereby expanding influenza treatment options. A Phase III clinical evaluation of favipiravir for influenza therapy has been completed in Japan and two Phase II studies have been completed in the United States. In addition to its anti-influenza activity, favipiravir blocks the replication of many other RNA viruses, including arenaviruses (Junin, Machupo and Pichinde); phleboviruses (Rift Valley fever, sandfly fever and Punta Toro); hantaviruses (Maporal, Dobrava, and Prospect Hill); flaviviruses (yellow fever and West Nile); enteroviruses (polio- and rhinoviruses); an alphavirus, Western equine encephalitis virus; a paramyxovirus, respiratory syncytial virus; and noroviruses. With its unique mechanism of action and broad range of antiviral activity, favipiravir is a promising drug candidate for influenza and many other RNA viral diseases for which there are no approved therapies.

[PMID: 34539392]
<b>Background:</b> In addition to supportive therapy, antiviral therapy is an effective treatment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). <b>Objective:</b> To compare the efficacy and safety of favipiravir and umifenovir (Arbidol) to treat COVID-19 patients. <b>Methods:</b> We conducted a prospective, randomized, controlled, open-label multicenter trial involving adult patients with COVID-19. Enrolled patients with initial symptoms within 12 days were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive conventional therapy plus Arbidol (200 mg*3/day) or favipiravir (1600 mg*2/first day followed by 600 mg*2/day) for 7 days. The primary outcome was the clinical recovery rate at day 7 of drug administration (relief for pyrexia and cough, respiratory frequency ≤24 times/min; oxygen saturation ≥98%). Latency to relief for pyrexia and cough and the rate of auxiliary oxygen therapy (AOT) or noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NMV)/mechanical ventilation (MV) were the secondary outcomes. Safety data were collected for 17 days. <b>Results:</b> A total of 240 enrolled COVID-19 patients underwent randomization; 120 patients were assigned to receive favipiravir (116 assessed), and 120 patients were assigned to receive Arbidol (120 assessed). The clinical recovery rate at day 7 of drug administration did not significantly differ between the favipiravir group (71/116) and Arbidol group (62/120) (<i>p</i> = 0.1396, difference in recovery rate: 0.0954; 95% CI: -0.0305∼0.2213). Favipiravir contributed to relief for both pyrexia (difference: 1.70 days, <i>p</i> < 0.0001) and cough (difference: 1.75 days, <i>p</i> < 0.0001). No difference was observed in the AOT or NMV/MV rate (both <i>p</i> > 0.05). The most frequently observed favipiravir-associated adverse event was increased serum uric acid (16/116, OR: 5.52, <i>p</i> = 0.0014). <b>Conclusion:</b> Among patients with COVID-19, favipiravir, compared to Arbidol, did not significantly improve the clinical recovery rate at day 7. Favipiravir significantly improved the latency to relieve pyrexia and cough. Adverse effects caused by favipiravir are mild and manageable.

[PMID: 33647553]
In this study, we aimed to compare the intensive care unit (ICU) admission rate of hospitalized mild/moderate COVID-19 patients treated with hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), favipiravir, and HCQ plus favipiravir. Single center retrospective designed observational study conducted in Ankara City Hospital. Patients who were hospitalized between March 15, 2020 and June 1, 2020 in COVID-19 inpatient clinics with laboratory confirmed diagnosis of COVID-19 were included in the study. An inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) for multiple treatment groups approach was used to balance the differences in several variables on admission. Among 2441 patients hospitalized with diagnosis of COVID-19 during the study period, 824 were eligible for the analysis. Median age of patients was 42 (18-93 years). Among all, 347 (43.2%) of the patients had mild disease, 470 (56.8%) had pneumonia. Propensity scores ranged from 0.1841 to 0.9381 in the HCQ group, from 0.03643 to 0.29885 in the favipiravir group, and from 0.03542 to 0.56184 in the HCQ plus favipiravir group. After IPTW for multiple treatment groups was applied, all the covariates in the planned propensity score had weighted standardized effect sizes below 10% which were ranged from 0.005 to 0.092. Multivariate analysis of treatment effect (adjusted effect of treatment) was indicated that there is no statistically significant difference between HCQ, favipiravir, and HCQ plus favipiravir treatment. After using combination of SMOTE and Bootstrap resampling approach, we found no statistically significant difference between HCQ and HCQ plus favipiravir groups in terms of ICU admission. However, compared with the HCQ group, ICU admission rate was statistically significantly higher in the favipiravir group. We obtained the similar results after the sensitivity analysis. HCQ with or without favipiravir treatment is associated with reduced risk of ICU admission compared to favipiravir alone in mild to moderate COVID-19 adult patients.

[PMID: 34548811]
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease due to SARS-COV-2. Patients with risk factors are vulnerable to severe morbidity and mortality. Favipiravir (FPV) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are considered possible COVID-19 treatments. To investigate the effectiveness and safety of FPV compared to HCQ in patients with COVID-19 as the standard of care approved by the national protocol there. This is a retrospective cohort study on patients with COVID-19 who were administered either FPV or HCQ at King Faisal Medical Complex, Taif, Saudi Arabia, from June 2020 to August 2020. In total, 508 patients were included in the analysis. Patients were categorized into three groups by medication. Patients enrolled in this study were 244 (55.8%) on FPV, 193 (44.2%) on HCQ and 71 (13.81%) on neither medication. Patients who received FPV had higher age and greater comorbidity. Most of the patients were discharged on day 14 (n = 303, 59.6%), 26 (36.6%) in neither med, 154 (63.1%) in FPV and 123 (63.7%) in HCQ groups with significant difference between groups (<i>P</i> < 0.0001). Mortality rate was 8.2% (n = 20) in FPV and 7.3% (n = 14) in HCQ groups with significant difference between groups (P = 0.048). Regarding drug safety, 19.7% of patients treated with FPV vs 7.8% HCQ have adverse effects with significant difference between groups (<i>P</i> < 0.0001). Most of the side effects were increase ALT and AST. Meanwhile, prolonged Q-T interval was reported only in the HCQ group (2.6%). From Cox regression modeling, only mechanical ventilation due to Covid 19 was predictive for mortality (HR: 16.598, 95% CI: 7.095-38.828, P < 0.0001). Meanwhile, there was no significant difference in the prediction of discharge of FPV (vs HCQ) (HR: 0.933, 95% CI: 0.729-1.195, <i>P</i> = 0.5843), predictors of mortality were HCQ (vs FPV) (HR: 2.3, 95% CI: 0.994-5.487, <i>P</i> = 0.0518). Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed improved survival time and discharged time among patients in the HCQ versus FPV group with an insignificant difference between them (<i>P</i> = 0.85, <i>P</i> = 0.06, respectively). The present study concluded that FPV and HCQ showed comparable efficacy in decrease mortality and oxygen requirements. FPV likely has a more favorable safety profile regarding cardiac toxicity. A randomized clinical trial with large patient numbers is recommended to confirm the effectiveness of these drugs in COVID-19 patients.

[PMID: 34535038]
The proverb "Old is gold" is applicable in drug discovery and the proverb "All that Glitters is not Gold" is also appropriate. In the COVID-19 era, there has been a race for drugs to be effective against SARS-CoV-2. There are reports about the uses of Remdesivir and Favipiravir as existing antivirals against virus but none have been conclusive so far. In the attempts for innovations, the combination of drugs is also under trials. Therefore, we used the density functional theory method and quantum theory of atoms in molecules to investigate drug-drug interactions involving Remdesivir and Favipiravir. The computed parameters were related to the antiviral actions of both drugs together. The results indicate enhanced antiviral activity and it will be worthy to consider additional investigations with the combination of these two drugs.

[PMID: 22429564]
Favipiravir, an influenza virus RNA polymerase inhibitor, and peramivir, an influenza virus neuraminidase inhibitor, were evaluated alone and in combination against pandemic influenza A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) virus infections in mice. Infected mice were treated twice daily for 5 d starting 4 h after virus challenge. Favipiravir was 40%, 70%, and 100% protective at 20, 40, and 100 mg/kg/d. Peramivir was 30% protective at 0.5 mg/kg/d, but ineffective at lower doses when used as monotherapy. Combinations of favipiravir and peramivir increased the numbers of survivors by 10-50% when the 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mg/kg/d doses of peramivir were combined with 20 mg/kg/d favipiravir and when all doses of peramivir were combined with 40 mg/kg/d favipiravir. Three-dimensional analysis of drug interactions using the MacSynergy method indicates strong synergy for these drug combinations. In addition, an increase in lifespan for groups of mice treated with drug combinations, compared to the most effective monotherapy group, was observed for the 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mg/kg/d doses of peramivir combined with favipiravir at the 20 mg dose level. Therefore, the 20 mg/kg/d dose of favipiravir was selected for further combination studies. Increased survival was exhibited when this dose was combined with peramivir doses of 0.1, 0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg/d (1 mg/kg/d of peramivir alone was 100% protective in this experiment). Improved body weight relative to either compound alone was evident using 0.25, 0.5, and 1 mg/kg/d of peramivir. Significant reductions in lung hemorrhage score and lung weight were evident on day 6 post-infection. In addition, virus titers were reduced significantly on day 4 post-infection by combination therapy containing favipiravir combined with peramivir at 0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg/d. These data demonstrate that combinations of favipiravir and peramivir perform better than suboptimal doses of each compound alone for the treatment of influenza virus infections in mice.

[PMID: 32405421]
Repurposing broad-spectrum antivirals is an immediate treatment opportunity for 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Favipiravir is an antiviral previously indicated for influenza and Ebola, which has shown some promise in early trials for treatment of COVID-19. We aim to review existing favipiravir safety evidence, which is vital to informing the potential future use of favipiravir in COVID-19. A search was conducted across EMBASE and MEDLINE databases, supplemented by relevant grey-literature and ClinicalTrials.gov. All studies assessing the use of favipiravir in humans by 27 March 2020 were considered for inclusion. Further analysis of available safety data from phase 2 and 3 studies was undertaken. Data extracted were adverse events (AEs) grade 1-4, serious AEs and discontinuation for AEs. Specific AEs of interest highlighted in early-phase studies, including gastrointestinal AEs and hyperuricaemia, were also examined. Twenty-nine studies were identified as potential sources of evidence of the clinical safety of favipiravir. Six were phase 2 and 3 studies reporting relevant safety data for statistical comparison, representing a total of 4299 participants, an estimated 175 person-years-of-follow-up (PYFU). Comparator drugs were oseltamivir, umifenovir, lopinavir/ritonavir or placebo. Study follow-up was between 5 and 21 days. The proportions of grade 1-4 AEs on favipiravir was 28.2% <i>vs</i> 28.4% (<i>P</i> = n.s.) in the comparison arms. The proportion of discontinuations due to AEs on favipiravir was 1.1% <i>vs</i> 1.2% (<i>P</i> = n.s.) in the comparison arms. For serious AEs the proportion was 0.4% in both arms (<i>P</i> = n.s.). There were significantly fewer gastrointestinal AEs occurring on favipiravir <i>vs</i> comparators [8.7% <i>vs</i> 11.5%; <i>P</i> = 0.003]. Favipiravir showed significantly more uric acid elevations than comparators [5.8% <i>vs</i> 1.3%; <i>P</i><0.0001]. Favipiravir demonstrates a favourable safety profile regarding total and serious AEs. However, safety concerns remain: hyperuricaemia, teratogenicity and QTc prolongation have not yet been adequately studied. Favipiravir may be safe and tolerable in short-term use, but more evidence is needed to assess the longer-term effects of treatment. Given the limitations of the evidence and unresolved safety concerns, caution is warranted in the widespread use of favipiravir against pandemic COVID-19.

[PMID: 33746092]
As of October 2020, there is still no specific drug to treat COVID-19 as it rages worldwide. Favipiravir, indicated for the treatment of new and re-emerging influenza infections, has been suggested to be effective against SARS-CoV-2, although this is not yet fully validated. We administered favipiravir to a 64-year-old female patient with COVID-19. Her symptoms resolved quickly after the start of treatment, with reduction of SARS-CoV-2 viral load, but she developed a fever again on day 12. Since the fever was relieved by discontinuation of favipiravir, and based on positive results with a drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test, we diagnosed her with favipiravir-induced drug fever. A decrease in the serum concentration of favipiravir was observed along with resolution of the fever. The present case suggests that drug fever should be considered in the differential diagnosis of relapsing fever episodes in COVID-19 patients receiving favipiravir.

[PMID: 28769016]
Favipiravir (T-705; 6-fluoro-3-hydroxy-2-pyrazinecarboxamide) is an anti-viral agent that selectively and potently inhibits the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of RNA viruses. Favipiravir was discovered through screening chemical library for anti-viral activity against the influenza virus by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. Favipiravir undergoes an intracellular phosphoribosylation to be an active form, favipiravir-RTP (favipiravir ribofuranosyl-5'-triphosphate), which is recognized as a substrate by RdRp, and inhibits the RNA polymerase activity. Since the catalytic domain of RdRp is conserved among various types of RNA viruses, this mechanism of action underpins a broader spectrum of anti-viral activities of favipiravir. Favipiravir is effective against a wide range of types and subtypes of influenza viruses, including strains resistant to existing anti-influenza drugs. Of note is that favipiravir shows anti-viral activities against other RNA viruses such as arenaviruses, bunyaviruses and filoviruses, all of which are known to cause fatal hemorrhagic fever. These unique anti-viral profiles will make favipiravir a potentially promising drug for specifically untreatable RNA viral infections.

[PMID: 34464921]
To assess the efficacy of Favipiravir compared to the standard therapy in treating patients with severe COVID-19 infection. This is a retrospective cohort of patients with COVID-19 pneumonia who were treated with favipiravir, versus comparison group that received the standard of care. A total of 226 patients were included; 110 patients received favipiravir and 116 patients received standard of care. Patients who received favipiravir had longer time to recovery (14.2 ± 8.8 versus 12.8 ± 5.2, p = 0.17). Favipiravir was associated with an improved early day 14 mortality (4 [3.6%] versus 11 [9.5%]), p = 0.008), but was associated with a higher day 28 mortality (26 [23.6%] versus 11 [9.5%], p = 0.02). The overall mortality was higher in the favipiravir versus the standard of care group but difference was not statistically significant (33 [30.0%] versus 24 [20.7%], p = 0.10). The addition of favipiravir to standard of care was not associated with any improvement in clinical outcomes or mortality. Larger randomized controlled clinical trials are needed to further assess the efficacy of favipiravir.

[PMID: 28462833]
Ebola virus is one of the most threatening pathogens with the mortality rate as high as 90% in the world. There are no licensed therapeutic drugs or preventive vaccines for Ebola hemorrhagic fever up to date. Favipiravir, a novel antiviral drug which was mainly used for the treatment of influenza, now has been demonstrated to have a curative effect in treating Ebola virus infection. In this review, we present an overview of recent progress on the treatment of Ebola virus disease with Favipiravir and describe its possible mechanism. Moreover, we give a brief summary of other related treatment strategies against Ebola.

[PMID: 33624584]
The global pandemic called COVID-19 has dragged the world into a healthcare crisis, and favipiravir is one of the most prescribed agents against the virus so far. Favipiravir is a repurposed antiviral agent in treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and to meet the current need, pharmaceutical companies are working for manufacturing licensed generic favipiravir. For getting the marketing authorization, the bioequivalence of the generic product must be proven first. The aim of this study is to demonstrate the bioequivalence of a new favipiravir tablet formulation as compared to the reference tablet formulation in healthy male subjects under fasting conditions. To prove the bioequivalence, a randomized, single oral dose, cross-over, two-period study was carried out in 30 healthy subjects under fasting conditions. Plasma favipiravir levels were quantified by using an in-house-developed high performance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry detector (LC-MSD) method. The 90% CIs for the test/reference geometric mean ratios of the C<sub>max</sub> and AUC<sub>0-tlast</sub> were 88.02 - 103.11% and 98.19 - 102.06%, respectively. This single-dose study has shown that the test and reference favipiravir products met the required bioequivalence criteria. Besides, both products were well tolerated and safe.

[PMID: 22022624]
Lassa and Junín viruses are the most prominent members of the Arenaviridae family of viruses that cause viral hemorrhagic fever syndromes Lassa fever and Argentine hemorrhagic fever, respectively. At present, ribavirin is the only antiviral drug indicated for use in treatment of these diseases, but because of its limited efficacy in advanced cases of disease and its toxicity, safer and more effective antivirals are needed. Here, we used a model of acute arenaviral infection in outbred guinea pigs based on challenge with an adapted strain of Pichindé virus (PICV) to further preclinical development of T-705 (Favipiravir), a promising broad-spectrum inhibitor of RNA virus infections. The guinea pig-adapted passage 19 PICV was uniformly lethal with an LD(50) of ∼5 plaque-forming units and disease was associated with fever, weight loss, thrombocytopenia, coagulation defects, increases in serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) concentrations, and pantropic viral infection. Favipiravir (300 mg/kg/day, twice daily orally for 14 days) was highly effective, as all animals recovered fully from PICV-induced disease even when therapy was initiated one week after virus challenge when animals were already significantly ill with marked fevers and thrombocytopenia. Antiviral activity and reduced disease severity was evidenced by dramatic reductions in peak serum virus titers and AST concentrations in favipiravir-treated animals. Moreover, a sharp decrease in body temperature was observed shortly after the start of treatment. Oral ribavirin was also evaluated, and although effective, the slower rate of recovery may be a sign of the drug's known toxicity. Our findings support further development of favipiravir for the treatment of severe arenaviral infections. The optimization of the experimental favipiravir treatment regimen in the PICV guinea pig model will inform critical future studies in the same species based on challenge with highly pathogenic arenaviruses such as Lassa and Junín.

[PMID: 29765101]
Nipah and Hendra viruses are recently emerged bat-borne paramyxoviruses (genus Henipavirus) causing severe encephalitis and respiratory disease in humans with fatality rates ranging from 40-75%. Despite the severe pathogenicity of these viruses and their pandemic potential, no therapeutics or vaccines are currently approved for use in humans. Favipiravir (T-705) is a purine analogue antiviral approved for use in Japan against emerging influenza strains; and several phase 2 and 3 clinical trials are ongoing in the United States and Europe. Favipiravir has demonstrated efficacy against a broad spectrum of RNA viruses, including members of the Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, Arenaviridae families, and the Bunyavirales order. We now demonstrate that favipiravir has potent antiviral activity against henipaviruses. In vitro, favipiravir inhibited Nipah and Hendra virus replication and transcription at micromolar concentrations. In the Syrian hamster model, either twice daily oral or once daily subcutaneous administration of favipiravir for 14 days fully protected animals challenged with a lethal dose of Nipah virus. This first successful treatment of henipavirus infection in vivo with a small molecule drug suggests that favipiravir should be further evaluated as an antiviral treatment option for henipavirus infections.

[PMID: 34571361]
Favipiravir and Molnupiravir, orally available antivirals, have been reported to exert antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2. First efficacy data have been recently reported in COVID-19 patients. We here report on the combined antiviral effect of both drugs in a SARS-CoV-2 Syrian hamster infection model. The infected hamsters were treated twice daily with the vehicle (the control group) or a suboptimal dose of each compound or a combination of both compounds. When animals were treated with a combination of suboptimal doses of Molnupiravir and Favipiravir at the time of infection, a marked combined potency at endpoint is observed. Infectious virus titers in the lungs of animals treated with the combination are reduced by ∼5 log10 and infectious virus are no longer detected in the lungs of >60% of treated animals. When start of treatment was delayed with one day a reduction of titers in the lungs of 2.4 log10 was achieved. Moreover, treatment of infected animals nearly completely prevented transmission to co-housed untreated sentinels. Both drugs result in an increased mutation frequency of the remaining viral RNA recovered from the lungs of treated animals. In the combo-treated hamsters, an increased frequency of C-to-T mutations in the viral RNA is observed as compared to the single treatment groups which may explain the pronounced antiviral potency of the combination. Our findings may lay the basis for the design of clinical studies to test the efficacy of the combination of Molnupiravir/Favipiravir in the treatment of COVID-19. stated in the acknowledgment.

[PMID: 32645335]
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a widely distributed hemorrhagic fever virus found throughout Eastern Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia. It is spread through bites from infected ticks, animal husbandry and can also be acquired in the healthcare setting during care of infected patients. In humans, CCHFV can cause a sudden onset of a non-specific febrile illness that can rapidly progress to severe hemorrhagic manifestations. Currently, there is no widely available vaccine and although ribavirin has been suggested for the treatment of CCHFV, clinical efficacy in both animal models and humans is inconsistent suggesting more potent antivirals are needed for CCHFV. Favipiravir is approved in Japan for the treatment of influenza virus infections and has shown promise against other highly pathogenic RNA viruses including CCHFV with demonstrated efficacy in the type I interferon deficient mouse model. In this report we utilized the cynomolgus macaque model to evaluate the efficacy of once- and twice-daily favipiravir treatment against CCHFV infection. We found that favipiravir treatment suppressed viremia and viral shedding when treatment was initiated 24 h post-infection and viral burdens in key tissues trended lower in favipiravir-treated animals. Our data indicate that favipiravir has efficacy against CCHFV in vivo in a non-human primate model of infection.

[PMID: 33555378]
The Covid-19 pandemic is highly contagious and has spread rapidly across the globe. To date there have been no specific treatment options available for this life-threatening disease. During this medical emergency, target-based drug repositioning/repurposing with a continuous monitoring and recording of results is an effective method for the treatment and drug discovery. This review summarizes the recent findings on COVID-19, its genomic organization, molecular evolution through phylogenetic analysis and has recapitulated the drug targets by analyzing the viral molecular machinery as drug targets and repurposing of most frequently used drugs worldwide and their therapeutic applications in COVID-19. Data from solidarity trials have shown that the treatment with Chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine and lopinavir-ritonavir had no effect in reducing the mortality rate and also had adverse side effects. Remdesivir, Favipiravir and Ribavirin might be a safer therapeutic option for COVID-19. Recent clinical trial has revealed that dexamethasone and convalescent plasma treatment can reduce mortality in patients with severe forms of COVID-19.

[PMID: 33130203]
The coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) outbreak all over the world has led the researchers to strive to develop drugs or vaccines to prevent or halt the progression of this ailment. To hasten the treatment process, repurposed drugs are being evaluated. Favipiravir is one such oral drug that was approved for new and reemerging pandemic influenza in Japan in 2014 and has shown potent in vitro activity against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2. It has a wide therapeutic safety margin indicated by a wide CC50/EC50 ratio for a high dose. From the clinical studies in COVID-19, it has shown rapid viral clearance as compared to lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/RTV) and superior recovery rate than umifenovir. Overall, favipiravir has shown promising results in clinical studies in China, Russia, and Japan, and more trials are underway in multiple countries, including USA, UK, and India. Recently, treatment guidelines from many countries and some states from India have included favipiravir in the treatment protocol. This review provides insights into the evidence-based evolving role of favipiravir in the management of COVID-19 infection with emphasis on benefits of initiating an early antiviral therapy with special focus on favipiravir, its pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic, in vitro, clinical data, and inclusion in the treatment protocols of COVID-19.

[PMID: 29524445]
Favipiravir, also known as T-705, is an antiviral drug that has been approved in 2014 in Japan to treat pandemic influenza virus infections. The drug is converted intracellularly into its active, phosphoribosylated form, which is recognized as a substrate by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Interestingly, besides its anti-influenza virus activity, this molecule is also able to inhibit the replication of flavi-, alpha-, filo-, bunya-, arena-, noro-, and of other RNA viruses, which include neglected and (re)emerging viruses for which no antiviral therapy is currently available. We will discuss the potential of favipiravir as a broad-spectrum countermeasure against infections caused by such neglected RNA viruses. Favipiravir has already been used off-label to treat patients infected with the Ebola virus and the Lassa virus. Because of the particular set-up of the clinical trials during these outbreaks, clear conclusions on the efficacy of favipiravir could not be made. For several viruses, it was demonstrated that the barrier of resistance development against favipiravir is high. Favipiravir has been shown to be well tolerated in healthy volunteers and in influenza virus-infected patients; however, caution is needed because of the teratogenic risks of this molecule. Because of its antiviral activity against different RNA viruses and its high barrier for resistance, the potential of favipiravir as a broad-spectrum antiviral seems promising, but safety and potency issues should be overcome before this drug or similar molecules could be used to treat large patient groups.