[PMID: 20038616]
Porphyromonas gingivalis is a major pathogen of chronic periodontitis and exists in a biofilm on the surface of the tooth root. Oxantel, a cholinergic anthelmintic and fumarate reductase inhibitor, significantly inhibited biofilm formation by P. gingivalis and disrupted established biofilms at concentrations below its MIC against planktonic cells. Oxantel was more effective against P. gingivalis in biofilm than metronidazole, a commonly used antibiotic for periodontitis.

[PMID: 24165189]
Bacterial pathogens commonly associated with chronic periodontitis are the spirochete Treponema denticola and the Gram-negative, proteolytic species Porphyromonas gingivalis and Tannerella forsythia. These species rely on complex anaerobic respiration of amino acids, and the anthelmintic drug oxantel has been shown to inhibit fumarate reductase (Frd) activity in some pathogenic bacteria and inhibit P. gingivalis homotypic biofilm formation. Here, we demonstrate that oxantel inhibited P. gingivalis Frd activity with a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 2.2 μM and planktonic growth of T. forsythia with a MIC of 295 μM, but it had no effect on the growth of T. denticola. Oxantel treatment caused the downregulation of six P. gingivalis gene products and the upregulation of 22 gene products. All of these genes are part of a regulon controlled by heme availability. There was no large-scale change in the expression of genes encoding metabolic enzymes, indicating that P. gingivalis may be unable to overcome Frd inhibition. Oxantel disrupted the development of polymicrobial biofilms composed of P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, and T. denticola in a concentration-dependent manner. In these biofilms, all three species were inhibited to a similar degree, demonstrating the synergistic nature of biofilm formation by these species and the dependence of T. denticola on the other two species. In a murine alveolar bone loss model of periodontitis oxantel addition to the drinking water of P. gingivalis-infected mice reduced bone loss to the same level as the uninfected control.