[PMID: 21215266]
Mutations in rfx6 were recently associated with Mitchell-Riley syndrome, which involves neonatal diabetes, and other digestive system defects. To better define the function of Rfx6 in early endoderm development we cloned the Xenopus homologue. Expression of rfx6 begins early, showing broad expression throughout the anterior endoderm; at later stages rfx6 expression becomes restricted to the endocrine cells of the gut and pancreas. Morpholino knockdown of rfx6 caused a loss of pancreas marker expression, as well as other abnormalities. Co-injection of exogenous wild-type rfx6 rescued the morpholino phenotype in Xenopus tadpoles, whereas attempts to rescue the loss-of-function phenotype using mutant rfx6 based on Mitchell-Riley patients were unsuccessful. To better define the pleiotropic effects, we performed microarray analyses of gene expression in knockdown foregut tissue. In addition to pancreatic defects, the microarray analyses revealed downregulation of lung, stomach and heart markers and an upregulation of kidney markers. We verified these results using RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Based on the different rfx6 expression patterns and our functional analyses, we propose that rfx6 has both early and late functions. In early development Rfx6 plays a broad role, being essential for development of most anterior endodermal organs. At later stages however, Rfx6 function is restricted to endocrine cells.

[PMID: 23914949]
Recently, bi-allelic mutations in the transcription factor RFX6 were described as the cause of a rare condition characterized by neonatal diabetes with pancreatic and biliary hypoplasia and duodenal/jejunal atresia. A male infant developed severe hyperglycemia (446 mg/dL) within 24 h of birth. Acute abdominal concerns by day five necessitated exploratory surgery that revealed duodenal atresia, gallbladder agenesis, annular pancreas and intestinal malrotation. He also exhibited chronic diarrhea and feeding intolerance, cholestatic jaundice, and subsequent liver failure. He died of sepsis at four months old while awaiting liver transplantation. The phenotype of neonatal diabetes with intestinal atresia and biliary agenesis clearly pointed to RFX6 as the causative gene; indeed, whole exome sequencing revealed a novel homozygous RFX6 mutation c.779A>C; p.Lys260Thr (K260T). This missense mutation also changes the consensus 5' splice donor site before intron 7 and is thus predicted to cause disruption in splicing. Both parents, who were not known to be related, were heterozygous carriers. Targeted genetic testing based on consideration of phenotypic features may reveal a cause among the many genes now associated with heterogeneous forms of monogenic neonatal diabetes. Our study demonstrates the feasibility of using modern sequencing technology to identify one such rare cause. Continued research is needed to determine the possible cost-effectiveness of this approach, especially when clear phenotypic clues are absent. Further study of patients with RFX6 mutations should clarify its role in pancreatic, intestinal and enteroendocrine cellular development and explain features such as the diarrhea exhibited in our case.