[PMID: 25764216]
Chemically synthesized DNA can carry small RNA sequence information but converting that information into small RNA is generally thought to require large double-stranded promoters in the context of plasmids, viruses and genes. We previously found evidence that circularized oligodeoxynucleotides (coligos) containing certain sequences and secondary structures can template the synthesis of small RNA by RNA polymerase III in vitro and in human cells. By using immunoprecipitated RNA polymerase III we now report corroborating evidence that this enzyme is the sole polymerase responsible for coligo transcription. The immobilized polymerase enabled experiments showing that coligo transcripts can be formed through transcription termination without subsequent 3' end trimming. To better define the determinants of productive transcription, a structure-activity relationship study was performed using over 20 new coligos. The results show that unpaired nucleotides in the coligo stem facilitate circumtranscription, but also that internal loops and bulges should be kept small to avoid secondary transcription initiation sites. A polymerase termination sequence embedded in the double-stranded region of a hairpin-encoding coligo stem can antagonize transcription. Using lessons learned from new and old coligos, we demonstrate how to convert poorly transcribed coligos into productive templates. Our findings support the possibility that coligos may prove useful as chemically synthesized vectors for the ectopic expression of small RNA in human cells.

[PMID: 27593562]
Circularized oligonucleotides, or coligos, were previously found to serve as RNA polymerase III (Pol III) templates in vitro and in human tissue culture cells. Here we randomized the 12-nucleotide larger loop (L-loop) of a well characterized coligo and found unexpectedly that in vitro transcription by FLAG-Pol III was not significantly affected. This observation allowed us to test the variable of coligo L-loop size separately from the variable of its sequence. Transcription efficiency increased with L-loop size from 3 to 12 nucleotides of randomized sequence, and the smallest loop forced initiation to move into the stem region. To test further the need for any specific sequence we compared seven nucleotide L-loops composed of random, abasic and abasic-acyclic nucleotides, and all supported transcription by Pol III. Transcription of a series of coligos containing twelve contiguous randomized nucleotides placed at different locations within the coligo structure provided further evidence that the stem-loop junction structure is important for precise initiation. Nearly the same transcript pattern was formed in vitro by Pol III from yeast and human cells. Overall, these experiments support structure, rather than L-loop sequence, as the major determinant of coligo transcription initiation by Pol III.