[PMID: 22044414]
The introduction of anti-TNF therapy has dramatically improved the outlook for patients suffering from a number of inflammatory conditions including rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. Despite this, a substantial proportion of patients (approximately 30-40%) fail to respond to these potentially toxic and expensive therapies. Treatment response is likely to be multifactorial; however, variation in genes or their expression may identify those most likely to respond. By targeted testing of variants within candidate genes, potential predictors of anti-TNF response have been reported; however, very few markers have replicated consistently between studies. Emerging genome-wide association studies suggest that there may be a number of genes with modest effects on treatment response rather than a few genes of large effect. Other potential serum biomarkers of response have also been explored including cytokines and autoantibodies, with antibodies developing to the anti-TNF drugs themselves being correlated with treatment failure.

[PMID: 24040234]
Treatment strategies blocking tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) have proven very successful in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), showing beneficial effects in approximately 50-60% of the patients. However, a significant subset of patients does not respond to anti-TNF agents, for reasons that are still unknown. The aim of this study was to validate five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PTPRC, CD226, AFF3, MyD88 and CHUK gene loci that have previously been reported to predict anti-TNF outcome. In addition, two markers of RA susceptibility, namely TRAF1/C5 and STAT4 were assessed, in a cohort of anti-TNF-treated RA patients, from the homogeneous Greek island of Crete, Greece. The RA patient cohort consisted of 183 patients treated with either of 3 anti-TNF biologic agents (infliximab, adalimumab and etanercept) from the Clinic of Rheumatology of the University Hospital of Crete. The SNPs were genotyped by TaqMan assays or following the Restriction Fragments Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs) approach. Disease activity score in 28 joints (DAS28) at baseline and after 6 months were available for all patients and analysis of good versus poor response at 6 months was performed for each SNP. None of the 7 genetic markers correlated with treatment response. We conclude that the gene polymorphisms under investigation are not strongly predictive of anti-TNF response in RA patients from Greece.