[PMID: 23211718]
p300, a transcriptional co-activator with histone acetyl transferase (HAT) activity, plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in response to multiple pro-hypertrophic stimuli including hyperglycemia. However, the precise mechanisms by which p300 expression is regulated remain unclear. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of miR-150, a potential p300-targeting microRNA (miRNA), in the post-transcriptional control of p300 expression and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by high glucose. We observed that the expression of miR-150 was significantly reduced, whereas the expression of p300 was strongly elevated, concomitant with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, in the hearts of diabetic rats compared with normal controls. Similar alterations were observed in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes that had been exposed to high levels of glucose. miR-150 mimics inhibited p300 3'-UTR luciferase reporter activity, as well as endogenous p300 expression. In addition, miR-150 mimics prevented glucose-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Co-transfection with a p300 expression vector and miR-150 mimics reversed the protective effect of miR-150 on cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. We further showed that the high glucose-mediated activation of PKCβ(2) in turn mediated the down-regulation of miR-150 expression. These data demonstrated a novel upstream role for miR-150 in p300-mediated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and revealed a previously uncharacterized miRNAs and HATs cross-talk mechanism for the hypertrophic phenotype induced by high glucose.

[PMID: 30323286]
The transcriptional co-activator p300 is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) that is typically recruited to transcriptional enhancers and regulates gene expression by acetylating chromatin. Here we show that the activation of p300 directly depends on the activation and oligomerization status of transcription factor ligands. Using two model transcription factors, IRF3 and STAT1, we demonstrate that transcription factor dimerization enables the trans-autoacetylation of p300 in a highly conserved and intrinsically disordered autoinhibitory lysine-rich loop, resulting in p300 activation. We describe a crystal structure of p300 in which the autoinhibitory loop invades the active site of a neighbouring HAT domain, revealing a snapshot of a trans-autoacetylation reaction intermediate. Substrate access to the active site involves the rearrangement of an autoinhibitory RING domain. Our data explain how cellular signalling and the activation and dimerization of transcription factors control the activation of p300, and therefore explain why gene transcription is associated with chromatin acetylation.