[PMID: 29186335]
As cancer genomics initiatives move toward comprehensive identification of genetic alterations in cancer, attention is now turning to understanding how interactions among these genes lead to the acquisition of tumor hallmarks. Emerging pharmacological and clinical data suggest a highly promising role of cancer-specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs) as druggable cancer targets. However, large-scale experimental identification of cancer-related PPIs remains challenging, and currently available resources to explore oncogenic PPI networks are limited. Recently, we have developed a PPI high-throughput screening platform to detect PPIs between cancer-associated proteins in the context of cancer cells. Here, we present the OncoPPi Portal, an interactive web resource that allows investigators to access, manipulate and interpret a high-quality cancer-focused network of PPIs experimentally detected in cancer cell lines. To facilitate prioritization of PPIs for further biological studies, this resource combines network connectivity analysis, mutual exclusivity analysis of genomic alterations, cellular co-localization of interacting proteins and domain-domain interactions. Estimates of PPI essentiality allow users to evaluate the functional impact of PPI disruption on cancer cell proliferation. Furthermore, connecting the OncoPPi network with the approved drugs and compounds in clinical trials enables discovery of new tumor dependencies to inform strategies to interrogate undruggable targets like tumor suppressors. The OncoPPi Portal serves as a resource for the cancer research community to facilitate discovery of cancer targets and therapeutic development. The OncoPPi Portal is available at http://oncoppi.emory.edu. andrey.ivanov@emory.edu or hfu@emory.edu.

[PMID: 31583637]
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) control all functions and physiological states of the cell. Identification and understanding of novel PPIs would facilitate the discovery of new biological models and therapeutic targets for clinical intervention. Numerous resources and PPI databases have been developed to define a global interactome through the PPI data mining, curation, and integration of different types of experimental evidence obtained with various methods in different model systems. On the other hand, the recent advances in cancer genomics and proteomics have revealed a critical role of genomic alterations in acquisition of cancer hallmarks through a dysregulated network of oncogenic PPIs. Deciphering of cancer-specific interactome would uncover new mechanisms of oncogenic signaling for therapeutic interrogation. Toward this goal our team has developed a high-throughput screening platform to detect PPIs between cancer-associated proteins in the context of cancer cells. The established network of oncogenic PPIs, termed the OncoPPi network, is available through the OncoPPi Portal, an interactive web resource that allows to access and interpret a high-quality cancer-focused network of PPIs experimentally detected in cancer cell lines integrated with the analysis of mutual exclusivity of genomic alterations, cellular co-localization of interacting proteins, domain-domain interactions, and therapeutic connectivity. This chapter presents a guide to explore the OncoPPi network using the OncoPPi Portal to facilitate cancer biology.