[PMID: 9658103]
The small nuclear structures known as ND10 or PML nuclear bodies have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes including response to stress and interferons, oncogenesis, and viral infection, but little is known about their biochemical properties. Recently, a ubiquitin-specific protease enzyme (named HAUSP) and a ubiquitin-homology family protein (PIC1) have been found associated with ND10. HAUSP binds strongly to Vmw110, a herpesvirus regulatory protein which has the ability to disrupt ND10, while PIC1 was identified as a protein which interacts with PML, the prototype ND10 protein. We have investigated the role of ubiquitin-related pathways in the mechanism of ND10 disruption by Vmw110 and the effect of virus infection on PML stability. The results show that the disruption of ND10 during virus infection correlates with the loss of several PML isoforms and this process is dependent on active proteasomes. The PML isoforms that are most sensitive to virus infection correspond closely to those which have recently been identified as being covalently conjugated to PIC1. In addition, a large number of PIC1-protein conjugates can be detected following transfection of a PIC1 expression plasmid, and many of these are also eliminated in a Vmw110-dependent manner during virus infection. These observations provide a biochemical mechanism to explain the observed effects of Vmw110 on ND10 and suggest a simple yet powerful mechanism by which Vmw110 might function during virus infection.

[PMID: 24190887]
Arsenic is a clinically effective treatment for acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) in which the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) protein is fused to retinoic receptor alpha (RARα). PML-RARα is degraded by the proteasome by a SUMO-dependent, ubiquitin-mediated pathway in response to arsenic treatment, curing the disease. Six major PML isoforms are expressed as a result of alternative splicing, each of which encodes a unique C-terminal region. Using a system in which only a single EYFP-linked PML isoform is expressed, we demonstrate that PMLI, PMLII and PMLVI accumulate in the cytoplasm following arsenic treatment, whereas PMLIII, PMLIV and PMLV do not. 3D structured illumination was used to obtain super-resolution images of PML bodies, revealing spherical shells of PML along with associated SUMO. Arsenic treatment results in dramatic isoform-specific changes to PML body ultrastructure. After extended arsenic treatment most PML isoforms are degraded, leaving SUMO at the core of the nuclear bodies. A high-content imaging assay identifies PMLV as the isoform most readily degraded following arsenic treatment, and PMLIV as relatively resistant to degradation. Immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrates that all PML isoforms are modified by SUMO and ubiquitin after arsenic treatment, and by using siRNA, we demonstrate that arsenic-induced degradation of all PML isoforms is dependent on the ubiquitin E3 ligase RNF4. Intriguingly, depletion of RNF4 results in marked accumulation of PMLV, suggesting that this isoform is an optimal substrate for RNF4. Thus the variable C-terminal domain influences the rate and location of degradation of PML isoforms following arsenic treatment.