[PMID: 27385158]
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is associated with pancreatic β-cell dysfunction, manifested by reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). Several transcription factors enriched in β-cells, such as MafA, control β-cell function by organizing genes involved in GSIS. Here we demonstrate that nardilysin (N-arginine dibasic convertase; Nrd1 and NRDc) critically regulates β-cell function through MafA. Nrd1(-/-) mice showed glucose intolerance and severely decreased GSIS. Islets isolated from Nrd1(-/-) mice exhibited reduced insulin content and impaired GSIS in vitro. Moreover, β-cell-specific NRDc-deficient (Nrd1(delβ)) mice showed a diabetic phenotype with markedly reduced GSIS. MafA was specifically downregulated in islets from Nrd1(delβ) mice, whereas overexpression of NRDc upregulated MafA and insulin expression in INS832/13 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that NRDc is associated with Islet-1 in the enhancer region of MafA, where NRDc controls the recruitment of Islet-1 and MafA transcription. Our findings demonstrate that NRDc controls β-cell function via regulation of the Islet-1-MafA pathway.

[PMID: 28230087]
Chronic inflammation contributes to a wide variety of human disorders. In the stomach, longstanding gastritis often results in structural alterations in the gastric mucosa, including metaplastic changes and gastric cancers. Therefore, it is important to elucidate factors that are involved in gastric inflammation. Nardilysin (N-arginine dibasic convertase; Nrdc) is a metalloendopeptidase of the M16 family that promotes ectodomain shedding of the precursor forms of various growth factors and cytokines by enhancing the protease activities of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM) proteins. Here, we have demonstrated that Nrdc crucially regulates gastric inflammation caused by Helicobacter felis infection or forced expression of prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> in K19-C2mE mice. Metaplastic changes following gastric inflammation were suppressed by the deletion of Nrdc. Furthremore, the deletion of Nrdc significantly suppressed N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU)-induced gastric tumorigenesis in the murine stomach. These data may lead to a global therapeutic approach against various gastric disorders by targeting Nrdc.