[PMID: 29477724]
The genetic cause of primary immunodeficiency disease (PID) carries prognostic information. We conducted a whole-genome sequencing study assessing a large proportion of the NIHR BioResource-Rare Diseases cohort. In the predominantly European study population of principally sporadic unrelated PID cases (n = 846), a novel Bayesian method identified nuclear factor κB subunit 1 (NFKB1) as one of the genes most strongly associated with PID, and the association was explained by 16 novel heterozygous truncating, missense, and gene deletion variants. This accounted for 4% of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) cases (n = 390) in the cohort. Amino acid substitutions predicted to be pathogenic were assessed by means of analysis of structural protein data. Immunophenotyping, immunoblotting, and ex vivo stimulation of lymphocytes determined the functional effects of these variants. Detailed clinical and pedigree information was collected for genotype-phenotype cosegregation analyses. Both sporadic and familial cases demonstrated evidence of the noninfective complications of CVID, including massive lymphadenopathy (24%), unexplained splenomegaly (48%), and autoimmune disease (48%), features prior studies correlated with worse clinical prognosis. Although partial penetrance of clinical symptoms was noted in certain pedigrees, all carriers have a deficiency in B-lymphocyte differentiation. Detailed assessment of B-lymphocyte numbers, phenotype, and function identifies the presence of an increased CD21<sup>low</sup> B-cell population. Combined with identification of the disease-causing variant, this distinguishes between healthy subjects, asymptomatic carriers, and clinically affected cases. We show that heterozygous loss-of-function variants in NFKB1 are the most common known monogenic cause of CVID, which results in a temporally progressive defect in the formation of immunoglobulin-producing B cells.

[PMID: 30063981]
Monoallelic loss-of-function mutations in NFKB1 were recently recognized as the most common monogenic cause of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). The prototypic clinical phenotype of NFKB1-deficient patients includes common CVID features, such as hypogammaglobulinaemia and sinopulmonary infections, plus other highly variable individual manifestations. Here, we describe a patient with a profound CVID phenotype and severe gastrointestinal manifestations, including chronic and recurrent diarrhoea. Using an NGS customized panel of 323 genes related to primary immunodeficiencies, we identified a novel monoallelic loss-of-function mutation in NFKB1 leading to a truncated protein (c.1149delT/p.Gly384Glu ∗ 48). Interestingly, we also found a rare variant in NOD2 previously associated with Crohn's disease (p.His352Arg). Our patient had hypogammaglobulinaemia with a small number of B cells, most of which were naïve. The most noteworthy findings included marked skewing towards a Th1 phenotype in peripheral blood T cells and excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNFα). The patient's 6-year-old daughter, a carrier of the NFKB1 mutation, is clinically asymptomatic, but has started to show cellular and molecular changes. This case of NFKB1 deficiency appears to be a combination of immunodeficiency and a hyperinflammatory state. The current situation of the patient's daughter provides a glimpse of the preclinical phase of the condition.