[PMID: 25436858]
Nearly all flowering plants produce red/violet anthocyanin pigments. Caryophyllales is the only order containing families that replace anthocyanins with unrelated red and yellow betalain pigments. Close biological correlation of pigmentation patterns suggested that betalains might be regulated by a conserved anthocyanin-regulating transcription factor complex consisting of a MYB, a bHLH and a WD repeat-containing protein (the MBW complex). Here we show that a previously uncharacterized anthocyanin MYB-like protein, Beta vulgaris MYB1 (BvMYB1), regulates the betalain pathway in beets. Silencing BvMYB1 downregulates betalain biosynthetic genes and pigmentation, and overexpressing BvMYB1 upregulates them. However, unlike anthocyanin MYBs, BvMYB1 will not interact with bHLH members of heterologous anthocyanin MBW complexes because of identified nonconserved residues. BvMYB1 resides at the historic beet pigment-patterning locus, Y, required for red-fleshed beets. We show that Y and y express different levels of BvMYB1 transcripts. The co-option of a transcription factor regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis would be an important evolutionary event allowing betalains to largely functionally replace anthocyanins.

[PMID: 19791510]
Betacyanins and anthocyanins, two main red flower pigments, never occur together in the same plant. Although the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway has been well analyzed, the biosynthetic genes and the regulatory mechanism of the betacyanin biosynthesis are still obscure. We cloned two cDNAs of DOPA dioxygenase from Phytolacca americana, PaDOD1 and PaDOD2, that may be involved in the betalain biosynthesis. The deduced amino acid sequence of PaDOD1 and PaDOD2 showed approximately 80% homology to each other. The promoter regions of PaDOD1 and PaDOD2 were isolated by inverse PCR and analyzed using PLACE database. Some putative MYB, bHLH, and environmental stress-responsive transcription factor binding sites were detected in the PaDOD1 and PaDOD2 promoter regions. Expression patterns of PaDOD1 and PaDOD2 in suspension cultures of P. americana were investigated by semiquantitative RT-PCR. The transcripts of PaDODs were found in both betacyanin-producing red cells and non-betacyanin-producing white cells, suggesting that not only the expression of DOD, but also the supplementation of DOPA might be a regulatory step for the betalain biosynthesis in P. americana.