[PMID: 32078672]
Factor VIII (FVIII) replacement products enable comprehensive care in hemophilia A. Treatment goals in severe hemophilia A are expanding beyond low annualized bleed rates to include long-term outcomes associated with high sustained FVIII levels. Endogenous von Willebrand factor (VWF) stabilizes and protects FVIII from degradation and clearance, but it also subjects FVIII to a half-life ceiling of ∼15 to 19 hours. Increasing recombinant FVIII (rFVIII) half-life further is ultimately dependent upon uncoupling rFVIII from endogenous VWF. We have developed a new class of FVIII replacement, rFVIIIFc-VWF-XTEN (BIVV001), that is physically decoupled from endogenous VWF and has enhanced pharmacokinetic properties compared with all previous FVIII products. BIVV001 was bioengineered as a unique fusion protein consisting of a VWF-D'D3 domain fused to rFVIII via immunoglobulin-G1 Fc domains and 2 XTEN polypeptides (Amunix Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Mountain View, CA). Plasma FVIII half-life after BIVV001 administration in mice and monkeys was 25 to 31 hours and 33 to 34 hours, respectively, representing a three- to fourfold increase in FVIII half-life. Our results showed that multifaceted protein engineering, far beyond a few amino acid substitutions, could significantly improve rFVIII pharmacokinetic properties while maintaining hemostatic function. BIVV001 is the first rFVIII with the potential to significantly change the treatment paradigm for severe hemophilia A by providing optimal protection against all bleed types, with less frequent doses. The protein engineering methods described herein can also be applied to other complex proteins.

[PMID: 32905674]
Factor VIII replacement products have improved the care of patients with hemophilia A, but the short half-life of these products affects the patients' quality of life. The half-life of recombinant factor VIII ranges from 15 to 19 hours because of the von Willebrand factor chaperone effect. BIVV001 (rFVIIIFc-VWF-XTEN) is a novel fusion protein designed to overcome this half-life ceiling and maintain high sustained factor VIII activity levels. Data are lacking on the safety and pharmacokinetics of single-dose BIVV001. In this phase 1-2a open-label trial, we consecutively assigned 16 previously treated men (18 to 65 years of age) with severe hemophilia A (factor VIII activity, <1%) to receive a single intravenous injection of recombinant factor VIII at a dose of 25 IU per kilogram of body weight (lower-dose group) or 65 IU per kilogram (higher-dose group). This injection was followed by a washout period of at least 3 days. The patients then received a single intravenous injection of BIVV001 at the same corresponding dose of either 25 IU or 65 IU per kilogram. Adverse events and pharmacokinetic measurements were assessed. No inhibitors to factor VIII were detected and no hypersensitivity or anaphylaxis events were reported up to 28 days after the injection of single-dose BIVV001. The geometric mean half-life of BIVV001 was three to four times as long as that of recombinant factor VIII (37.6 hours vs. 9.1 hours in the lower-dose group and 42.5 vs. 13.2 hours in the higher-dose group); the area under the curve (AUC) for product exposure was six to seven times as great in the two dose groups (4470 hours vs. 638 hours × IU per deciliter in the lower-dose group and 12,800 hours vs. 1960 hours × IU per deciliter in the higher-dose group). After the injection of BIVV001 in the higher-dose group, the mean factor VIII level was in the normal range (≥51%) for 4 days and 17% at day 7, which suggested the possibility of a weekly interval between treatments. In a small, early-phase study involving men with severe hemophilia A, a single intravenous injection of BIVV001 resulted in high sustained factor VIII activity levels, with a half-life that was up to four times the half-life associated with recombinant factor VIII, an increase that could signal a new class of factor VIII replacement therapy with a weekly treatment interval. No safety concerns were reported during the 28-day period after administration. (Funded by Sanofi and Sobi; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03205163.).