[PMID: 25854787]
To assess the accuracy of obtaining body temperatures in dogs with a noncontact infrared thermometer (NCIT) on the cornea compared with a rectal digital thermometer (RDT). Prospective single center study. University teaching hospital. Three hundred dogs presented with low, normal, or high body temperatures. Three body temperature readings were measured by an RDT and by an NCIT on the cornea of the left eye by 2 investigators (experienced and inexperienced). Results obtained by the 2 methods were compared. Median body temperature measured by the experienced investigator with the RDT and the NCIT were 38.3°C (range 35.5°C-41.1°C; 95% CI: 38.2-38.4°C) and 37.7°C (35.9°C-40.1°C; 95% CI: 37.7°C-37.9°C), respectively. Measurement of RDT as well as of NCIT correlated well between both investigators (rRDT = 0.94; rNCIT = 0.82; respectively, P < 0.001 for both methods). Mean RDT and NCIT-temperature correlated poorly (r = 0.43; P < 0.001) when taken by the experienced investigator and even less by the nonexperienced investigator (r = 0.38; P < 0.001). Repeatability of the NCIT revealed an unsatisfactory value (0.24°C) compared to RDT measurement (0.12°C). Agreement between both devices in measuring low, normal, and high values, calculated by Cohens-Kappa, was unsatisfactory (к = 0.201; P < 0.001). Calculating the receiver operating characteristic curve to determine the best threshold for fever (defined as RDT temperature >39.0°C) showed an area under the curve of 0.76. Mean discomfort score was significantly lower using NCIT compared to RDT measurement (P < 0.001). There was poor agreement between body temperatures obtained by RDT and NCIT. The corneal NCIT measurement tends to underrecognize hypothermic and hyperthermic conditions. Although the use of the NCIT yields faster results and is significantly more comfortable for the dog than the RDT measurement, it cannot be recommended in dogs at this time.

[PMID: 28992906]
A 4-year-old cocker spaniel, male, of 12kg body weight was presented because of the onset of polyuria or polydipsia. From the first months of its life, the dog had exhibited constant serous to mucopurulent nasal discharge, productive cough, sneezing, reverse sneezing, otitis, and recurrent episodes of fever. The respiratory signs had been treated several times with antibiotics, without ever achieving a complete resolution. Clinical examination revealed normal rectal temperature (38.3°C), increased respiratory rate (40breaths/min), a copious mucous nasal discharge and right deviation of the heart apex beat (ictus cordis). Increased respiratory sounds with moist rales and crackles were found on chest auscultation. An increase in serum creatinine, urea and phosphorus, hypoalbuminemia and proteinuria were found. Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs of the thorax and of the abdomen showed the transposition of the heart, with the cardiac apex pointing toward the right (dextrocardia), bronchointerstitial lung pattern, areas of consolidation, lesions consistent with bronchiectasis caves and a mirror-image of abdominal organs, confirming the diagnosis of complete situs inversus (CSI). Respiratory signs, combined with CSI, suggested the diagnosis of Kartagener syndrome (KS). Abdominal ultrasound showed an increase in the echogenicity of the renal parenchyma, a loss of definition of the corticomedullary line, slight bilateral pyelectasis, and decreased cortical perfusion. The dog died 2 months later because of a further worsening of the clinical condition. Necroscopy demonstrated the existence of CSI, rhinosinusitis, bronchitis, and bronchiectasis, so confirming the diagnosis of KS, and renal amyloidosis. This is the first case reported in veterinary medicine of the presence of renal amyloidosis together with KS in a dog.