[PMID: 18991571]
Luteolin, 3',4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone, is a common flavonoid that exists in many types of plants including fruits, vegetables, and medicinal herbs. Plants rich in luteolin have been used in Chinese traditional medicine for treating various diseases such as hypertension, inflammatory disorders, and cancer. Having multiple biological effects such as anti-inflammation, anti-allergy and anticancer, luteolin functions as either an antioxidant or a pro-oxidant biochemically. The biological effects of luteolin could be functionally related to each other. For instance, the anti-inflammatory activity may be linked to its anticancer property. Luteolin's anticancer property is associated with the induction of apoptosis, and inhibition of cell proliferation, metastasis and angiogenesis. Furthermore, luteolin sensitizes cancer cells to therapeutic-induced cytotoxicity through suppressing cell survival pathways such as phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), and stimulating apoptosis pathways including those that induce the tumor suppressor p53. These observations suggest that luteolin could be an anticancer agent for various cancers. Furthermore, recent epidemiological studies have attributed a cancer prevention property to luteolin. In this review, we summarize the progress of recent research on luteolin, with a particular focus on its anticancer role and molecular mechanisms underlying this property of luteolin.

[PMID: 21881237]
Depression is a significant public health problem and some reports indicate an association between depression and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Luteolin is a flavonoid contained in many plants and with a variety of known pharmacological properties such as anti-inflammatory, anti-anxiety, and memory-improving effects, suggesting that luteolin penetrates into the brain. In the present study, we investigated the effects of luteolin on endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced neuronal cell death. Luteolin significantly suppressed tunicamycin-induced cell death at 1 to 10 µM in human neuroblastoma cells. Luteolin increased in the expression of the 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein and 94 kDa glucose-regulated protein and decreased in the cleavage activation of caspase-3. Additionally, to investigate whether chronic luteolin treatment has an antidepression effect, we performed some behavioral tests. Chronic luteolin treatment showed antidepressant-like effects in behavioral tests and, luteolin attenuated the expression of endoplasmic reticulum stress-related proteins in the hippocampus of corticosterone-treated depression model mice. These findings indicate that luteolin has antidepressant-like effects, partly due to the suppression of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

[PMID: 34460026]
Prevention and management of myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury is a key step in coronary heart disease surgery. Luteolin is a falconoid compound that has an antioxidant effect, but its mechanism in I/R injury in vivo and in vitro is still under explored. This study attempted to reveal the role of luteolin (Lut) in I/R through mediation of the Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP-1)/Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway. To establish I/R rat models, the left anterior descending artery (LAD) was ligated for 30 min and re-perfused for 1 h in Lut-pretreated or nude rats. Comparisons between infarct area, cardiac dysfunction, and myocardial cell death and inflammatory reaction were performed in I/R-induced rats. Hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) cell models were established by stimulating H9c2 cells with 95% nitrogen and 5% carbon dioxide. Simultaneously, H/R-related cell death and inflammatory reactions were investigated following Lut treatment. The target protein of Lut was identified using western blotting. Pro-inflammatory cytokines were also measured in serum or Lut-pretreated cell culture medium. The results revealed that compared with the I/R group, Lut treatment could significantly decrease myocardial infarction (MI) area, increase left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), and decrease cell death and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the serum. Decreased apoptosis and inflammatory cytokines were also observed in H/R cells after Lut treatment. Lut treatment downregulated SHP-1 expression and subsequently upregulated STAT3 phosphorylation in both I/R rat heart tissue and H9c2 cells. The findings of the current study suggest that Lut can protect the heart and reduce MI area, cell apoptosis rate, and inflammatory level in I/R models.

[PMID: 32407927]
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress designates a cellular response to the accumulation of misfolded proteins, which is related to disease progression in the liver. Luteolin (3',4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone) is a phytochemical found frequently in medicinal herbs. Although luteolin has been reported to possess the therapeutic potential to prevent diverse stage of liver diseases, its role in hepatic ER stress has not been established. Thus, the present study aimed to determine the role of luteolin in tunicamycin (Tm)-induced ER stress, and to identify the relevant mechanisms involved in its hepatoprotective effects. In hepatocyte-derived cells and primary hepatocytes, luteolin significantly decreased Tm- or thapsigargin-mediated C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression. In addition, luteolin reduced the activation of three canonical signaling pathways related to the unfolded protein response, and decreased mRNA levels of glucose-regulated protein 78, ER DNA J domain-containing protein 4, and asparagine synthetase. Luteolin also significantly upregulated sestrin 2 (SESN2), and luteolin-mediated CHOP inhibition was blocked in SESN2 (+/-) cells. Moreover, luteolin resulted in phosphorylation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), as well as increased nuclear Nrf2 expression. Deletion of the antioxidant response element in the human SESN2 promoter inhibited increased luciferase activation by luteolin, suggesting that Nrf2 is a critical transcription factor for luteolin-dependent SESN2 expression. In a Tm-mediated liver injury model, luteolin decreased serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase activities, prevented degenerative changes and apoptosis of hepatocytes, and inhibited CHOP and glucose-regulated protein 78 expression in hepatic tissues. Therefore, luteolin may be an effective phytochemical to manage ER stress-related liver injury.

[PMID: 30119240]
Bronchopneumonia is a common multiple infection disease under 2 years old. Luteolin is a natural flavonoid widely distributed in plants with anti-inflammatory effect. This study aimed to explore the effects of luteolin on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced bronchopneumonia injury in vitro and in vivo. Firstly, the viability and apoptosis of human bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells after luteolin treatment were assessed. Then, cells were treated with 10 μM LPS to simulate inflammatory injury. The potential protective effects of luteolin on LPS-induced BEAS-2B cell inflammatory injury were detected. Moreover, after LPS and/or luteolin treatment, the expression of microRNA-132 (miR-132) in BEAS-2B cells was measured. The roles of miR-132 in protective activity of luteolin were investigated. Finally, the LPS-induced bronchopneumonia murine model was established and the anti-inflammatory effects of luteolin in vivo were analyzed. The results showed that LPS decreased BEAS-2B cell viability, increased cell apoptosis and enhanced inflammatory cytokines expression. Luteolin alleviated the LPS-induced viability loss, apoptosis and elevated expression of inflammatory cytokines in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, luteolin alleviated the LPS-induced miR-132 expression increase in BEAS-2B cells. Overexpression of miR-132 reversed the protective effects of luteolin on LPS-induced inflammatory injury. Mechanistically, luteolin mitigated LPS-induced activation of NF-κB signaling pathway by down-regulation of miR-132. Furthermore, we also found that luteolin alleviated LPS-induced bronchopneumonia model in vivo. In conclusion, this study revealed that luteolin alleviated LPS-induced bronchopneumonia injury in vitro and in vivo through down-regulating miR-132. These findings provide theoretical basis for deeply exploring the treatment of bronchopneumonia in children by using luteolin.

[PMID: 29207088]
Luteolin is a falconoid compound that is present in various types of plants and possesses remarkable potential as a chemopreventive agent. However, the poor aqueous solubility of luteolin limits its clinical application. In the present study, an approach towards chemoprevention was explored using liposomes to deliver luteolin, and the antitumor efficacy was investigated in colorectal carcinoma. The present findings demonstrated that luteolin was efficiently encapsulated into liposomes with an encapsulation efficiency as high as 90%. The particle size of the liposomal luteolin (Lipo‑Lut) and ζ‑potential were optimized. In vitro studies demonstrated that, Lipo‑Lut had a significant inhibitory effect on the growth on the CT26 colorectal carcinoma cell line compared with free luteolin (Free‑Lut). The in vivo study indicated that Lipo‑Lut could achieve superior antitumor effects against CT26 tumor compared with luteolin alone. The present results suggested that liposome delivery of luteolin improved solubility, bioavailability and may have potential applications in chemoprevention in clinical settings.

[PMID: 33469821]
Luteolin is a flavonoid with antioxidant properties already demonstrated in studies related to inflammation, tumor, and cardiovascular processes; however, there are no available information regarding its antioxidant effects at the venous endothelial site. We investigated the effects of luteolin (10, 20, and 50 μmol/L) in cultures of rat venous endothelial cells. Nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were analyzed by fluorimetry; 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) residues were evaluated by immunofluorescence, and prostacyclin (PGI<sub>2</sub>) release was investigated by colorimetry. Intracellular NO levels were significantly enhanced after 10 min of luteolin incubation, with a parallel decrease in ROS generation. These results were accompanied by a significant reduction in the expression of 3-NT residues and enhanced PGI<sub>2</sub> rates. Therefore, luteolin is effective in reducing ROS thereby improving NO availability in venous endothelial cells. Besides, luteolin-induced decrease in 3-NT residues may correlate with the enhancement in endothelial PGI<sub>2</sub> bioavailability. These findings suggest the future application of this flavonoid as a protective agent by improving endothelial function in several circulatory disorders related to venous insufficiency.

[PMID: 23317200]
Luteolin is a plant flavonoid which exhibits anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor effects. However, the antiproliferative potential of luteolin is not fully understood. In this study, we investigated the effect of luteolin on cell cycling and apoptosis in human esophageal squamous carcinoma cell line Eca109 cells. MTT assays showed that luteolin had obvious cytotoxicity on Eca109 with an IC50 of 70.7±1.72 μM at 24 h. Luteolin arrested cell cycle progression in the G0/G1 phase and prevented entry into S phase in a dose- and time-dependent manner. as assessed by FCM. Luteolin induced apoptosis of Eca109 cells was demonstrated by AO/EB staining assay and annexin V-FITC/PI staining. Moreover, luteolin downregulated the expression of cyclin D1, survivin and c-myc, and it also upregulated the expression of p53, in line with the fact that luteolin was able to inhibit Eca109 cell proliferation.

[PMID: 29928143]
Metastatic breast cancer is typically an extremely aggressive cancer with poor prognosis. Metastasis requires the orchestration of homeostatic factors and cellular programs, many of which are potential therapeutic targets. Luteolin (2-[3,4-dihydroxyphenyl]-5,7-dihydroxy-4-chromenone), is a naturally occurring flavonoid found in fruits and vegetables that exhibits many anticancer properties. Luteolin obstructs metastasis through both direct and indirect mechanisms. For instance, luteolin may suppress breast cancer invasion by acting as an antiangiogenic therapeutic inhibiting VEGF production and its receptor's activity. Furthermore, luteolin decreases epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers and metastatic proclivity. Luteolin also acts as an antiproliferative by suppressing receptor tyrosine-kinase activity and apoptosis, both of which could prevent incipient colonization of breast cancer. Many of these antimetastatic characteristics accredited to luteolin are likely functionally related. For instance, the PI3K/Akt pathway, which is impeded by luteolin, has several downstream programs involved in increased proliferation, survival, and metastatic potential in breast cancer. In this review, luteolin's ability to ameliorate breast cancer is summarized. The paper also offers insight into the molecular mechanisms by which luteolin may suppress breast cancer metastasis.

[PMID: 24353826]
Luteolin is a flavonoid found in abundance in celery, green pepper, and dandelions. Previous studies have shown that luteolin is an anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative agent. In this study, the anti-inflammatory capacity of luteolin and one of its glycosidic forms, luteolin-7-O-glucoside, were compared and their molecular mechanisms of action were analyzed. In lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated RAW 264.7 cells, luteolin more potently inhibited the production of nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin E2 as well as the expression of their corresponding enzymes (inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) than luteolin-7-O-glucoside. The molecular mechanisms underlying these effects were investigated to determine whether the inflammatory response was related to the transcription factors, nuclear factor (NF)-κB and activator protein (AP)-1, or their upstream signaling molecules, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). Luteolin attenuated the activation of both transcription factors, NF-κB and AP-1, while luteolin-7-O-glucoside only impeded NF-κB activation. However, both flavonoids inhibited Akt phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner. Consequently, luteolin more potently ameliorated LPS-induced inflammation than luteolin-7-O-glucoside, which might be attributed to the differentially activated NF-κB/AP-1/PI3K-Akt pathway in RAW 264.7 cells.

[PMID: 34717250]
Luteolin has been reviewed as a flavonoid possessing potential cardioprotective, anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer activities. Having multiple biological effects, luteolin may act as either an antioxidant or a pro-oxidant. In this work, the protective role of copper(II)-chelation by luteolin on DNA damage via the Cu-Fenton reaction was studied. EPR and UV-vis spectroscopic data demonstrated that the luteolin, lacking 3-OH group, chelates to Cu(II) via the 5-OH and 4-CO groups, respectively. EPR spin trapping experiments using DMPO spin trap confirmed that the coordination of luteolin to Cu(II) significantly suppressed formation of hydroxyl and superoxide radicals (by 80%) in a Cu-Fenton system. Absorption titrations showed that the chelation of Cu(II) by luteolin slightly increased the mild intercalation strength of its interaction with DNA, as compared with free luteolin. Comparison with kaempferol and quercetin revealed, that the strength of the interaction between the free flavonoids/Cu-flavonoid complexes with DNA is only mildly affected by the presence/absence of 3-OH group. Due to the differences in the sensitivities of absorption titrations and viscometry, the latter confirmed weaker DNA intercalating efficiency of Cu-luteolin complex than does free luteolin. A dose dependent protective effect of luteolin against ROS-induced DNA damage was observed using gel electrophoresis. This effect was more pronounced compared to quercetin and kaempferol. In conclusion, the administration of luteolin to patients suffering from oxidative stress-related diseases with disturbed Cu-metabolism such as Alzheimer's diseases (antioxidant effect) and certain cancers (prooxidant effect) may have several health benefits.

[PMID: 20074346]
Luteolin, a plant derived flavonoid, exerts a variety of pharmacological activities and anti-oxidant properties associated with its capacity to scavenge oxygen and nitrogen species. Luteolin also shows potent anti-inflammatory activities by inhibiting nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) signaling in immune cells. To better understand the immuno-modulatory effects of this important flavonoid, we performed a genome-wide expression analysis in pro-inflammatory challenged microglia treated with luteolin and conducted a phenotypic and functional characterization. Resting and LPS-activated BV-2 microglia were treated with luteolin in various concentrations and mRNA levels of pro-inflammatory markers were determined. DNA microarray experiments and bioinformatic data mining were performed to capture global transcriptomic changes following luteolin stimulation of microglia. Extensive qRT-PCR analyses were carried out for an independent confirmation of newly identified luteolin-regulated transcripts. The activation state of luteolin-treated microglia was assessed by morphological characterization. Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity was assessed by quantifying secreted nitric oxide levels and apoptosis of 661W photoreceptors cultured in microglia-conditioned medium. Luteolin dose-dependently suppressed pro-inflammatory marker expression in LPS-activated microglia and triggered global changes in the microglial transcriptome with more than 50 differentially expressed transcripts. Pro-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic gene expression was effectively blocked by luteolin. In contrast, mRNA levels of genes related to anti-oxidant metabolism, phagocytic uptake, ramification, and chemotaxis were significantly induced. Luteolin treatment had a major effect on microglial morphology leading to ramification of formerly amoeboid cells associated with the formation of long filopodia. When co-incubated with luteolin, LPS-activated microglia showed strongly reduced NO secretion and significantly decreased neurotoxicity on 661W photoreceptor cultures. Our findings confirm the inhibitory effects of luteolin on pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in microglia. Moreover, our transcriptomic data suggest that this flavonoid is a potent modulator of microglial activation and affects several signaling pathways leading to a unique phenotype with anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, and neuroprotective characteristics. With the identification of several novel luteolin-regulated genes, our findings provide a molecular basis to understand the versatile effects of luteolin on microglial homeostasis. The data also suggest that luteolin could be a promising candidate to develop immuno-modulatory and neuroprotective therapies for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

[PMID: 22203870]
Acute lung injury (ALI), instilled by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), is a severe illness with excessive mortality and has no specific treatment strategy. Luteolin is an anti-inflammatory flavonoid and widely distributed in the plants. Pretreatment with luteolin inhibited LPS-induced histological changes of ALI and lung tissue edema. In addition, LPS-induced inflammatory responses, including increased vascular permeability, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6 production, and expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), were also reduced by luteolin in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, luteolin suppressed activation of NFκB and its upstream molecular factor, Akt. These results suggest that the protection mechanism of luteolin is by inhibition of NFκB activation possibly via Akt.

[PMID: 22269172]
Luteolin is a 3',4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone found in various fruits and vegetables. We have shown previously that luteolin reduces HT-29 cell growth by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. The objective of this study was to examine whether luteolin downregulates the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling pathway in HT-29 cells. In order to assess the effects of luteolin and/or IGF-I on the IGF-IR signaling pathway, cells were cultured with or without 60 μmol/L luteolin and/or 10 nmol/L IGF-I. Cell proliferation, DNA synthesis, and IGF-IR mRNA levels were evaluated by a cell viability assay, [3H]thymidine incorporation assays, and real-time polymerase chain reaction, respectively. Western blot analyses, immunoprecipitation, and in vitro kinase assays were conducted to evaluate the secretion of IGF-II, the protein expression and activation of IGF-IR, and the association of the p85 subunit of phophatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) with IGF-IR, the phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, and cell division cycle 25c (CDC25c), and PI3K activity. Luteolin (0 - 60 μmol/L) dose-dependently reduced the IGF-II secretion of HT-29 cells. IGF-I stimulated HT-29 cell growth but did not abrogate luteolin-induced growth inhibition. Luteolin reduced the levels of the IGF-IR precursor protein and IGF-IR transcripts. Luteolin reduced the IGF-I-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IGF-IR and the association of p85 with IGF-IR. Additionally, luteolin inhibited the activity of PI3K activity as well as the phosphorylation of Akt, ERK1/2, and CDC25c in the presence and absence of IGF-I stimulation. The present results demonstrate that luteolin downregulates the activation of the PI3K/Akt and ERK1/2 pathways via a reduction in IGF-IR signaling in HT-29 cells; this may be one of the mechanisms responsible for the observed luteolin-induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.

[PMID: 28282295]
Background Neuropathic pain (NP) is a common condition accompanied by nerve injury. To date, there is no definite treatment approved for this disorder. In addition, many drugs that are used for NP cause adverse reactions. Luteolin is a naturally occurring flavonoid with diverse pharmacological properties such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and anticancer. We sought to investigate luteolin effects on chronic, acute and neuropathic pain as well as its potential to increase morphine anti-nociceptive effects in mice. Methods Albino mice (20-25 g) were randomly divided into 14 groups (n=7) including morphine 1 mg/kg body weight +luteolin (5 mg/kg body weight), morphine (9 mg/kg body weight, i.p.), luteolin (2.5, 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight), imipramine 40 mg/kg body weight and normal saline (NS) (0.9 %) as vehicle and subjected to hot plate test. Formalin test was done in the following groups: NS, diclofenac sodium (10 mg/kg body weight, i.p.), morphine (9 mg/kg body weight, i.p.) and luteolin (2.5, 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight). Results Administration of luteolin single dose (5 and 10 mg/kg body weight) significantly reduced neuropathic pain ( p<0.05$\rm{p}<0.05$) in comparison to negative control. Anti-nociceptive effects of luteolin were comparable to imipramine as the standard positive control ( p<0.001$\rm{p}<0.001$). Co-administration of luteolin and morphine potentiated morphine 1 mg/kg body weight painkilling effects ( p<0.001$\rm{p}<0.001$). Conclusions Our results showed that luteolin alone reduces neuropathic pain. Furthermore, when co-administered with morphine 1 mg/kg body weight, luteolin potentiates morphine effects. Therefore, luteolin-morphine co-administration might be a valuable alternative for the conventional treatment.

[PMID: 10972088]
Plant-derived flavonoids, which occur abundantly in our daily dietary intake, possess antitumor, antibacterial, and free radical scavenging properties. They form active constituents of a number of herbal and traditional medicines. Several flavonoids have been shown to exert their action by interacting with DNA topoisomerases and promoting site-specific DNA cleavage. Therefore, flavonoids are potential candidates in drug design. We report here that, although the flavonoids luteolin and quercetin are potent antileishmanial agents, luteolin has great promise for acting as a lead compound in the chemotherapy of leishmaniasis, a major concern in developing countries. Kinetoplast DNA (kDNA) minicircle cleavage in drug-treated parasites was measured by electrophoresis of the total cellular DNA, followed by Southern hybridization using 32P labeled kDNA as a probe. Cell cycle progression and apoptosis were measured by flow cytometry using propidium iodide and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled Annexin V. Luteolin and quercetin inhibited the growth of Leishmania donovani promastigotes and amastigotes in vitro, inhibited DNA synthesis in promastigotes, and promoted topoisomerase-II-mediated linearization of kDNA minicircles. The IC50 values of luteolin and quercetin were 12.5 microM and 45.5 microM, respectively. These compounds arrest cell cycle progression in L. donovani promastigotes, leading to apoptosis. Luteolin has no effect on normal human T-cell blasts. Both luteolin and quercetin reduced splenic parasite burden in animal models. Luteolin and quercetin are effective antileishmanial agents. Quercetin has nonspecific effects on normal human T cells, but luteolin appears nontoxic. So, luteolin can be a strong candidate for antileishmanial drug design.

[PMID: 24477342]
Luteolin, a naturally occurring flavonoid, possesses anti-cancer activities against several human cancers, but the exact molecular and biochemical mechanisms of above findings are not very clear, and its activity against head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is seldom mentioned. In this study, we investigated luteolin against human laryngeal squamous cell line Hep-2 cells, using MTT assay, flow cytometry, Western blot and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. Luteolin inhibited Hep-2 cells proliferation at the inhibitive concentrations of 50% (IC50) near to 50 μM and induced the apoptosis in Hep-2 cells through caspase-3 and caspase-8 activation. Up-regulation of Fas and down-regulation of long form cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (c-FLIPL) protein were also involved after luteolin treatment at both protein and mRNA levels. Luteolin could not only inhibit cell proliferation but also induce apoptosis by activating the Fas signaling pathway at the receptor level in laryngeal squamous cell line Hep-2 cells.

[PMID: 26020516]
Transthyretin (TTR) is a homotetrameric plasma protein with amyloidogenic properties that has been linked to the development of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP), familial amyloidotic cardiomyopathy, and senile systemic amyloidosis. The in vivo role of TTR is associated with transport of thyroxine hormone T4 and retinol-binding protein. Loss of the tetrameric integrity of TTR is a rate-limiting step in the process of TTR amyloid formation, and ligands with the ability to bind within the thyroxin binding site (TBS) can stabilize the tetramer, a feature that is currently used as a therapeutic approach for FAP. Several different flavonoids have recently been identified that impair amyloid formation. The flavonoid luteolin shows therapeutic potential with low incidence of unwanted side effects. In this work, we show that luteolin effectively attenuates the cytotoxic response to TTR in cultured neuronal cells and rescues the phenotype of a Drosophila melanogaster model of FAP. The plant-derived luteolin analogue cynaroside has a glucoside group in position 7 of the flavone A-ring and as opposed to luteolin is unable to stabilize TTR tetramers and thus prevents a cytotoxic effect. We generated high-resolution crystal-structures of both TTR wild type and the amyloidogenic mutant V30M in complex with luteolin. The results show that the A-ring of luteolin, in contrast to what was previously suggested, is buried within the TBS, consequently explaining the lack of activity from cynaroside. The flavonoids represent an interesting group of drug candidates for TTR amyloidosis. The present investigation shows the potential of luteolin as a stabilizer of TTR in vivo. We also show an alternative orientation of luteolin within the TBS which could represent a general mode of binding of flavonoids to TTR and is of importance concerning the future design of tetramer stabilizing drugs.

[PMID: 18937165]
Luteolin is a flavone which occurs in medicinal plants as well as in some vegetables and spices. It is a natural anti-oxidant with less pro-oxidant potential than the flavonol quercetin, the best studied flavonoid, but apparently with a better safety profile. It displays excellent radical scavenging and cytoprotective properties, especially when tested in complex biological systems where it can interact with other anti-oxidants like vitamins. Luteolin displays specific anti-inflammatory effects at micromolar concentrations which are only partly explained by its anti-oxidant capacities. The anti-inflammatory activity includes activation of anti-oxidative enzymes, suppression of the NFkappaB pathway and inhibition of pro-inflammatory substances. In vivo, luteolin reduced increased vascular permeability and was effective in animal models of inflammation after parenteral and oral application. Although luteolin is only a minor component in our nutrition (less than 1 mg/day) epidemiological studies indicate that it has the potential to protect from diseases associated with inflammatory processes such as cardiovascular disease. Luteolin often occurs in the form of glycosides in plants, but these are cleaved and the aglycones are conjugated and metabolized after nutritional uptake which has to be considered when evaluating in vitro studies. Some data for oral and topical bioavailability exist, but more quantitative research in this field is needed to evaluate the physiological and therapeutical potential of luteolin.

[PMID: 27185356]
Glutamatergic excitotoxicity is crucial in the pathogenesis of numerous brain disorders. Luteolin, a flavonoid compound, inhibits glutamate release, however, its ability to affect glutamate-induced brain injury is unknown. Therefore, this study evaluated the protective effect of luteolin against brain damage induced by kainic acid (KA), a glutamate analog. Rats were treated with luteolin (10 or 50mg/kg, intraperitoneally) 30min before an intraperitoneal injection of KA (15mg/kg). Luteolin treatment reduced the KA-induced seizure score and elevations of glutamate levels in the hippocampus. A histopathological analysis showed that luteolin attenuated KA-induced neuronal death and microglial activation in the hippocampus. An immunoblotting analysis showed that luteolin restored the KA-induced reduction in Akt phosphorylation in the hippocampus. Furthermore, a Morris water maze test revealed that luteolin effectively prevented KA-induced learning and memory impairments. The results suggest that luteolin protected rat brains from KA-induced excitotoxic damage by reducing glutamate levels, mitigating inflammation, and enhancing Akt activation in the hippocampus. Therefore, luteolin may be beneficial for preventing or treating brain disorders associated with excitotoxic neuronal damage.

[PMID: 27170112]
Luteolin is a naturally occurring flavone that reportedly has anti-inflammatory effects. Because most luteolin is conjugated following intestinal absorption, free luteolin is likely present at low levels in the body. Therefore, luteolin metabolites are presumably responsible for luteolin bioactivity. Here we confirmed that luteolin glucuronides, especially luteolin-3'-O-glucuronide, are the major metabolites found in plasma after oral administration of luteolin (aglycone) or luteolin glucoside (luteolin-7-O-glucoside) to rats. Luteolin-4'-O-glucuronide and luteolin-7-O-glucuronide were also detectable together with luteolin-3'-O-glucuronide in the liver, kidney, and small intestine. Next, we prepared these luteolin glucuronides and compared the anti-inflammatory effects of luteolin and luteolin glucuronides on gene expression in lipopolysaccharide-treated RAW264.7 cells. Luteolin glucuronides, especially luteolin-7-O-glucuronide, reduced expression of inflammatory genes in the cells, although their effects were weaker than those of luteolin. These results indicate that the active compound responsible for the anti-inflammatory effect of luteolin in vivo would be luteolin glucuronide and/or residual luteolin.

[PMID: 27016074]
Luteolin is a common dietary flavonoid present in Chinese herbal medicines that has been reported to have important anti-inflammatory properties. Previous studies have shown that luteolin is an anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative agent. In this study, the anti-virus inflammatory capacity of luteolin and its molecular mechanisms of action were analyzed. The cytotoxic effects of luteolin were assessed in the presence or absence of pseudorabies virus (PRV) via LDH and MTT assays. The results showed that luteolin (<10μM) had no toxic effects and there were tendencies toward higher cell survival. In PRV-infected RAW264.7 cells, luteolin potently inhibited the production of NO, iNOS, COX-2 and inflammatory cytokine production. Luteolin did not inhibit the phosphorylation of ERK 1/2, p38, and JNK 1/2 either. We found that PRV-induced NF-κB activation is regulated through inhibition of STAT1and STAT3 phosphorylation in response to luteolin. Additionally, luteolin caused the induction of HO-1 via upregulation of Nrf2, both of which are involved in the secretion of proinflammatory mediators. The blockade of HO-1 expression with SnPP, a HO-1 inhibitor, attenuated HO-1 induction by luteolin and thus mitigated its anti-inflammatory effects during PRV-infected RAW264.7 cells. Taken together, our data indicate that luteolin diminishes the proinflammatory mediators NO, inflammatory cytokines and the expression of their regulatory genes, iNOS and COX-2, in PRV-infected RAW264.7 cells by inhibiting STAT1/3 dependent NF-κB activation and inducing Nrf2mediated HO-1 expression.

[PMID: 32081041]
Recently, many studies have reported the anticancer properties of flavonoid luteolin against a variety of tumors, but there is still a lack in the description of its mechanism of action. In attempt to better contribute to the literature, we evaluated the antiproliferative activity of luteolin extracted by <i>Fridericia platyphylla</i> in a panel of tumor cell lines representative of six different tissues. Luteolin presented antiproliferative activity for all the assessed tumor cell lines, being glioblastoma the most sensitive one. This compound was able to inhibit U-251 cells migration and tumorigenesis. Besides, luteolin leads U-251 tumor cells to apoptosis death by depolarisation of the mitochondrial membrane, ERK proteins phosphorylation, cleavage of PARP and Caspase 9, further inducing DNA damage by H2AX phosphorylation, which had not yet been described for glioblastomas. Altogether, our results reaffirm luteolin as a potential therapeutic drug.

[PMID: 12027807]
Luteolin, a naturally occurring flavonoid, is abundant in our daily dietary intake. It exhibits a wide spectrum of pharmacological properties, but little is known about its biochemical targets other than the fact that it induces topoisomerase II-mediated apoptosis. In the present study, we show that luteolin completely inhibits the catalytic activity of eukaryotic DNA topoisomerase I at a concentration of 40 microM, with an IC50 of 5 microM. Preincubation of enzyme with luteolin before adding a DNA substrate increases the inhibition of the catalytic activity (IC50=0.66 microM). Treatment of DNA with luteolin before addition of topoisomerase I reduces this inhibitory effect. Subsequent fluorescence tests show that luteolin not only interacts directly with the enzyme but also with the substrate DNA, and intercalates at a very high concentration (>250 microM) without binding to the minor groove. Direct interaction between luteolin and DNA does not affect the assembly of the enzyme-DNA complex, as evident from the electrophoretic mobility-shift assays. Here we show that the inhibition of topoisomerase I by luteolin is due to the stabilization of topoisomerase-I DNA-cleavable complexes. Hence, luteolin is similar to camptothecin, a class I inhibitor, with respect to its ability to form the topoisomerase I-mediated 'cleavable complex'. But, unlike camptothecin, luteolin interacts with both free enzyme and substrate DNA. The inhibitory effect of luteolin is translated into concanavalin A-stimulated mouse splenocytes, with the compound inducing SDS-K+-precipitable DNA-topoisomerase complexes. This is the first report on luteolin as an inhibitor of the catalytic activity of topoisomerase I, and our results further support its therapeutic potential as a lead anti-cancer compound that poisons topoisomerases.

[PMID: 30280574]
Luteolin is a flavonoid present in plants in the form of aglycone or glucosides. In this study, luteolin glucosides (i.e., luteolin-7- O-β-d-glucoside, luteolin-7- O-[2-(β-d-apiosyl)-β-d-glucoside], and luteolin-7- O-[2-(β-d-apiosyl)-6-malonyl-β-d-glucoside]) prepared from green pepper leaves as well as luteolin aglycone were orally administered to rats. Regardless of the administered luteolin form, luteolin glucuronides were mainly detected from plasma and organs. Subsequently, luteolin aglycone, the most absorbed form of luteolin in rats, was orally administered to humans. As a result, luteolin-3'- O-sulfate was mainly identified from plasma, suggesting that not only luteolin form but also animal species affect the absorption and metabolism of luteolin. When LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells were treated with luteolin glucuronides and luteolin sulfate (the characteristic metabolites identified from rats and humans, respectively), the different luteolin conjugates were metabolized in different ways, suggesting that such difference in metabolism results in their difference in anti-inflammatory effects.

[PMID: 16140950]
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is an important member of the TNF superfamily with great potential in cancer therapy. Luteolin is a dietary flavonoid commonly found in some medicinal plants. Here we found that pretreatment with a noncytotoxic concentration of luteolin significantly sensitized TRAIL-induced apoptosis in both TRAIL-sensitive (HeLa) and TRAIL-resistant cancer cells (CNE1, HT29, and HepG2). Such sensitization is achieved through enhanced caspase-8 activation and caspase-3 maturation. Further, the protein level of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) was markedly reduced in cells treated with luteolin and TRAIL, and ectopic expression of XIAP protected against cell death induced by luteolin and TRAIL, showing that luteolin sensitizes TRAIL-induced apoptosis through down-regulation of XIAP. In search of the molecular mechanism responsible for XIAP down-regulation, we found that luteolin and TRAIL promoted XIAP ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Next, we showed that protein kinase C (PKC) activation prevented cell death induced by luteolin and TRAIL via suppression of XIAP down-regulation. Moreover, luteolin inhibited PKC activity, and bisindolylmaleimide I, a general PKC inhibitor, simulated luteolin in sensitizing TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Taken together, these results present a novel anticancer effect of luteolin and support its potential application in cancer therapy in combination with TRAIL. In addition, our data reveal a new function of PKC in cell death: PKC activation stabilizes XIAP and thus suppresses TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

[PMID: 32694396]
Neonatal sepsis is a life-threatening inflammatory condition. Extracellular cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (CIRP), a proinflammatory mediator, plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced lung injury in neonates. Luteolin, a polyphenolic flavonoid, has potent anti-inflammatory properties. However, the effects of luteolin on CIRP production and neonatal sepsis-induced lung injury remained unknown. We therefore hypothesize that treatment with luteolin suppresses CIRP production and attenuates lung injury in neonatal sepsis. To study this, sepsis was induced in C57BL/6J mouse pups (5-7 days) by intraperitoneal cecal slurry injection (CSI). One hour after CSI, luteolin (10 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle (normal saline) was administered through intraperitoneal injection. CIRP mRNA and protein were determined and lung injury was assessed at 10 h after CSI. Our results showed that administration of luteolin decreased CIRP mRNA and protein, improved lung architecture, reduced lung edema, and apoptosis after CSI. To examine the direct effect of luteolin on CIRP production, peritoneal macrophages were isolated from neonatal mice and stimulated with 100 ng/mL LPS with or without the presence of luteolin. The result indicates that luteolin directly inhibited LPS-induced CIRP production in neonatal macrophages. In addition, luteolin also downregulated hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) and NOD-like receptor 3 (NLRP3) expression in septic neonates and in LPS-stimulated neonatal macrophages. In conclusion, administration of luteolin suppresses CIRP production and attenuates lung injury in neonatal sepsis. The beneficial effect of luteolin may be related to downregulation of HIF-1α and NLRP3 expression in neonatal macrophages. Luteolin may be developed as an adjunctive therapy for neonatal sepsis.

[PMID: 26246742]
Inflammation of adipocytes has been a therapeutic target for treatment of obesity and metabolic disorders which cause insulin resistance and hence lead to type II diabetes. Luteolin is a bioflavonoid with many beneficial properties such as antioxidant, antiproliferative, and anti-cancer. To elucidate the potential anti-inflammatory response and the underlying mechanism of luteolin in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. We stimulated 3T3-L1 adipocytes with the mixture of tumor necrosis factor-α, lipopolysaccharide, and interferon-γ (TLI) in the presence or absence of luteolin. We performed Griess' method for nitric oxide (NO) production and measure mRNA and protein expressions by real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting, respectively. Luteolin opposed the stimulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase and NO production by simultaneous treatment of adipocytes with TLI. Furthermore, it reduced the pro-inflammatory genes such as cyclooxygenase-2, interleukin-6, resistin, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1. Furthermore, luteolin improved the insulin sensitivity by enhancing the expression of insulin receptor substrates (IRS1/2) and glucose transporter-4 via phosphatidylinositol-3K signaling pathway. This inhibition was associated with suppression of Iκ-B-α degradation and subsequent inhibition of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) p65 translocation to the nucleus. In addition, luteolin blocked the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, c-Jun N-terminal Kinases and also p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). These results illustrate that luteolin attenuates inflammatory responses in the adipocytes through suppression of NF-κB and MAPKs activation, and also improves insulin sensitivity in 3T3-L1 cells, suggesting that luteolin may represent a therapeutic agent to prevent obesity-associated inflammation and insulin resistance.

[PMID: 31994822]
Luteolin is a natural flavonoid with strong anti-oxidative properties that is reported to have an anti-cancer effect in several malignancies other than bladder cancer. In this study, we describe the effect of luteolin on a human bladder cancer cell line, T24, in the context of the regulation of p21, thioredoxin-1 (TRX1) and the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Luteolin inhibited cell survival and induced G2/M cell-cycle arrest, p21 upregulation and downregulation of phospho(p)-S6, which is downstream of mTOR signaling. Luteolin also upregulated TRX1 and reduced intracellular reactive oxygen species production. In a subcutaneous xenograft mouse model using the rat bladder cancer cell line, BC31, tumor volumes were significantly decreased in mice orally administered luteolin compared to control. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that increased p21 and decreased p-S6 expression were induced in the luteolin treatment group. Moreover, in another in vivo N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine (BBN)-induced rat bladder cancer model, the oral administration of luteolin led to a trend of decreased bladder tumor dimension and significantly decreased the Ki67-labeling index and p-S6 expression. Furthermore, the major findings on the metabolism of luteolin suggest that both plasma and urine luteolin-3'-O-glucuronide concentrations are strongly associated with the inhibition of cell proliferation and mTOR signaling. Moreover, a significant decrease in the squamous differentiation of bladder cancer is attributed to plasma luteolin-3'-glucuronide concentration. In conclusion, luteolin, and in particular its metabolized product, may represent another natural product-derived therapeutic agent that acts against bladder cancer by upregulating p21 and inhibiting mTOR signaling.

[PMID: 31019613]
Luteolin (3',4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone) is a flavone with a yellow crystalline appearance present in numerous plants such as broccoli, green chili, and carrot. Luteolin is considered to be an endocrine disruptor with potent estrogen agonist activity and potent progesterone antagonist activity. Luteolin has effects on smooth muscle. Luteolin relaxed guinea pig trachea smooth muscle as it inhibited both phosphodiesterase and reduced intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Luteolin also caused vasorelaxation in rat thoracic aorta smooth muscle by inhibiting intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> release, inhibition of sarcolemmal Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels, and activation of K<sup>+</sup> channels. Luteolin or its glycosides from artichoke extracts may have an ameliorating effect on irritable bowel syndrome. The purpose of this study was to determine if luteolin had an effect on gallbladder motility. An <i>in vitro</i> pharmacologic technique was utilized. Either cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK) or KCl were used to induce tension in male guinea pig gallbladder strips maintained in Sawyer-Bartlestone chambers. Luteolin relaxed either the CCK- or KCl-induced tension in a concentration dependent manner. Various blockers were added to the chambers to determine which second messenger system(s) mediated the observed relaxation. Paired <i>t</i>-tests were used for statistical analysis. Differences between mean values of P < 0.05 were considered significant. Treatment of the gallbladder strips with luteolin prior to either KCl or CCK significantly (P < 0.001) decreased the amount of either KCl- or cholecystokinin-induced tension. The 2-aminoethoxydiphenylborane was used to ascertain if the release of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> mediated the luteolin-induced relaxation. It significantly (P < 0.001) decreased the amount of luteolin-induced relaxation. To ascertain if PKA mediated the luteolin-induced relaxation, PKA inhibitor 14-22 amide myristolated was used. It significantly (P < 0.01) reduced the amount of luteolin-induced relaxation. Neither KT5823, N<sup>G</sup>-methyl-L-arginine acetate salt, genistein, tetraethylammonium, nor fulvestrant had a significant effect. To ascertain if PKC mediated the luteolin-induced relaxation, the PKC inhibitors bisindolymaleimide IV and chelerythrine Cl<sup>-</sup> were used together. They had no significant effect. Luteolin relaxed cholecystokinin- or KCl-induced tension by blocking extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> entry as well as intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> release. In addition, the actions of PKA are also involved in mediating the luteolin effect.