[PMID: 24760871]
Schwann cells, the myelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), originate from multipotent neural crest cells that also give rise to other cells, including neurons, melanocytes, chondrocytes, and smooth muscle cells. The transcription factor Sox10 is required for peripheral glia specification. However, all neural crest cells express Sox10 and the mechanisms directing neural crest cells into a specific lineage are poorly understood. We show here that histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) are essential for the specification of neural crest cells into Schwann cell precursors and satellite glia, which express the early determinants of their lineage myelin protein zero (P0) and/or fatty acid binding protein 7 (Fabp7). In neural crest cells, HDAC1/2 induced expression of the transcription factor Pax3 by binding and activating the Pax3 promoter. In turn, Pax3 was required to maintain high Sox10 levels and to trigger expression of Fabp7. In addition, HDAC1/2 were bound to the P0 promoter and activated P0 transcription. Consistently, in vivo genetic deletion of HDAC1/2 in mouse neural crest cells led to strongly decreased Sox10 expression, no detectable Pax3, virtually no satellite glia, and no Schwann cell precursors in dorsal root ganglia and peripheral nerves. Similarly, in vivo ablation of Pax3 in the mouse neural crest resulted in strongly reduced expression of Sox10 and Fabp7. Therefore, by controlling the expression of Pax3 and the concerted action of Pax3 and Sox10 on their target genes, HDAC1/2 direct the specification of neural crest cells into peripheral glia.

[PMID: 17652534]
Mature cystic teratomas have been widely studied relative to their tissue components derived from all 3 embryonic layers, and immunohistochemical methods have demonstrated a variety of neurohormonal polypeptides. To our knowledge, Langerhans cells (LCs), which are a peculiar component of epidermis, have not been reported in ovarian teratomas. The origin of these cells is still a matter of debate, ranging from bone marrow stem cells to neural elements. Thirty mature teratomas of the ovary were studied by immunohistochemistry using CD1 (specific against dendritic LCs), S100 protein (against LCs and melanocytes), and melan-A and HMB45 (against melanocytes). Furthermore, antibodies for identifying subsets of lymphocytes and monocytes (CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, and CD68) were used. Histologic examination showed teratomas with the presence of all 3 embryonic layers in variable proportions in 23 cases, while 7 teratomas were composed only of epidermis without appendages or other tissues. Immunohistochemistry identified LCs among the suprabasal layers of epidermis in the same sites at which melanocytes were seen in the basal layer. CD1-positive LCs sometimes appeared to cross the basal membrane and penetrate the subepidermal tissue (related to their known migratory ability), and they were associated there with T-cell line lymphocytes (CD3 positive). These findings were commonly observed in teratomas that included all 3 embryonic layers and neural tissues. Notably, LCs and melanocytes were undetectable in the 7 teratomas composed of epidermis only. Our observations of LCs in ovarian teratomas led us to consider these cells to be derived from neural cells, possibly related to Schwann cells, in accord with the original description by Langerhans. In fact, LCs are always associated with melanocytes, which are universally considered to be derived from the neural crest, as are Schwann cells and peripheral nerves. Finally, we propose that LCs may be part of a cytoimmunologic system related to the T-cell compartment, with a stem cell derived from the neural crest.

[PMID: 21501576]
Melanocytes, the pigmented cells of the skin, and the glial Schwann cells lining peripheral nerves are developmentally derived from an early and transient ectodermal structure of the vertebrate embryo, the neural crest, which is also at the origin of multiple neural and non-neural cell types. Besides melanocytes and neural cells of the peripheral nervous system, the neural crest cells give rise to mesenchymal cell types in the head, which form most of the craniofacial skeleton, dermis, fat tissue and vascular musculo-connective components. How such a wide diversity of differentiation fates is established during embryogenesis and is later maintained in adult tissues are among key questions in developmental and stem cell biology. The analysis of the developmental potentials of single neural crest cells cultured in vitro led to characterizing multipotent stem/progenitor cells as well as more restricted precursors in the early neural crest of avian and mammalian embryos. Data support a hierarchical model of the diversification of neural crest lineages through progressive restrictions of multipotent stem cell potentials driven by local environmental factors. In particular, melanocytes and glial Schwann cells were shown to arise from a common bipotent progenitor, which depends upon the peptide endothelin-3 for proliferation and self-renewal ability. In vivo, signaling by endothelin-3 and its receptor is also required for the early development of melanocytes and proper pigmentation of the vertebrate body. It is generally assumed that, after lineage specification and terminal differentiation, specialized cell types, like the melanocytes and Schwann cells, do not change their identity. However, this classic notion that somatic cell differentiation is a stable and irreversible process has been challenged by emerging evidence that dedifferentiation can occur in different biological systems through nuclear transfer, cell fusion, epigenetic modifications and ectopic gene expression. This review considers the issue of whether neural crest-derived lineages are endowed with some phenotypic plasticity. Emphasis is put on the ability of pigment cells and Schwann cells to dedifferentiate and reprogram their fate in vitro. To address this question, we have studied the clonal progeny of differentiated Schwann cells and melanocytes after their isolation from the sciatic nerve and the back skin of quail embryos, respectively. When stimulated to proliferate in vitro in the presence of endothelin-3, both cell types were able to dedifferentiate and produce alternative neural crest-derived cell lineages. Individual Schwann cells isolated by FACS, using a glial-specific surface marker, gave rise in culture to pigment cells and myofibroblasts/smooth muscle cells. Treatment of the cultures with endothelin-3 was required for Schwann cell conversion into melanocytes, which involved acquisition of multipotency. Moreover, Schwann cell plasticity could also be induced in vivo: following transplantation into the branchial arch of a young chick host embryo, dedifferentiating Schwann cells were able to integrate the forming head structures of the host and, specifically, to contribute smooth muscle cells to the wall of cranial blood vessels. We also analyzed the in vitro behavior of individual pigment cells obtained by microdissection and enzymatic treatment of quail epidermis at embryonic and hatching stages. In single cell cultures treated with endothelin-3, pigment cells strongly proliferated while rapidly dedifferentiating into unpigmented cells, leading to the formation of large colonies that comprised glial cells and myofibroblasts in addition to melanocytes. By serially subcloning these primary colonies, we could efficiently propagate a bipotent glial-melanocytic precursor that is generated in the progeny of the melanocytic founder. These data therefore suggest that pigment cells have the ability to revert back to the state of self-renewing neural crest-like progenitors. Altogether, these studies have shown that Schwann cells and pigment cells display an unstable status of differentiation, which can be disclosed if these differentiated cells are displaced out of their native tissue. When challenged with new environmental conditions in vitro, differentiated Schwann cells and pigment cells can reacquire stem cell properties of their neural crest ancestors. Notably, such reprogramming was achieved through the effect of a single exogenous factor and without the need of any induced genetic modification. Deciphering the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate the plasticity and maintenance of neural crest-derived differentiated cells is likely to be an important step towards the understanding of the neurocristopathies and cancers that target neural crest derivatives in humans.

[PMID: 8834474]
The urodele amphibians are nearly the only adult vertebrates able to regenerate their missing or amputated tail. The most striking feature of this model lies in the ability of the spinal cord (SC) to differentiate, within the regenerating tail, a new ependymal tube from which the SC and the peripheral nervous system originate. A fundamental question is whether, in response to tail excision, the ependymoglia of the old SC stump behaves as an embryonic neuroepithelium. To evaluate this possibility, cell lines from primary cell cultures of adult SC were established for the first time in newts, and two cell clones, immunochemically characterized as ependymoglial cell populations, could be obtained. To analyze the potentialities of these clonal cells, after transplantation in tail regenerates, cell-marking experiments, using either in vitro transfection with lacZ gene or the lineage tracer lysinated rhodamine dextran (LRD), were performed. One to 2 weeks postimplantation, most of labeled derivatives were identified as melanocytes. Interestingly, labeled cells were also seen integrated in the ependymoglia of the regenerating SC. Two to 6 weeks after implantation in young regenerates, we also observed LRD-labeled elongated cells close to nerves or myofibers which were unambiguously identified as Schwann cells by galactocerebroside staining. Taken together, these findings showed that clonal cells derived from adult newt SC cultures could largely find, in regenerate mesenchyme, suitable environmental conditions to differentiate into melanocytes or Schwann cells. Because these two cells types arise from neural crest cells during embryo-genesis, this supports the interesting view that multipotent cells are still present in the SC of adult urodeles.

[PMID: 8269857]
We previously found that cultured neural crest-derived cells from embryonic quail peripheral nerves, which consist mostly of Schwann cell precursors, gave rise to melanocytes following treatment with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) or 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Here, we show that antisense deoxyoligonucleotides targeted against two regions of the bFGF mRNA transcript blocked this TPA-induced transdifferentiation of Schwann cell precursors. Neither sense nor scrambled antisense control oligonucleotides had any effect in this regard. TPA increased bFGF protein expression in cell lysates but not in conditioned media from these cultures, and this expression was localized to the nucleus and cytoplasm. Furthermore, bFGF-neutralizing antibodies and inositol-hexakisphosphate (InsP6) both inhibited pigmentation caused by exogenous bFGF, but had no affect on TPA-induced melanogenesis, suggesting that bFGF is not released by these cells. These data indicate that bFGF is necessary for the TPA-induced transdifferentiation of Schwann cell precursors into melanocytes and that bFGF acts via an intracrine mechanism.

[PMID: 9142492]
Using in vitro cell-marking experiments and transplantation in tail regenerates, we have recently shown (Benraiss et al., 1996) that clonal cells derived from adult newt spinal cord (SC) cultures could find suitable cues in blastemal mesenchyme to enable them to differentiate into melanocytes or Schwann cells. This led to the question of whether neural crest-like cell derivatives might emerge from the ependymal tube as tail regeneration proceeded. To address this question we used the biolistic method for in situ transfection of caudal SC cells. These cells were transfected with an alkaline phosphatase marker gene. The potentialities of transfected cell derivatives in tail regenerates were analyzed using histochemistry or immunohistochemistry. As early as eight days after transfection, labeled cells were detected in the regenerating SC and around its "terminal vesicle" (TV). Two to four weeks following transfection, most of the labeled cell derivatives could be identified either by dark granules as melanocytes or by galactocerebroside staining as Schwann cells. Electron microscopic investigations revealed the incompletely organized cytoarchitecture of the TV, suggesting that an exit of cells was possible at this level, at least from its "open" dorsal part. Furthermore, the localization of ciliated cells in the blastemal mesenchyme, especially around the TV, supported this view by suggesting that they might be ependymal cells detached from it. Our findings therefore led us to believe that in the newt, during tail regeneration, neural crest-like cells emerging from the TV could participate in the formation of the peripheral nervous system, especially by providing Schwann cells and melanocytes.

[PMID: 12702775]
In vertebrate embryos, diversification of the lineages arising from the neural crest (NC) is controlled to a large extent by environmental factors. In previous work, we showed that endothelin 3 (ET3) peptide favors the development of glial and melanocytic NC precursors in vitro. This factor is also capable of inducing proliferation of cultured epidermal pigment cells and their conversion to glia. ET3 therefore strongly promotes the emergence of melanocytic and glial phenotypes from precursors and acts on the maintenance of these phenotypes. In the present work, we explored the capacity of ET3 to reprogram glial cells into melanocytes. Schwann cells expressing glial-specific markers [such as the Schwann cell myelin protein (SMP)] were isolated from sciatic nerves of quail embryos and cultured in vitro. We found that ET3 promotes cell growth and sequential expression of melanocyte differentiation markers in cultures of purified SMP-expressing cells, whereas it had no significant effect on SMP-negative cells from the same nerves. Moreover, we provide evidence for the transition of differentiated Schwann cells to melanocytes in clonal cultures. This transition involves the production of a mixed progeny of melanoblasts/melanocytes, glia, and cells bearing differentiation markers of both phenotypes. Therefore, Schwann cells exposed to ET3 transdifferentiate to melanocytes through reversion to the stage of bipotent glial-melanocytic NC precursors. These findings show that NC-derived pigment and glial cells are phenotypically unstable in vitro and may undergo reversal of precursor hierarchy to function as bipotent stem cells.

[PMID: 23347447]
Melanocytes are pigment-producing cells generated from neural crest cells (NCCs) that delaminate from the dorsal neural tube. The widely accepted premise that NCCs migrating along the dorsolateral pathway are the main source of melanocytes in the skin was recently challenged by the finding that Schwann cell precursors are the major cellular source of melanocytes in the skin. Still, in a wide variety of vertebrate embryos, melanocytes are exclusively derived from NCCs. In this study, we show that a NCC population that is not derived from Sox1(+) dorsal neuroepithelial cells but are derived from Sox1(-) cells differentiate into a significant population of melanocytes in the skin of mice. Later, these Sox1(-) cells clearly segregate from cells that originated from Sox1(+) dorsal neuroepithelial cell-derived NCCs. The possible derivation of Sox1(-) cells from epidermal cells also strengthens their non-neuroepithelial origin.

[PMID: 7684712]
Analysis of lineage segregation during mammalian neural crest development has not been sufficiently performed due to technical difficulties. In the present study, therefore, we established a clonal culture system of mouse neural crest cells in order to analyze developmental potentials of individual neural crest cells and their patterns of lineage segregation. 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and cholera toxin (CT) were applied to culture medium to trigger melanogenic differentiation of mouse neural crest cells. Three morphologically distinct types of clones were observed. (1) "Pigmented clones" consisted of melanocytes only, suggesting that the clone-forming cells were committed to the melanogenic lineage. These clones were observed only in the presence of TPA and CT. The proportion of this type of clone (8%) was much lower than that of the equivalent type of clone in quail trunk neural crest (40-60%; Sieber-Blum and Cohen, 1980, Dev. Biol. 80, 96-106). It therefore appears that the segregation pattern to the melanogenic lineage during mouse neural crest development in vitro differs quantitatively from that in the quail. (2) "Mixed clones" consisted of pigmented and unpigmented cells. Like pigmented clones, they were observed only in the presence of TPA and CT. The clones contained up to four types of cells: melanocytes, S100-positive cells (Schwann cells or melanogenic precursor cells), serotonin (5-HT)-positive autonomic neuron-like cells, and substance P (SP)-immunoreactive sensory neuron-like cells. Thus, at least some mixed clone-forming cells are pluripotent. (3) Two classes of "unpigmented clones" were observed that consisted of unpigmented cells only. These clones developed in the presence and absence of TPA and CT. Unpigmented clones in one class contained up to three types of cells as well as other, as yet unidentified cells: S100-, 5-HT-, and SP-positive cells. This observation suggests that at least some of these clones originate from cells with a partially restricted developmental potential. Clones in another class consisted of S100- or SP-positive cells only. These clones might be derived from cells restricted to the SP-positive neuronal cell or melanocyte/Schwann cell lineage. The present data indicate that at initiation of migration, the mouse neural crest of the trunk region is a heterogeneous population of cells containing pluripotent cells, cells with a restricted developmental potential, and cells apparently committed to the melanogenic cell lineage.

[PMID: 8320168]
Melanocytic tumors as well as multiple neurofibromas were induced in 35 of 88 Syrian golden hamsters by a single s.c. administration of 100 mg/kg of N-nitroso-N-ethylurea applied 48 h after birth. The lesions were all observed proliferating in the dermis and demonstrated melanosomes and premelanosomes. High cellularity, nuclear atypia and transplantability of the tumors in outbred hamsters suggested a malignant nature. Some of the melanomas were morphologically heterogenous and contained Schwann-like cells as minor components. In addition, transplantation of the melanomas resulted in increased schwannian differentiation even for primary tumors which did not contain any Schwann-like cell foci. One of the transplanted melanomas mimicked malignant peripheral nervous tumor. Schwannian differentiation was also proved by the fact that glial fibrillary acidic protein was positive in 22.2% of the cases. The present results suggest that the induced hamster melanomas originate from neural crest-derived cells which are able to differentiate into both melanocytes and Schwann cells.

[PMID: 10885676]
In this study, we have analyzed the melanogenic potential of Schwann cells using in vitro cell cultures of embryonic quail peripheral nerves. It is shown that in Schwann cells, two factors, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13 acetate (TPA) and endothelin 3, trigger a differentiation pathway toward melanocytes, and that Steel factor has no effect on these cells unless treated simultaneously with TPA. In these cultures, TPA induces the expression of c-kit, whereas Steel factor enhances the development of melanocytes. In the assay system we employed, neither neuronal nor catecholaminergic phenotypes were obtained, regardless of various combinations of related factors added to the culture medium. These data support our previous observations indicating the existence of bipotent progenitors that are capable of differentiating into Schwann cells or into melanocytes, and the regulatory role of endothelin 3 on those precursors, as revealed by the clonal culture of neural crest cells.

[PMID: 25805416]
The development of the nervous system involves cells remaining within the neural tube (CNS) and a group of cells that delaminate from the dorsal neural tube and migrate extensively throughout the developing embryo called neural crest cells (NCC). These cells are a mesenchymal highly migratory group of cells that give rise to a wide variety of cell derivatives: melanocytes, sensory neurons, bone, Schwann cells, etc. But not all NCC can give rise to all derivatives, they have fate restrictions based on their axial level of origin: cranial, vagal, trunk and sacral. Our aim was to provide a thorough presentation on how does trunk neural crest cell migration looks in the chicken embryo, in wholemount and in sections using the unique chicken marker HNK1. The description presented here makes a good guideline for those interested in viewing trunk NCC migration patterns. We show how before HH14 there are few trunk NCC delaminating and migrating, but between HH15 through HH19 trunk NCC delaminate in large numbers. Melanocytes precursors begin to enter the dorsolateral pathway by HH17. We found that by HH20 HNK1 is not a valid good marker for NCC and that HNK1 is a better marker than Sox10 when looking at neural crest cells morphology and migration details.

[PMID: 20454996]
Melanocytes and Schwann cells are derived from the multipotent population of neural crest cells. Although both cell types were thought to be generated through completely distinct pathways and molecular processes, a recent study has revealed that these different cell types are intimately interconnected far beyond previously postulated limits in that they share a common post-neural crest progenitor, i.e. the Schwann cell precursor. This finding raises interesting questions about the lineage relationships of hitherto unrelated cell types such as melanocytes and Schwann cells, and may provide clinical insights into mechanisms of pigmentation disorders and for cancer involving Schwann cells and melanocytes.

[PMID: 23858437]
Skin melanocytes arise from two sources: either directly from neural crest progenitors or indirectly from neural crest-derived Schwann cell precursors after colonization of peripheral nerves. The relationship between these two melanocyte populations and the factors controlling their specification remains poorly understood. Direct lineage tracing reveals that neural crest and Schwann cell progenitor-derived melanocytes are differentially restricted to the epaxial and hypaxial body domains, respectively. Furthermore, although both populations are initially part of the Foxd3 lineage, hypaxial melanocytes lose Foxd3 at late stages upon separation from the nerve, whereas we recently found that epaxial melanocytes segregate earlier from Foxd3-positive neural progenitors while still residing in the dorsal neural tube. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments in avians and mice, respectively, reveal that Foxd3 is both sufficient and necessary for regulating the balance between melanocyte and Schwann cell development. In addition, Foxd3 is also sufficient to regulate the switch between neuronal and glial fates in sensory ganglia. Together, we propose that differential fate acquisition of neural crest-derived cells depends on their progressive segregation from the Foxd3-positive lineage.

[PMID: 10906452]
The avian spinal cord is characterized by an absence of motor nerves and sensory nerves and ganglia at its caudalmost part. Since peripheral sensory neurons derive from neural crest cells, three basic mechanisms could account for this feature: (i) the caudalmost neural tube does not generate any neural crest cells; (ii) neural crest cells originating from the caudal part of the neural tube cannot give rise to dorsal root ganglia or (iii) the caudal environment is not permissive for the formation of dorsal root ganglia. To solve this problem, we have first studied the pattern of expression of ventral (HNF3beta) and dorsal (slug) marker genes in the caudal region of the neural tube; in a second approach, we have recorded the emergence of neural crest cells using the HNK1 monoclonal antibody; and finally, we have analyzed the developmental potentials of neural crest cells arising from the caudalmost part of the neural tube in avian embryo in in vitro culture and by means of heterotopic transplantations in vivo. We show here that neural crest cells arising from the neural tube located at the level of somites 47-53 can differentiate both in vitro and in vivo into melanocytes and Schwann cells but not into neurons. Furthermore, the neural tube located caudally to the last pair of somites (i.e. the 53rd pair) does not give rise to neural crest cells in any of the situations tested. The specific anatomical aspect of the avian spinal cord can thus be accounted for by limited developmental potentials of neural crest cells arising from the most caudal part of the neural tube.

[PMID: 19931641]
Neural crest cells are the primary innovation that led to evolution of the vertebrates, and transcription factors of the SoxE family (Sox8, Sox9 and Sox10) are among the central players regulating the development of these cells. In all vertebrates examined to date, one or more SoxE proteins are required for the formation of neural crest cells, the maintenance of their multipotency, and their survival. Later, SoxE proteins drive the formation of multiple neural crest derivatives including chondrocytes, melanocytes, and cells of the peripheral nervous system, particularly Schwann cells/peripheral glia. Given their multiple diverse roles in the development of the neural crest, it is important to understand how the activity of SoxE factors is controlled such that they direct the correct developmental outcome. While combinatorial control with other regulatory factors is clearly one mechanism for generating such functional versatility, modulation of SoxE activity, both by SoxD family factors and by post-translational modification, also appears to be important. Elucidating the mechanisms that control SoxE function is essential to understand the evolutionary origin of the vertebrates, as well as a host of SoxE-linked syndromes and diseases, and may prove crucial for developing stem cell based therapies that target SoxE-regulated cell types.

[PMID: 20683859]
The dorsal neural tube first generates neural crest cells that exit the neural primordium following an epithelial-to-mesenchymal conversion to become sympathetic ganglia, Schwann cells, dorsal root sensory ganglia, and melanocytes of the skin. Following the end of crest emigration, the dorsal midline of the neural tube becomes the roof plate, a signaling center for the organization of dorsal neuronal cell types. Recent lineage analysis performed before the onset of crest delamination revealed that the dorsal tube is a highly dynamic region sequentially traversed by fate-restricted crest progenitors. Furthermore, prospective roof plate cells were shown to originate ventral to presumptive crest and to progressively relocate dorsalward to occupy their definitive midline position following crest delamination. These data raise important questions regarding the mechanisms of cell emigration in relation to fate acquisition, and suggest the possibility that spatial and/or temporal information in the dorsal neural tube determines initial segregation of neural crest cells into their derivatives. In addition, they emphasize the need to address what controls the end of neural crest production and consequent roof plate formation, a fundamental issue for understanding the separation between central and peripheral lineages during development of the nervous system.

[PMID: 18636017]
S100 protein is a sensitive marker for melanomas and peripheral nerve sheath tumors. It is, however, expressed by other mesenchymal and epithelial tumors. Despite its low specificity, S100 protein is valuable for the diagnosis of desmoplastic melanomas and peripheral nerve sheath tumors, for which no specific marker is available. Sox10 is a neural crest transcription factor crucial for specification, maturation, and maintenance of Schwann cells and melanocytes. Anti-Sox10 antibody was applied to a variety of neural crest-derived tumors, mesenchymal and epithelial neoplasms, and normal tissues. Sox10 nuclear expression was found in 76 of 78 melanomas (97%) and 38 of 77 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (49%) whereas S100 protein was expressed in 71 melanomas (91%) and 23 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (30%). Sox10 was diffusely expressed in schwannomas and neurofibromas. Sox10 reaction was seen only in sustentacular cells of pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas, and occasionally carcinoid tumors from various organs, but it was not seen in the tumor cells. In normal tissues, Sox10 was expressed in Schwann cells, melanocytes, and myoepithelial cells of salivary, bronchial, and mammary glands. Sox10 reaction was not identified in any other mesenchymal and epithelial tumors except for myoepitheliomas and diffuse astrocytomas. Sox10 was expressed by metastatic melanomas and nodal capsular nevus in sentinel lymph nodes, but not by other lymph node components such as dendritic cells. Our results indicate that Sox10 will serve as a more sensitive and specific marker for the diagnosis of melanocytic and schwannian tumors than S100 protein.

[PMID: 1504451]
The presence of melanin granules in Schwann cells of unmyelinated nerve fibres in the normal skin of a black woman is demonstrated by electron microscopy. Pathological conditions associated with the differentiation ability of Schwann cells for melanogenic are reviewed. This capacity may be due to the common origin of Schwann cells and melanocytes in the neural crest.

[PMID: 6517351]
Neural tubes containing premigratory neural crest cells from head and trunk levels as well as somites containing neural crest cells that have migrated away from the neural crest were grafted orthotopically and heterotopically from quail embryos to chicken embryos. Schwann cells and melanocytes of donor origin developed after all grafting procedures. Cartilage developed only from neural crest cells of head levels. No skeletal muscle was ever observed to develop from the neural crest. The development of these different cell types from heterotopically grafted premigratory neural crest cells indicates that the neural crest is not a population of pluripotent undeterminated cells, but that at least some determinated cells are present within it before the onset of emigration of neural crest cells from the neural crest. Different neural-crest-derived cell populations exhibit different migratory behaviour: After heterotopically grafting quail neural crest cells to the wing buds of chicken embryos, Schwann cells and non-epidermal melanocytes were found to have migrated proximally and distally away from the grafts. Epidermal melanocytes of donor origin were found to have migrated in a distal direction essentially.

[PMID: 3085152]
After heterotopically grafting premigratory neural crest cells from quail embryos to the wing buds of chicken embryos, Schwann cells, non-epidermal melanocytes and epidermal melanocytes develop in the wings of the host embryos. This indicates that these neural crest derived cell populations are determined before the onset of emigration of neural crest cells from the crest. Epidermal melanocytes of donor origin are found essentially distally from the grafts, whereas non-epidermal melanocytes and Schwann cells are found proximally and distally therefrom. If the apical ectodermal ridge is removed from wing buds that have received a graft of neural crest cells, the directionality of the migration of epidermal melanocytes is lost. This indicates that the apical ectodermal ridge might account for the directional movement of epidermal melanoblasts. This situation is compared to myoblasts that behave in a similar way within the avian embryonic wing bud.

[PMID: 22170630]
During the process of development, neural crest cells migrate out from their niche between the newly formed ectoderm and the neural tube. Thereafter, they give rise not only to ectodermal cell types, but also to mesodermal cell types. Cell types with neural crest ancestry consequently comprise a number of specialized varieties, such as ectodermal neurons, melanocytes and Schwann cells, as well as mesodermal osteoblasts, adipocytes and smooth muscle cells. Numerous recent studies suggest that stem cells with a neural crest origin persist into adulthood, especially within the mammalian craniofacial compartment. This review discusses the sources of adult neural crest-derived stem cells (NCSCs) derived from the cranium, as well as their differentiation potential and expression of key stem cell markers. Furthermore, the expression of marker genes associated with embryonic stem cells and the issue of multi- versus pluripotency of adult NCSCs is reviewed. Stringent tests are proposed, which, if performed, are anticipated to clarify the issue of adult NCSC potency. Finally, current pre-clinical and clinical data are discussed in light of the clinical impact of adult NCSCs.

[PMID: 1967835]
In the vertebrate embryo, Schwann cells lining the peripheral nerves originate from the neural crest (NC), a structure that also gives rise to ganglion satellite cells, most of the neurons of the peripheral nervous system, melanocytes, and part of the cranial mesenchyme. We have studied the emergence of the Schwann cell lineage in vitro in clonal cultures of quail mesencephalic NC cells by using the Schwann cell myelin protein antigen as an early and specific marker for myelinating and nonmyelinating cells. After 13-16 days in culture, numerous clones contained Schwann cell myelin protein-positive cells, sometimes isolated and sometimes associated with other NC-derived cell types. Detailed phenotypic analysis of the clones allowed us to infer the presence of differently committed Schwann-cell ancestors in the NC during the migration stage. In particular, we found evidence for the existence of a bipotent precursor of Schwann cells and nonneuronal satellite cells; a common precursor of neurons, satellite cells, and Schwann cells; and a pluripotent precursor of Schwann cells, satellite cells, neurons, and melanocytes. These founder cell types coexist in the NC with a committed Schwann cell progenitor of high-proliferative potential that differentiates in vitro in the absence of other peripheral cells and axons.

[PMID: 9247201]
The peptide endothelin 3 (EDN3) is essential for normal neural crest development in vivo, and is a potent mitogen for quail truncal crest cells in vitro. It is not known which subpopulations of crest cells are targets for this response, although it has been suggested that EDN3 is selective for melanoblasts. In the absence of cell markers for different precursor types in the quail crest, we have characterised EDN3-responsive cell types using in vitro colony assay and clonal analysis. Colonies were analysed for the presence of Schwann cells, melanocytes, adrenergic cells or sensory-like cells. We provide for the first time a description of the temporal pattern of lineage segregation in neural crest cultures. In the absence of exogenous EDN3, crest cells proliferate and then differentiate. Colony assay indicates that in these differentiated cultures few undifferentiated precursors remain and there is a low replating efficiency. By contrast, in the presence of 100 ng/ml EDN3 differentiation is inhibited and most of the cells maintain the ability to give rise to mixed colonies and clones containing neural crest derivatives. A high replating efficiency is maintained. In secondary culture there was a progressive decline in the number of cell types per colony in control medium. This loss of developmental potential was not seen when exogenous EDN3 was present. Cell type analysis suggests two novel cellular targets for EDN3 under these conditions. Contrary to expectations, one is a multipotent precursor whose descendants include melanocytes, adrenergic cells and sensory-like cells; the other can give rise to melanocytes and Schwann cells. Our data do not support previous claims that the action of EDN3 in neural crest culture is selective for cells in the melanocyte lineage.

[PMID: 3425403]
Human hand anlagen of different developmental stages are studied light and scanning electron microscopically. The findings are compared with experimental and ultrastructural results obtained from avian limb anlagen. Shaping, cell differentiation and the spatial arrangement of different cells are found to be the basic processes of hand development. The shaping of the arm and hand seems to anticipate future grasping movements. Factors controlling this developmental process are on the one hand the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) that maintains in the underlying mesoderm a high level of mitotic activity, and on the other hand a species-specific pattern of cell death in different zones of arm and hand. Interdigital cell death, microfilament bundles included in the basal compartment of AER cells, and local anchorings of the AER ectoderm by collagen fibrils are involved in finger separation. The flexion creases are genetically fixed and their development cannot be explained by mechanical factors. It is found that the early hand anlage is already composed of relatively autonomous founder cells committed to different lineages. This is true for the muscle precursor cells which originate from the brachial somites. These migrating somite cells are determined to belong to the myogenic lineage. However, their distribution, mitotic activity and later arrangement in single muscles are controlled by factors localized within the hand itself. Tendons develop autonomously from somatopleural cells. Other already committed cells are the angioblasts forming the endothelial lining of the blood vessels, the neural crest cells differentiating into melanocytes and Schwann cells, and the blood-derived cells like chrondro- or osteoclasts. The differentiation of somatopleural cells into cartilage, connective tissue or smooth muscle depends on their position within the hand anlage. Possible mechanisms leading to the specific pattern are discussed.

[PMID: 14576682]
Blue nevi (BN) and neurocristic hamartomas (NCH) are pigmented lesions that originate from the aberrant development of cells derived from the neural crest. BN are composed of dermal melanocytes, whereas NCH have a broader histology and show Schwann cell differentiation as well. In addition, BN and NCH might differ in their potential to develop into a malignancy. We describe a patient with a lesion showing features of both a plaque-type BN and NCH.

[PMID: 25752517]
The neural crest is a transient migratory multipotent cell population that originates from the neural plate border and is formed at the end of gastrulation and during neurulation in vertebrate embryos. These cells give rise to many different cell types of the body such as chondrocytes, smooth muscle cells, endocrine cells, melanocytes, and cells of the peripheral nervous system including different subtypes of neurons and peripheral glia. Acquisition of lineage-specific markers occurs before or during migration and/or at final destination. What are the mechanisms that direct specification of neural crest cells into a specific lineage and how do neural crest cells decide on a specific migration route? Those are fascinating and complex questions that have existed for decades and are still in the research focus of developmental biologists. This review discusses transcriptional events and regulations occurring in neural crest cells and derived lineages, which control specification of peripheral glia, namely Schwann cell precursors that interact with peripheral axons and further differentiate into myelinating or nonmyelinating Schwann cells, satellite cells that remain tightly associated with neuronal cell bodies in sensory and autonomous ganglia, and olfactory ensheathing cells that wrap olfactory axons, both at the periphery in the olfactory mucosa and in the central nervous system in the olfactory bulb. Markers of the different peripheral glia lineages including intermediate multipotent cells such as boundary cap cells, as well as the functions of these specific markers, are also reviewed. Enteric ganglia, another type of peripheral glia, will not be discussed in this review. GLIA 2015;63:1883-1896.

[PMID: 2685414]
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed on 64 nevocellular nevi (12 compound nevi and 52 intradermal nevi). S-100 protein and its alpha- and beta-subunits were almost always demonstrated in type A, B and C cells, and the staining intensity tended to increase in the type C cells. Neuron-specific enolase was detected in each type of cell; however, the population of positive cells was smaller among type C cells. Beta 2-microglobulin was occasionally demonstrated, but only in type A cells. Vimentin was frequently revealed in every type of cell. Neither myelin basic protein nor glial fibrillary acidic protein was observed in any type of cell. In contrast, normal epidermal melanocytes were positive for vimentin, but negative for S-100 protein and its subunits and neuron-specific enolase. Schwann cells were positive for S-100 protein and its beta-subunit, but negative for the alpha-subunit. Thus, the nevus cells shared a common nature with epidermal melanocytes and Schwann cells which originate from the neural crest; however, the former cells were somewhat different from the latter two kinds and from benign and malignant tumors derived from these cells in the expression of these antigenic substances. Such differences in the expression of antigenic substances may be due to dysontogenic manifestations in nevus cells.

[PMID: 17631447]
In the vertebrate embryo, multiple cell types originate from a common structure, the neural crest (NC), which forms at the dorsal tips of the neural epithelium. The NC gives rise to migratory cells that colonise a wide range of embryonic tissues and later differentiate into neurones and glial cells of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), pigment cells (melanocytes) in the skin and endocrine cells in the adrenal and thyroid glands. In the head and the neck, the NC also yields mesenchymal cells that form craniofacial cartilages, bones, dermis, adipose tissue, and vascular smooth muscle cells. The NC is therefore a model system to study cell diversification during embryogenesis and phenotype maintenance in the adult. By analysing the developmental potentials of quail NC cells in clonal cultures, we have shown that the migratory NC is a collection of heterogeneous progenitors, including various types of intermediate precursors and highly multipotent cells, some of which being endowed of self-renewal capacity. We also have identified common progenitors for mesenchymal derivatives and neural/melanocytic cells in the cephalic NC. These results are consistent with a hierarchical model of lineage segregation wherein environmental cytokines control the fate of progenitors and stem cells. One of these cytokines, the endothelin3 peptide, promotes the survival, proliferation, and self-renewal capacity of common progenitors for glial cells and melanocytes. At post-migratory stages, when they have already differentiated, NC-derived cells exhibit phenotypic plasticity. Epidermal pigment cells and Schwann cells from peripheral nerves in single-cell culture are able to reverse into multipotent NC-like progenitors endowed with self-renewal. Therefore, stem cell properties are expressed by a variety of NC progenitors and can be re-acquired by differentiated cells of NC origin, suggesting potential function for repair.

[PMID: 23815504]
Melanocytes are pigment-producing cells that reside in the skin, eyes, ears, heart, and central nervous system meninges of mammals. Schwann cells are glial cells, which closely associate with peripheral nerves, myelinating, and sheathing them. Melanocytes and Schwann cells both arise from the neural crest during development, and some melanocytes arise directly from Schwann cell precursors lining developing spinal nerves. In this review, we explore the connections between melanocytes and Schwann cells in development and transformation.