[PMID: 22874562]
The multiunit Cullin (CUL)-RING E3 ligase (CRL) controls diverse biological processes by targeting a mass of substrates for ubiquitination and degradation, whereas its dysfunction causes carcinogenesis. Post-translational neddylation of CUL, a process triggered by the NEDD8-activating enzyme E1 subunit 1 (NAE1), is required for CRL activation. Recently, MLN4924 was discovered via a high-throughput screen as a specific NAE1 inhibitor and first-in-class anticancer drug. By blocking CUL neddylation, MLN4924 inactivates CRL and causes the accumulation of CRL substrates that trigger cell cycle arrest, senescence and/or apoptosis to suppress the growth of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Recently, we found that MLN4924 also triggers protective autophagy in response to CRL inactivation. MLN4924-induced autophagy is attributed partially to the inhibition of mechanistic target of rapamycin (also known as mammalian target of rapamycin, MTOR) activity by the accumulation of the MTOR inhibitory protein DEPTOR, as well as reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced stress. Moreover, the blockage of autophagy response enhances apoptosis in MLN4924-treated cells. Together, our findings not only reveal autophagy as a novel cellular response to CRL inactivation by MLN4924, but also provide a piece of proof-of-concept evidence for the combination of MLN4924 with autophagy inhibitors to enhance therapeutic efficacy.

[PMID: 19360080]
The clinical development of an inhibitor of cellular proteasome function suggests that compounds targeting other components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system might prove useful for the treatment of human malignancies. NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) is an essential component of the NEDD8 conjugation pathway that controls the activity of the cullin-RING subtype of ubiquitin ligases, thereby regulating the turnover of a subset of proteins upstream of the proteasome. Substrates of cullin-RING ligases have important roles in cellular processes associated with cancer cell growth and survival pathways. Here we describe MLN4924, a potent and selective inhibitor of NAE. MLN4924 disrupts cullin-RING ligase-mediated protein turnover leading to apoptotic death in human tumour cells by a new mechanism of action, the deregulation of S-phase DNA synthesis. MLN4924 suppressed the growth of human tumour xenografts in mice at compound exposures that were well tolerated. Our data suggest that NAE inhibitors may hold promise for the treatment of cancer.

[PMID: 24672057]
MLN4924 is an investigational small-molecule inhibitor of the Nedd8-activating enzyme currently in phase I clinical trials. MLN4924 induces DNA damage via rereplication in most cell lines. This distinct mechanism of DNA damage may affect its ability to combine with standard-of-care agents and may affect the clinical development of MLN4924. As such, we studied its interaction with other DNA-damaging agents. Mitomycin C, cisplatin, cytarabine, UV radiation, SN-38, and gemcitabine demonstrated synergy in combination with MLN4924 in vitro. The combination of mitomycin C and MLN4924 was shown to be synergistic in a mouse xenograft model. Importantly, depletion of genes within the ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related (ATR) and BRCA1/BRCA2 pathways, chromatin modification, and transcription-coupled repair reduced the synergy between mitomycin C and MLN4924. In addition, comet assay demonstrated increased DNA strand breaks with the combination of MLN4924 and mitomycin C. Our data suggest that mitomycin C causes stalled replication forks, which when combined with rereplication induced by MLN4924 results in frequent replication fork collisions, leading to cell death. This study provides a straightforward approach to understand the mechanism of synergy, which may provide useful information for the clinical development of these combinations.

[PMID: 20142034]
Brownell et al. (2010) elucidate the mechanism of action of MLN4924, a NEDD8-activating enzyme inhibitor. MLN4924 requires the activity of the enzyme to generate a NEDD8-adenylate analog that potently and selectively shuts down this posttranslational modification system.

[PMID: 21873567]
Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) are responsible for the ubiquitination of many cellular proteins, thereby targeting them for proteasomal degradation. In most cases the substrates of the CRLs have not been identified, although many of those that are known have cancer relevance. MLN4924, an investigational small molecule that is a potent and selective inhibitor of the Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE), is currently being explored in Phase I clinical trials. Inhibition of Nedd8-activating enzyme by MLN4924 prevents the conjugation of cullin proteins with NEDD8, resulting in inactivation of the entire family of CRLs. We have performed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture analysis of A375 melanoma cells treated with MLN4924 to identify new CRL substrates, confidently identifying and quantitating 5122-6012 proteins per time point. Proteins such as MLX, EID1, KLF5, ORC6L, MAGEA6, MORF4L2, MRFAP1, MORF4L1, and TAX1BP1 are rapidly stabilized by MLN4924, suggesting that they are novel CRL substrates. Proteins up-regulated at later times were also identified and siRNA against their corresponding genes were used to evaluate their influence on MLN4924-induced cell death. Thirty-eight proteins were identified as being particularly important for the cytotoxicity of MLN4924. Strikingly, these proteins had roles in cell cycle, DNA damage repair, and ubiquitin transfer. Therefore, the combination of RNAi with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture provides a paradigm for understanding the mechanism of action of novel agents affecting the ubiquitin proteasome system and a path to identifying mechanistic biomarkers.

[PMID: 21969368]
Ubiquitin-activating enzyme (UAE or E1) activates ubiquitin via an adenylate intermediate and catalyzes its transfer to a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2). MLN4924 is an adenosine sulfamate analogue that was identified as a selective, mechanism-based inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE), another E1 enzyme, by forming a NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct that tightly binds at the active site of NAE, a novel mechanism termed substrate-assisted inhibition (Brownell, J. E., Sintchak, M. D., Gavin, J. M., Liao, H., Bruzzese, F. J., Bump, N. J., Soucy, T. A., Milhollen, M. A., Yang, X., Burkhardt, A. L., Ma, J., Loke, H. K., Lingaraj, T., Wu, D., Hamman, K. B., Spelman, J. J., Cullis, C. A., Langston, S. P., Vyskocil, S., Sells, T. B., Mallender, W. D., Visiers, I., Li, P., Claiborne, C. F., Rolfe, M., Bolen, J. B., and Dick, L. R. (2010) Mol. Cell 37, 102-111). In the present study, substrate-assisted inhibition of human UAE (Ube1) by another adenosine sulfamate analogue, 5'-O-sulfamoyl-N(6)-[(1S)-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-yl]-adenosine (Compound I), a nonselective E1 inhibitor, was characterized. Compound I inhibited UAE-dependent ATP-PP(i) exchange activity, caused loss of UAE thioester, and inhibited E1-E2 transthiolation in a dose-dependent manner. Mechanistic studies on Compound I and its purified ubiquitin adduct demonstrate that the proposed substrate-assisted inhibition via covalent adduct formation is entirely consistent with the three-step ubiquitin activation process and that the adduct is formed via nucleophilic attack of UAE thioester by the sulfamate group of Compound I after completion of step 2. Kinetic and affinity analysis of Compound I, MLN4924, and their purified ubiquitin adducts suggest that both the rate of adduct formation and the affinity between the adduct and E1 contribute to the overall potency. Because all E1s are thought to use a similar mechanism to activate their cognate ubiquitin-like proteins, the substrate-assisted inhibition by adenosine sulfamate analogues represents a promising strategy to develop potent and selective E1 inhibitors that can modulate diverse biological pathways.

[PMID: 24213570]
SAG (Sensitive to Apoptosis Gene), also known as RBX2 or ROC2, is a RING protein required for the activity of Cullin-RING ligase (CRL). Our recent study showed that Sag total knockout caused embryonic lethality at E11.5-12.5 days with associated defects in vasculogenesis. Whether Sag is required for de novo vasculogenesis in embryos and angiogenesis in tumors is totally unknown. Here, we report that Sag endothelial deletion also causes embryonic lethality at E15.5 with poor vasculogenesis. Sag deletion in primary endothelial cells (ECs) or knockdown in MS-1 ECs inhibits migration, proliferation and tube formation, with p27 accumulation being responsible for the suppression of migration and proliferation. Furthermore, Sag deletion significantly inhibits angiogenesis in an in vivo Matrigel plug assay, and tumor angiogenesis and tumorigenesis in a B16F10 melanoma model. Finally, MLN4924, an investigational small molecule inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) that inhibits CRL, suppresses in vitro migration, proliferation and tube formation, as well as in vivo angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. Taken together, our study, using both genetic and pharmaceutical approaches, demonstrates that Sag is essential for embryonic vasculogenesis and tumor angiogenesis, and provides the proof-of-concept evidence that targeting Sag E3 ubiquitin ligase may have clinical value for anti-angiogenesis therapy of human cancer.

[PMID: 22951983]
MLN4924, a newly discovered small molecule inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE), inactivates Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin Ligases (CRLs) by blocking cullin neddylation. As a result, MLN4924 causes accumulation of several key substrates of CRLs and effectively suppresses tumor cell growth by inducing apoptosis and senescence. However, the role of MLN4924 in induction of autophagy and its biological significance are totally unknown. Here we showed that MLN4924 effectively induces autophagy in both time- and dose-dependent manners in multiple human cancer lines, indicating a general phenomenon. Mechanistically, by inactivating CRLs, MLN4924 causes accumulation of DEPTOR and HIF1α. The siRNA knockdown and gene KO studies showed that DEPTOR and the HIF1-REDD1-TSC1 axis are responsible for MLN4924-induced autophagy via inhibiting mTORC1. Biologically, autophagy is a survival signal to tumor cells, and blockage of autophagy via siRNA knockdown, gene KO and small molecule inhibitor remarkably enhanced MLN4924-induced apoptosis. Our study reveals an uncharacterized mechanism of MLN4924 action and provides the proof-of-concept evidence for strategic drug combination of MLN4924 with an autophagy inhibitor for maximal killing of tumor cells via enhancing apoptosis.

[PMID: 25615422]
MLN4924, a small molecule inhibitor of NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE), has been reported to elicit an anti-tumor effect on various malignancies. In this study, we investigated the anti-tumor effect of MLN4924 in human urothelial carcinoma (UC) in vitro and in vivo by using three human UC cell lines of various grading (T24, NTUB1 and RT4). The impact of MLN4924 on UC cells was determined by measuring viability (MTT), proliferation (BrdU incorporation), cell cycle progression (flow cytometry with propidium iodide staining) and apoptosis (flow cytometry with annexin V-FITC labeling). The cell cycle regulatory molecules, apoptosis-related molecules, and cell stress-related proteins were examined by Western blotting. The influence of tumor cell migration and invasion was analyzed by Transwell and wound healing assays. We also evaluated the effects of MLN4924 on tumor growth by a SCID xenograft mouse model. The data show that MLN4924 induced dose-dependent cytotoxicity, anti-proliferation, anti-migration, anti-invasion and apoptosis in human UC cells, accompanied by activations of Bad, phospho-histone H2A.X, caspase-3, 7 and PARP, decreased level of phospho-Bcl2, and caused cell cycle retardation at the G2M phase. Moreover, MLN4924 activated endoplasmic reticulum stress-related molecules (caspase-4, phospho-eIF2α, ATF-4 and CHOP) and other stress responses (JNK and c-Jun activations). Finally, we confirmed MLN4924 inhibited tumor growth in a UC xenograft mouse model with minimal general toxicity. We concluded that MLN4924 induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, as well as activation of cell stress responses in human UC. These findings imply MLN4924 provides a novel strategy for the treatment of UC.

[PMID: 24634471]
Stromal-mediated signaling enhances NF-κB pathway activity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) B cells, leading to cell survival and chemoresistance. Ubiquitination of IκBα may partially account for constitutive activation of NF-κB. MLN4924 is an investigational agent that inhibits the Nedd8-activating enzyme, thereby neutralizing Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligases and preventing degradation of their substrates. We conducted a preclinical assessment of MLN4924 in CLL. Primary CLL cells were cocultured in vitro with CD40L-expressing stroma to mimic the prosurvival conditions present in lymphoid tissue. The effect of MLN4924 on CLL cell apoptosis, NF-κB pathway activity, Bcl-2 family members, and cell cycle was assessed by flow cytometry, Western blotting, PCR, and immunocytochemistry. CD40L-expressing stroma protected CLL cells from spontaneous apoptosis and induced resistance to multiple drugs, accompanied by NF-κB activation and Bim repression. Treatment with MLN4924 induced CLL cell apoptosis and circumvented stroma-mediated resistance. This was accompanied by accumulation of phospho-IκBα, decreased nuclear translocation of p65 and p52 leading to inhibition of both the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways, and reduced transcription of their target genes, notably chemokines. MLN4924 promoted induction of Bim and Noxa in the CLL cells leading to rebalancing of Bcl-2 family members toward the proapoptotic BH3-only proteins. siRNA-mediated knockdown of Bim or Noxa decreased sensitivity to MLN4924. MLN4924 enhanced the antitumor activity of the inhibitors of B-cell receptor (BCR)-associated kinases. MLN4924 disrupts NF-κB activation and induces Bim expression in CLL cells, thereby preventing stroma-mediated resistance. Our data provide rationale for further evaluation of MLN4924 in CLL.

[PMID: 21914854]
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a tumor-selective cytokine with potential anticancer activity and is currently under clinical testing. Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), like other cancer types, exhibits varied sensitivity to TRAIL. MLN4924 is a newly developed investigational small molecule inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme with potent anticancer activity. This study reveals a novel function of MLN4924 in synergizing with TRAIL to induce apoptosis in HNSCC cells. MLN4924 alone effectively inhibited the growth of HNSCC cells and induced apoptosis. When combined with TRAIL, synergistic effects on decreasing the survival and inducing apoptosis of HNSCC cells occurred. MLN4924 decreased c-FLIP levels without modulating death receptor 4 and death receptor 5 expression. Enforced expression of c-FLIP substantially attenuated MLN4924/TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Thus c-FLIP reduction plays an important role in mediating MLN4924/TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Moreover, MLN4924 decreased c-FLIP stability, increased c-FLIP ubiquitination, and facilitated c-FLIP degradation, suggesting that MLN4924 decreases c-FLIP levels through promoting its degradation. MLN4924 activated c-jun-NH(2)-kinase (JNK) signaling, evidenced by increased levels of phospho-c-Jun in MLN4924-treated cells. Chemical inhibition of JNK activation not only prevented MLN4924-induced c-FLIP reduction, but also inhibited MLN4924/TRAIL-induced apoptosis, suggesting that JNK activation mediates c-FLIP downregulation and subsequent enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by MLN4924. Because knockdown of NEDD8 failed to activate JNK signaling and downregulate c-FLIP, it is likely that MLN4924 reduces c-FLIP levels and enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis independent of NEDD8 inhibition.

[PMID: 24525735]
Inhibition of protein neddylation, particularly cullin neddylation, has emerged as a promising anticancer strategy, as evidenced by the antitumor activity in preclinical studies of the Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor MLN4924. This small molecule can block the protein neddylation pathway and is now in clinical trials. We and others have previously shown that the antitumor activity of MLN4924 is mediated by its ability to induce apoptosis, autophagy and senescence in a cell context-dependent manner. However, whether MLN4924 has any effect on tumor angiogenesis remains unexplored. Here we report that MLN4924 inhibits angiogenesis in various in vitro and in vivo models, leading to the suppression of tumor growth and metastasis in highly malignant pancreatic cancer, indicating that blockage of angiogenesis is yet another mechanism contributing to its antitumor activity. At the molecular level, MLN4924 inhibits Cullin-RING E3 ligases (CRLs) by cullin deneddylation, causing accumulation of RhoA at an early stage to impair angiogenic activity of vascular endothelial cells and subsequently DNA damage response, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis due to accumulation of other tumor-suppressive substrates of CRLs. Furthermore, we showed that inactivation of CRLs, via small interfering RNA (siRNA) silencing of its essential subunit ROC1/RBX1, recapitulates the antiangiogenic effect of MLN4924. Taken together, our study demonstrates a previously unrecognized role of neddylation in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis using both pharmaceutical and genetic approaches, and provides proof of concept evidence for future development of neddylation inhibitors (such as MLN4924) as a novel class of antiangiogenic agents.

[PMID: 21677879]
Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL), with its founding member of SKP1-Cullins-F-box proteins (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase, is the largest family of E3 ligases, which requires cullin neddylation for its activation. Recently, an inhibitor of NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE), MLN4924, was reported to block cullin neddylation and inactivate CRL/SCF E3, resulting in apoptosis induction and tumor suppression both in vitro and in vivo. We report here that apoptosis is not the sole mechanism by which MLN4924 suppresses tumor cell growth because apoptosis is moderately induced by the drug in some cancer cell lines and drug-induced growth suppression is only partially blocked by a pan-caspase inhibitor, z-VAD. MLN4924 treatment induces the characteristics of senescence phenotypes as evidenced by enlarged and flattened cellular morphology and positive staining of senescence-associated β-Gal. MLN4924-induced senescence is associated with cellular response to DNA damage, triggered by accumulation of DNA-licensing proteins CDT1 and ORC1, as a result of inactivation of CRL/SCF E3s. The senescence occurs in the manner independent of pRB/p16 and p53, but dependent on p21, a known substrate of CRL/SCF E3s and a mediator of senescence, which accumulates on CRL/SCF inactivation by MLN4924. Furthermore, MLN4924-induced senescence is irreversible and coupled with persistent accumulation of p21 and sustained activation of DNA damage response. Our study reveals a novel mechanism of MLN4924 action and showed that MLN4924 could be further developed as an effective anticancer agent by inducing apoptosis and irreversible senescence.

[PMID: 21994410]
Cerenkov luminescence imaging (CLI) is an emerging imaging technique that combines aspects of both optical and nuclear imaging fields. The ability to fully evaluate the correlation and sensitivity of CLI to PET is critical to progress this technique further for use in high-throughput screening of pharmaceutical compounds. To achieve this milestone, it must first be established that CLI data correlate to PET data in an in vivo preclinical antitumor study. We used MLN4924, a phase 2 oncology therapeutic, which targets and inhibits the NEDD8-activating enzyme pathway involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We compared the efficacious effects of MLN4924 using PET and Cerenkov luminescence image values in the same animals. Imaging of (18)F-FDG uptake was performed at 5 time points after drug treatment in the subcutaneously implanted diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tumor line OCI-Ly10. Data were acquired with both modalities on the same day, with a 15-min delay between CLI and PET. PET data analysis was performed using percentage injected dose per cubic centimeter of tissue (%ID/cm(3)), average standardized uptake values, and total glycolytic volume. CLI measurements were radiance, radiance per injected dose (radiance/ID), and total radiant volume. A strong correlation was found between PET total glycolytic volume and CLI total radiant volume (r(2) = 0.99) and various PET and CLI analysis methods, with strong correlations found between PET %ID/cm(3) and CLI radiance (r(2) = 0.83) and CLI radiance/ID (r(2) = 0.82). MLN4924 demonstrated a significant reduction in tumor volume after treatment (volume ratio of treated vs. control, 0.114 at day 29). The PET and CLI data presented confirm the correlation and dynamic sensitivity of this new imaging modality. CLI provides a preclinical alternative to expensive PET instrumentation. Future high-throughput studies should provide for quicker turnaround and higher cost-to-return benefits in the drug discovery process.

[PMID: 22439935]
MLN4924 is an investigational small-molecule inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) in clinical trials for the treatment of cancer. MLN4924 is a mechanism-based inhibitor, with enzyme inhibition occurring through the formation of a tight-binding NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct. In cell and xenograft models of cancer, we identified treatment-emergent heterozygous mutations in the adenosine triphosphate binding pocket and NEDD8-binding cleft of NAEβ as the primary mechanism of resistance to MLN4924. Biochemical analyses of NAEβ mutants revealed slower rates of adduct formation and reduced adduct affinity for the mutant enzymes. A compound with tighter binding properties was able to potently inhibit mutant enzymes in cells. These data provide rationales for patient selection and the development of next-generation NAE inhibitors designed to overcome treatment-emergent NAEβ mutations.

[PMID: 22012946]
MLN4924 is an investigational first-in-class small molecule inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE). NAE is an essential component of the NEDD8 conjugation pathway, controlling the activity of a subset of ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) E3 ligases, multiprotein complexes that transfer ubiquitin molecules to substrate proteins. MLN4924 was tested against the PPTP in vitro panel using 96-hour exposure time at concentrations ranging from 1.0 nM to 10 µM. It was tested in vivo at a dose of 100 mg/kg [66 mg/kg for the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) xenografts] administered orally twice daily × 5 days. Treatment duration was 3 weeks. The median relative IC(50) for MLN4924 against the PPTP cell lines was 143 nM, (range: 15-678 nM) with that for the Ewing panel being significantly lower (31 nM). MLN4924 induced significant differences in EFS distribution compared to control in 20 of 34 (59%) evaluable solid tumor xenografts. MLN4924 induced intermediate activity (EFS T/C values >2) in 9 of the 33 evaluable xenografts (27%), including 4 of 4 glioblastoma xenografts, 2 of 3 Wilm's tumor xenografts, 2 of 5 rhabdomyosarcoma xenografts, and 1 of 4 neuroblastoma xenografts. For the ALL panel, 5 of 8 evaluable xenografts showed intermediate activity for the EFS T/C measure. MLN4924 did not induce objective responses in the PPTP solid tumor or ALL panels. MLN4924 showed potent activity in vitro and in vivo showed tumor growth inhibitory activity against a subset of the PPTP solid tumor and ALL xenografts.

[PMID: 25388161]
New therapies are urgently needed for patients with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). The novel NEDDylation inhibitor MLN4924 (pevonedistat) has demonstrated significant preclinical antileukemic activity and preliminary efficacy in patients with AML in a phase I trial. On the basis of its antimyeloid and DNA-damaging properties, we investigated the ability of MLN4924 to augment conventional cytarabine (ara-C) therapy. The effects of MLN4924/ara-C on viability, clonogenic survival, apoptosis, DNA damage, and relevant pharmacodynamic targets were determined. The efficacy and pharmacodynamics of MLN4924/ara-C were assessed in an AML xenograft model. Cotreatment of AML cell lines and primary patient specimens with MLN4924 and ara-C led to diminished clonogenic survival, increased apoptosis, and synergistic levels of DNA damage. RNAi demonstrated that stabilization of CDT-1, an event previously shown to mediate the DNA-damaging effects of MLN4924, was not a key regulator of sensitivity to the MLN4924/ara-C combination. Global metabolic profiling revealed that MLN4924 disrupts nucleotide metabolism and depletes intracellular nucleotide pools in AML cells. Subsequent experiments showed that MLN4924 promoted increased incorporation of ara-C into the DNA of AML cells. This effect as well as the therapeutic benefit of the MLN4924/ara-C combination was antagonized by supplementation with the nucleotide building block ribose. Coadministration of MLN4924 and ara-C to mice bearing FLT3-ITD(+) AML xenografts stably inhibited disease progression and increased DNA damage in vivo. Our findings provide strong rationale for clinical investigation of the MLN4924/ara-C combination and establish a new link between therapeutic inhibition of NEDDylation and alterations in nucleotide metabolism. Clin Cancer Res; 21(2); 439-47. ©2014 AACR.

[PMID: 22072567]
Radiotherapy is used in locally advanced pancreatic cancers in which it can improve survival in combination with gemcitabine. However, prognosis is still poor in this setting in which more effective therapies remain needed. MLN4924 is an investigational small molecule currently in phase I clinical trials. MLN4924 inhibits NAE (NEDD8 Activating Enzyme), a pivotal regulator of the E3 ubiquitin ligase SCF (SKP1, Cullins, and F-box protein), that has been implicated recently in DNA damage and repair. In this study, we provide evidence that MLN4924 can be used as an effective radiosensitizer in pancreatic cancer. Specifically, MLN4924 (20-100 nmol/L) effectively inhibited cullin neddylation and sensitized pancreatic cancer cells to ionizing radiation in vitro with a sensitivity enhancement ratio of approximately 1.5. Mechanistically, MLN4924 treatment stimulated an accumulation of several SCF substrates, including CDT1, WEE1, and NOXA, in parallel with an enhancement of radiation-induced DNA damage, aneuploidy, G(2)/M phase cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis. RNAi-mediated knockdown of CDT1 and WEE1 partially abrogated MLN4924-induced aneuploidy, G(2)/M arrest, and radiosensitization, indicating a causal effect. Furthermore, MLN4924 was an effective radiosensitizer in a mouse xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer. Our findings offer proof-of-concept for use of MLN4924 as a novel class of radiosensitizer for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

[PMID: 21417215]
MLN4924 (1), which is in clinical trials as an anticancer agent, was stereoselectively synthesized from d-ribose via a route involving stereoselective reduction, regioselective cleavage of an isopropylidene moiety, and selective displacement of a cyclic sulfate moiety as key steps.

[PMID: 22927439]
Cullin-RING E3 ligases (CRLs) are a class of ubiquitin ligases that control the proteasomal degradation of numerous target proteins, including IκB, and the activity of these CRLs are positively regulated by conjugation of a Nedd8 polypeptide onto Cullin proteins in a process called neddylation. CRL-mediated degradation of IκB, which normally interacts with and retains NF-κB in the cytoplasm, permits nuclear translocation and transactivation of the NF-κB transcription factor. Neddylation occurs through a multistep enzymatic process involving Nedd8 activating enzymes, and recent studies have shown that the pharmacological agent, MLN4924, can potently inhibit Nedd8 activating enzymes, thereby preventing neddylation of Cullin proteins and preventing the degradation of CRL target proteins. In macrophages, regulation of NF-κB signaling functions as a primary pathway by which infectious agents such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) cause the up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines. Here we have analyzed the effects of MLN4924, and compared the effects of MLN4924 with a known anti-inflammatory agent (dexamethasone), on certain proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) and the NF-κB signaling pathway in LPS-stimulated macrophages. We also used siRNA to block neddylation to assess the role of this molecular process during LPS-induced cytokine responsiveness. Our results demonstrate that blocking neddylation, either pharmacologically or using siRNA, abrogates the increase in certain proinflammatory cytokines secreted from macrophages in response to LPS. In addition, we have shown that MLN4924 and dexamethasone inhibit LPS-induced cytokine up-regulation at the transcriptional level, albeit through different molecular mechanisms. Thus, neddylation represents a novel molecular process in macrophages that can be targeted to prevent and/or treat the LPS-induced up-regulation of proinflammatory cytokines and the disease processes associated with their up-regulation.

[PMID: 21159650]
MLN4924 is a first-in-class experimental cancer drug that inhibits the NEDD8-activating enzyme, thereby inhibiting cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases and stabilizing many cullin substrates. The mechanism by which MLN4924 inhibits cancer cell proliferation has not been defined, although it is accompanied by DNA rereplication and attendant DNA damage. Here we show that stabilization of the DNA replication factor Cdt1, a substrate of cullins 1 and 4, is critical for MLN4924 to trigger DNA rereplication and inhibit cell proliferation. Even only 1 hour of exposure to MLN4924, which was sufficient to elevate Cdt1 for 4-5 hours, was found to be sufficient to induce DNA rereplication and to activate apoptosis and senescence pathways. Cells in S phase were most susceptible, suggesting that MLN4924 will be most toxic on highly proliferating cancers. Although MLN4924-induced cell senescence seems to be dependent on induction of p53 and its downstream effector p21(Waf1), we found that p53(-/-) and p21(-/-) cells were even more susceptible than wild-type cells to MLN4924. Our results suggested that apoptosis, not senescence, might be more important for the antiproliferative effect of MLN4924. Furthermore, our findings show that transient exposure to this new investigational drug should be useful for controlling p53-negative cancer cells, which often pose significant clinical challenge.

[PMID: 20129059]
The NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) initiates a protein homeostatic pathway essential for cancer cell growth and survival. MLN4924 is a selective inhibitor of NAE currently in clinical trials for the treatment of cancer. Here, we show that MLN4924 is a mechanism-based inhibitor of NAE and creates a covalent NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct catalyzed by the enzyme. The NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct resembles NEDD8 adenylate, the first intermediate in the NAE reaction cycle, but cannot be further utilized in subsequent intraenzyme reactions. The stability of the NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct within the NAE active site blocks enzyme activity, thereby accounting for the potent inhibition of the NEDD8 pathway by MLN4924. Importantly, we have determined that compounds resembling MLN4924 demonstrate the ability to form analogous adducts with other ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) catalyzed by their cognate-activating enzymes. These findings reveal insights into the mechanism of E1s and suggest a general strategy for selective inhibition of UBL conjugation pathways.

[PMID: 24155378]
MLN4924 is a first-in-class cancer drug that inhibits the Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE). Herein, we report that MLN4924 inhibits Vpx/Vpr-induced SAMHD1 degradation by inhibiting the neddylation of E3 ubiquitin ligase and blocks macaque simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVmac) replication in myeloid cells. SAMHD1 is required for MLN4924-mediated SIVmac inhibition. Our findings indicate the potential efficacy of inhibiting neddylation as an antiretroviral strategy and identify the readily available anticancer drug MLN4924 as a candidate agent for that purpose.

[PMID: 22832224]
Inhibition of NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) has emerged as a highly promising approach to treat cancer through the adenosine sulfamate analog MLN4924. Here, we show that selective pressure results in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells with decreased MLN4924 sensitivity and identify a single-nucleotide transition that changes alanine 171 to threonine (A171T) of the NAE subunit UBA3. This reduces the enzyme's affinity for MLN4924 and ATP while increasing NEDD8 activation at physiological ATP concentrations. Expression of UBA3 A171T is sufficient to decrease MLN4924 sensitivity of naive HCT116 cells, indicating that it is a dominant suppressor of MLN4924-mediated cell death. Our data suggest that the on-target potency of MLN4924 selects for a point mutation in NAE that overcomes the molecule's inhibitory effects, allowing cancer cell survival.

[PMID: 21463634]
Cullin RING ligases (CRLs) constitute the largest family of ubiquitin ligases with diverse cellular functions. Conjugation of the ubiquitin-like molecule Nedd8 to a conserved lysine residue on the cullin scaffold is essential for the activity of CRLs. Using structural studies and in vitro assays, it has been demonstrated that neddylation stimulates CRL activity through conformational rearrangement of the cullin C-terminal winged-helix B domain and Rbx1 RING subdomain from a closed architecture to an open and dynamic structure, thus promoting ubiquitin transfer onto the substrate. Here, we tested whether the proposed mechanism operates in vivo in intact cells and applies to other CRL family members. To inhibit cellular neddylation, we used a cell line with tetracycline-inducible expression of a dominant-negative form of the Nedd8 E2 enzyme or treatment of cells with the Nedd8 E1 inhibitor MLN4924. Using these cellular systems, we show that different mutants of Cul2 and Cul3 and of Rbx1 that confer increased Rbx1 flexibility mimic neddylation and rescue CRL activity in intact cells. Our findings indicate that in vivo neddylation functions by inducing conformational changes in the C-terminal domain of Cul2 and Cul3 that free the RING domain of Rbx1 and bridge the gap for ubiquitin transfer onto the substrate.

[PMID: 20525923]
MLN4924 is a potent and selective small molecule NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor. In most cancer cells tested, inhibition of NAE leads to induction of DNA rereplication, resulting in DNA damage and cell death. However, in preclinical models of activated B cell-like (ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), we show that MLN4924 induces an alternative mechanism of action. Treatment of ABC DLBCL cells with MLN4924 resulted in rapid accumulation of pIkappaBalpha, decrease in nuclear p65 content, reduction of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) transcriptional activity, and G(1) arrest, ultimately resulting in apoptosis induction, events consistent with potent NF-kappaB pathway inhibition. Treatment of germinal-center B cell-like (GCB) DLBCL cells resulted in an increase in cellular Cdt-1 and accumulation of cells in S-phase, consistent with cells undergoing DNA rereplication. In vivo administration of MLN4924 to mice bearing human xenograft tumors of ABC- and GCB-DLBCL blocked NAE pathway biomarkers and resulted in complete tumor growth inhibition. In primary human tumor models of ABC-DLBCL, MLN4924 treatment resulted in NF-kappaB pathway inhibition accompanied by tumor regressions. This work describes a novel mechanism of targeted NF-kappaB pathway modulation in DLBCL and provides strong rationale for clinical development of MLN4924 against NF-kappaB-dependent lymphomas.

[PMID: 23624319]
Cellular effects of a Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor, MLN4924, using the AlphaScreen format were explored. MLN4924 acts as a substrate-assisted inhibitor of NAE by forming a tight binding Nedd8-MLN4924 adduct. The inhibited enzyme can no longer transfer Nedd8 downstream to modify and activate the E3 cullin-RING ligases. This results in the stabilization of proteins regulated by the proteasome, leading to cell death. These studies monitored the endogenous cellular changes to NAE∼Nedd8 thioester, the formation of the Nedd8-MLN4924 adduct, and the reduction in the Cul1-Nedd8. Lysates derived from MLN4924-treated HCT116 cells showed that whereas the β-subunit of NAE remained constant, reductions of both NAE∼Nedd8 thioester and Cul1-Nedd8 levels occurred with a concomitant rise of the adduct. Moreover, the formation of the Nedd8-MLN4924 adduct was approximately stoichiometric with the concentration of NAEβ. Higher density 384-well cell-based assays illustrated the kinetics of enzyme inactivation across a wider range of MLN4924 concentrations, showing a rapid loss of NAE∼Nedd8 thioester and Cul1-Nedd8. The reduction of NAE∼Nedd8 thioester precedes the loss of Cul1-Nedd8 at twice the rate. Finally, these results clearly demonstrate the utility of the homogeneous assay for quantitative assessment of these endogenous cellular components in a 384-well plate in response to inhibition of NAE by MLN4924.

[PMID: 22246439]
The NEDD8-activating enzyme is upstream of the 20S proteasome in the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway and catalyzes the first step in the neddylation pathway. NEDD8 modification of cullins is required for ubiquitination of cullin-ring ligases that regulate degradation of a distinct subset of proteins. The more targeted impact of NEDD8-activating enzyme on protein degradation prompted us to study MLN4924, an investigational NEDD8-activating enzyme inhibitor, in preclinical multiple myeloma models. In vitro treatment with MLN4924 led to dose-dependent decrease of viability (EC(50) = 25-150 nmol/L) in a panel of human multiple myeloma cell lines. MLN4924 was similarly active against a bortezomib-resistant ANBL-6 subline and its bortezomib-sensitive parental cells. MLN4924 had submicromolar activity (EC(50) values <500 nmol/L) against primary CD138(+) multiple myeloma patient cells and exhibited at least additive effect when combined with dexamethasone, doxorubicin, and bortezomib against MM.1S cells. The bortezomib-induced compensatory upregulation of transcripts for ubiquitin/proteasome was not observed with MLN4924 treatment, suggesting distinct functional roles of NEDD8-activating enzyme versus 20S proteasome. MLN4924 was well tolerated at doses up to 60 mg/kg 2× daily and significantly reduced tumor burden in both a subcutaneous and an orthotopic mouse model of multiple myeloma. These studies provide the framework for the clinical investigation of MLN4924 in multiple myeloma.

[PMID: 23527154]
Multiple myeloma (MM) displays an NFκB activity-related gene expression signature and about 20% of primary MM samples harbor genetic alterations conducive to intrinsic NFκB signaling activation. The relevance of blocking the classical versus the alternative NFκB signaling pathway and the molecular execution mechanisms involved, however, are still poorly understood. Here, we comparatively tested NFκB activity abrogation through TPCA-1 (an IKK2 inhibitor), BAY 11-7082 (an IKK inhibitor poorly selective for IKK1 and IKK2), and MLN4924 (an NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE)-inhibitor), and analyzed their anti-MM activity. Whereas TPCA-1 interfered selectively with activation of the classical NFκB pathway, the other two compounds inhibited classical and alternative NFκB signaling without significant discrimination. Noteworthy, whereas TPCA-1 and MLN4924 elicited rather mild anti-MM effects with slight to moderate cell death induction after 1 day BAY 11-7082 was uniformly highly toxic to MM cell lines and primary MM cells. Treatment with BAY 11-7082 induced rapid cell swelling and its initial effects were blocked by necrostatin-1 or the ROS scavenger BHA, but a lasting protective effect was not achieved even with additional blockade of caspases. Because MLN4924 inhibits the alternative NFκB pathway downstream of IKK1 at the level of p100 processing, the quite discordant effects between MLN4924 and BAY 11-7082 must thus be due to blockade of IKK1-mediated NFκB-independent necrosis-inhibitory functions or represent an off-target effect of BAY 11-7082. In accordance with the latter, we further observed that concomitant knockdown of IKK1 and IKK2 did not have any major short-term adverse effect on the viability of MM cells.

[PMID: 23986575]
The deoxynucleoside triphosphohydrolase SAMHD1 restricts retroviral replication in myeloid cells. Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) and a simian immunodeficiency virus from rhesus macaques (SIVmac) encode Vpx, a virion-packaged accessory protein that counteracts SAMHD1 by inducing its degradation. SAMHD1 is thought to work by depleting the pool of intracellular deoxynucleoside triphosphates but has also been reported to have exonuclease activity that could allow it to degrade the viral genomic RNA or viral reverse-transcribed DNA. To induce the degradation of SAMHD1, Vpx co-opts the cullin4a-based E3 ubiquitin ligase, CRL4. E3 ubiquitin ligases are regulated by the covalent attachment of the ubiquitin-like protein Nedd8 to the cullin subunit. Neddylation can be prevented by MLN4924, a drug that inhibits the nedd8-activating enzyme. We report that MLN4924 inhibits the neddylation of CRL4, blocking Vpx-induced degradation of SAMHD1 and maintaining the restriction. Removal of the drug several hours postinfection released the block. Similarly, Vpx-containing virus-like particles and deoxynucleosides added to the cells more than 24 h postinfection released the SAMHD1-mediated block. Taken together, these findings support deoxynucleoside triphosphate pool depletion as the primary mechanism of SAMHD1 restriction and argue against a nucleolytic mechanism, which would not be reversible.