[PMID: 19623466]
Epilepsy is the most common serious neurological condition and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most important direct epilepsy-related cause of death. Information concerning risk factors for SUDEP is conflicting, but high seizure frequency is a potential risk factor. Additionally, potential pathomechanisms for SUDEP are unknown, but it is very probable that cardiac arrhythmias during and between seizures or transmission of epileptic activity to the heart via the autonomic nervous system potentially play a role. More than two decades ago, temporal lobe epilepsy was suggested as having been the ''nervous disease'' of Gustave Flaubert, one of the most important French novelists. In these lines, as the circumstances of his death were the subject of fabulous and mysterious speculations, we postulated in this paper that Flaubert's death could be due SUDEP phenomenon.

[PMID: 25323494]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most tragic potential outcome of epilepsy. Despite recommendations from epilepsy organizations in the United Kingdom and the United States, many neurologists choose not to discuss the risk of SUDEP with their patients with epilepsy. Yet, the literature clearly demonstrates that people with epilepsy and their caregivers want to know more about SUDEP. When health care providers do not provide information, people with epilepsy turn to other sources, risking misinformation and potentially increasing anxiety and distress. Sharing accurate information about SUDEP can optimize epilepsy self-management and engage the person with epilepsy as a partner in their own care. Information about SUDEP must be part of the comprehensive education given to all people with epilepsy.

[PMID: 23099115]
Sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is uncommon. Discussing the risk of SUDEP can be difficult, particularly in those where the risk is considered low, and previous studies have suggested that clinical practice varies widely. The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) suggest information on SUDEP is "essential" and National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommend that "tailored information on the person's relative risk of SUDEP should be part of the counselling process…". The study aimed to evaluate if discussion of SUDEP risk is being documented in clinical records and to determine if there is an association between documented discussion and risk factors for SUDEP. A retrospective case note review was undertaken in those with an established diagnosis of epilepsy attending clinic between 1st January 2009 and 30th June 2009. Overall, a documented SUDEP discussion was noted in 14/345 (4%) cases. Patients were statistically more likely to have a documented SUDEP discussion if they had ongoing generalised tonic-clonic seizures, with a trend also towards informing those non-compliant with medication. Patients were more likely to be informed of SUDEP if they had potentially modifiable risk factors identified. There was, however, no documented evidence to suggest that SUDEP is being discussed in the majority of cases.

[PMID: 19713869]
People with epilepsy may die unexpectedly without a clear structural or pathologic cause. This condition is called sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), and it accounts for a large proportion of deaths among people with epilepsy. SUDEP incidence rates vary with the cohort studied, ranging from 0.35 per 1,000 person-years of follow-up in population-based studies to 9.3 per 1,000 person-years in patients with refractory epilepsy. Although many studies have been performed, the causes of SUDEP are not understood. However, even without precise knowledge of the underlying pathogenic mechanism(s), SUDEP prevention could start with the identification of the most prominent risk factors. SUDEP seems to occur more commonly during sleep and it preferentially affects young adults with medically intractable epilepsy (especially tonic-clonic seizures), individuals who also have neurologic comorbidity, and patients receiving antiepileptic drug polytherapy. This article reviews the clinical features associated with SUDEP and suggests preventive measures for this condition.

[PMID: 22042178]
Epilepsy is the main neurological condition in children and adolescents. Unfortunately patients with medical refractory epilepsy are more susceptible for clinical complications and death. We report a prospectively evaluated cohort of children followed for approximately 10 years. Fifty-three of 1012 patients died. Forty-two patients died due to epilepsy or its clinical complications and the main causes of death were pneumonia (in 16 cases), sepsis (in 9 patients), status epilepticus (in 8 patients). In 11 patients cause of death was sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Mental retardation was significantly more frequent in patients who did not die from SUDEP. SUDEP may be a significant condition associated with mortality in children and adolescents with epilepsy.

[PMID: 25499158]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a major cause of mortality in epilepsy. Despite its devastating consequences, SUDEP appears to be poorly discussed with patients by health professionals. The risk of causing psychological distress to the patient is highlighted as a reason for not discussing SUDEP. However, no studies have assessed the adult patients' views on this important question. We conducted this cross-sectional study to evaluate the awareness and perspectives on SUDEP among adult patients with epilepsy. One hundred five consecutive adult patients with epilepsy, referred to the Epilepsy Clinic of a tertiary hospital between October 2012 and November 2013, were surveyed to ascertain their views and understanding of SUDEP. The data were analyzed using logistic regression to explore the association between patients' awareness of SUDEP and characteristics such as age, gender, duration of epilepsy, level of education, and employment. Awareness of SUDEP among adult patients with epilepsy was poor (14.3%). However, the vast majority (89.5%) wished to be informed about SUDEP, and 59% requested detailed information. The treating neurologist was considered to be the most appropriate source of SUDEP information by 85.6% of patients. Multivariable analysis of the data showed no association between characteristics of patients (age, gender, duration of epilepsy, level of education, and employment) and their awareness of SUDEP or desire to get SUDEP-related information. Our study suggests that the majority of adult patients wish to be informed about SUDEP. This is in contrast to the general reluctance of medical professionals to inform all patients routinely about this condition.

[PMID: 22191982]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a category of death in people with epilepsy occurring in the absence of a known structural cause of death and is most likely heterogeneous with regard to mechanisms and circumstances. SUDEP is particularly difficult to investigate in research studies for several reasons, including its relatively low incidence, its unpredictable occurrence often in unwitnessed settings, and its low rate of complete autopsy examinations. Over the past two decades, two complementary definitions have been used in most SUDEP studies, but often with variations. We propose here a unified SUDEP definition and classification to resolve current ambiguities and to retrieve cases that would not have been further studied if the previous definitions were used. The proposed Unified SUDEP Definition and Classification contains, in addition to concepts inherent in the previous definitions, nine main recommendations. (1) The word "unexpected," and not the word "unexplained," should be uniformly used in the term SUDEP. (2) The SUDEP category should be applied when appropriate, whether or not a terminal seizure is known to have occurred. (3) The "Possible SUDEP" category should be used only for cases with competing causes of death, with cases left unclassified when data are insufficient to reasonably permit their classification. (4) Cases that would otherwise fulfill the definition of SUDEP should be designated as "SUDEP Plus" when evidence indicates that a preexisting condition, known before or after autopsy, could have contributed to the death, which otherwise is classified as SUDEP (e.g., coronary insufficiency with no evidence of myocardial infarction or long-QT syndrome with no documented primary ventricular arrhythmia leading to death). (5) To be considered SUDEP, the death should have occurred within 1 h from the onset of a known terminal event. (6) For status epilepticus as an exclusion criterion for SUDEP, the duration of seizure activity should be 30 min or more. (7) A specific category of SUDEP due to asphyxia should not be designated, the distinction being largely impractical on circumstantial or autopsy evidence, with more than one mechanism likely to be contributory in many cases. (8) Death occurring in water but without circumstantial or autopsy evidence of submersion should be classified as "Possible SUDEP." If any evidence of submersion is present, the death should not be classified as SUDEP. (9) A category of "Near-SUDEP" should be agreed to include cases in which cardiorespiratory arrest was reversed by resuscitation efforts with subsequent survival for more than 1 h. Scenarios that demonstrate the basis for each SUDEP category are described. If disagreement exists about which category fits a particular case, we suggest the use of consensus decision by a panel of informed reviewers to adjudicate the classification of the case.

[PMID: 19666211]
Epilepsy is the most common serious neurological condition and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most important direct epilepsy-related cause of death. Information concerning risk factors for SUDEP is conflicting, but high seizure frequency is a potential risk factor. Additionally, potential pathomechanisms for SUDEP are unknown, but it is very probable that cardiac arrhythmias during and between seizures or transmission of epileptic activity to the heart via the autonomic nervous system potentially play a role. In parallel, studies have shown a link between vitamin D dysfunction and epilepsy. Moreover, several evidences in the literature suggest an association between low vitamin D and seizures, indicating the possibility of anticonvulsant properties of this hormone. Quite interesting, a growing body of data suggests that low vitamin D levels may adversely affect cardiovascular health, directly associated with death from heart failure and sudden cardiac death. In view of the above findings, our research group focused in this review article that SUDEP, at least in some cases, could be related with low vitamin D levels.

[PMID: 23109241]
Among people with epilepsy, there is a 20-fold higher risk of dying suddenly and unexpectedly compared with the general population. This phenomenon is called sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) and the term is used when sudden death occurs in an otherwise reasonably healthy person with epilepsy and the autopsy is unrevealing. In most cases, SUDEP occurs during sleep and is unwitnessed. Risk factors for SUDEP include the presence or number of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), nocturnal seizures, young age at epilepsy onset, longer duration of epilepsy, dementia, absence of cerebrovascular disease, asthma, male gender, symptomatic aetiology of epilepsy and alcohol abuse. Suggested factors predisposing to SUDEP have included long-QT-related mutations, impaired serotonergic brain stem control of respiration, altered autonomic control and seizures with a pronounced postictal suppression and respiratory compromise. Final events that may lead up to SUDEP are a postictal CNS shutdown with pronounced EEG suppression, ictal or postictal apnoea, and ictal cardiac arrhythmia. It is unknown whether antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) modify the risk for SUDEP. Studies have consistently found that the presence or number of GTCS is associated with an increased risk for SUDEP. Since continued presence of GTCS clearly necessitates the use of AEDs, both factors must be taken into account to determine whether one or both increases the risk for SUDEP. Some studies suggest that AEDs, such as lamotrigine and carbamazepine, may increase the risk of SUDEP, but rarely adjust for GTCS. Other studies, which have found that AEDs are associated with a decreased SUDEP risk, either adjust for the number of GTCS or are meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials. Studies assessing the impact of AEDs on the risk for SUDEP are limited because SUDEP is a rare event, making randomized clinical trials impossible to conduct. Observational studies focus on whether or not an AED was prescribed. When postmortem AED concentrations are assessed they are usually low or absent, perhaps due to sampling in deceased individuals, making it difficult to fully resolve whether AEDs increase or decrease SUDEP risk. Despite these caveats, the evidence suggests that AEDs are not associated with an increased risk for SUDEP on a population level, although some individuals may be susceptible to effects of AEDs. Recent evidence from a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials of adjunctive AEDs at efficacious doses provides strong support for AED treatment as mono- or polytherapy to increase seizure control and protect against SUDEP in patients with refractory epilepsy. For patients for whom seizure control is unattainable, supervision or monitoring may prevent SUDEP, though this has never been formally tested.

[PMID: 19909334]
Epilepsy Bereaved? is a charity representing those who have experienced the sudden death of a loved one due to epilepsy. Many individuals with epilepsy, as well as their partners, relatives, and friends, are unaware of the risk for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Much of the literature available does not include information on SUDEP. When information is given, the risk for SUDEP may be underestimated. Epilepsy Bereaved? believes that people with epilepsy and their partners, families, and friends have the same right to be informed as any others dealing with a chronic condition, unless they express a wish to the contrary. Information should include the risk for SUDEP. Bereaved families agree that they would rather have been informed of the risks than left ignorant. Increased awareness and understanding of this condition may help improve treatment compliance and enable individuals to take measures to reduce the risk for sudden death.

[PMID: 25253292]
Worldwide, mortality associated with epilepsy is a matter of grave concern. The mortality rate in epileptic population is two to three times more than that of the general population. Sudden unexplained death in epilepsy, better known as sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), is a mysterious and rare condition, in which typically young or middle-aged people with epilepsy die without a clearly defined cause. At times, this may raise a strong suspicion of foul play and raise several medico-legal issues. There may be several different underlying mechanisms but most research has focused on seizure-related cerebral and respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmia and autonomic dysfunction. In recent years, some significant risk factors have been recognized and strategies have been suggested that could be useful in prevention of SUDEP. Present communication provides some of the updates on new advances in prevention of SUDEP as well as highlights related medico-legal issues.

[PMID: 17433051]
People with epilepsy may die suddenly and unexpectedly without a structural pathological cause. Most SUDEP cases are likely to be related to seizures. SUDEP incidence varies and is <1:1,000 person-years among prevalent cases in the community and approximately 1:250 person years in specialist centres. Case-control studies identified certain risk factors, some potentially amenable to manipulation, including uncontrolled convulsive seizures and factors relating to treatment and supervision. Both respiratory and cardiac mechanisms are important. The apparent protective effect of lay supervision supports an important role for respiratory factors, in part amenable to intervention by simple measures. Whereas malignant tachyarrhythmias are rare during seizures, sinus bradycardia/arrest, although infrequent, is well documented. Both types of arrhythmias can have a genetic basis. This article reviews SUDEP and explores the potential of coexisting liability to cardiac arrhythmias as a contributory factor, while acknowledging that at present, bridging evidence between cardiac inherited gene determinants and SUDEP is lacking.

[PMID: 24348119]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is an exceptionally difficult condition to study in humans. Therefore, translational research in animal models has been very important in defining pathophysiological mechanisms of death and identifying potential treatments. These models are helping define whether the primary mechanism of death is cardiac or respiratory. They have also identified a link to the serotonergic system of the brainstem; this, in turn, led to recognition that SUDEP and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) may share a common final pathway in the sequence of events that lead to death.

[PMID: 25600783]
Most cases of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) follow a seizure, and most deaths occur while people are in bed, presumably sleeping. Nocturnal seizures are reported to be a risk factor for SUDEP. People with nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (NFLE) have seizures predominantly or exclusively during sleep, often many times per night. The present study aimed to assess whether NFLE represents a high-risk condition for SUDEP. The present study retrospectively assessed the incidence of SUDEP in a cohort reconstructed from a dedicated database of consecutive patients referred to the Epilepsy and Sleep Centres of the Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna from 1980 to 2012 with: (1) a diagnosis of NFLE, (2) at least 90% of seizures during sleep, and (3) at least one-year of follow-up. One hundred and three people were included. The median time from seizure onset to last observation was 26 years, equal to a follow-up of 2789 person-years. One person died of SUDEP during the follow-up period. The incidence rate of SUDEP was 0.36 per 1000 person-years (95% CI 0.01 to 2.0). The incidence of SUDEP in the participant population was not higher than the rates previously reported in prevalent epilepsy populations (0.4 to 2.3 per 1000 person-years). The low prevalence of SUDEP might reflect the low occurrence of generalised tonic-clonic seizures in people with NFLE.

[PMID: 23962523]
The incidence of sudden death appears to be 20 times higher in patients with epilepsy compared with the general population. Epilepsy-related death, particularly sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), is still underestimated by healthcare professionals and this may reflect the mistaken belief that epilepsy is a benign condition. The risk of death associated with epilepsy appeared rarely to have been discussed with patients or their families. It appears the decision to discuss SUDEP and also to peg SUDEP risk is arbitrary and clinical. Unfortunately there is no structured evidenced mechanism at present to represent person centered risk of SUDEP and there is currently no easy manner or template to have this discussion with the family and the patient. We conducted a detailed literature review in Medline, Embase and Psychinfo databases to extract the common risk factors as evidenced from literature till date. Research into risk factors has identified a number of risk factors for SUDEP, some of which are potentially modifiable. Based on the literature review, we believe that the ascertained risk factors could be employed in clinical practice as a checklist to reduce an individual patient's risk of SUDEP. The SUDEP safety checklist may be of practical use in reducing risks in some individuals and is definitely of use in helping communication. An evidence based checklist identifying the major risk factors can help both clinicians and patients to focus on minimizing certain risk factors and promote safety by focusing on the modifiable factors and guide treatment. It can be a tool to open a person centered discussion with patients and to outline how individual behaviors could impact on risk.

[PMID: 26387918]
The aim of this study was to review population autopsy data on epilepsy-related deaths (ERD) in Queensland, Australia, to establish the incidence of autopsy-confirmed sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), explore factors associated with SUDEP, and determine if complete autopsy examinations of SUDEP were performed. All autopsy reports for a 5year period in Queensland were electronically searched for the terms 'epilepsy' or 'seizure'. The identified reports were reviewed, and data were extracted for all ERD. In the study period, 175 ERD were identified from autopsy records (123 SUDEP, 34 accident-related, 3 due to status epilepticus). From data available on the prevalence of epilepsy in Queensland (National Health Survey), the incidence of autopsy-confirmed SUDEP was 0.7 per 1000 person years (95% confidence interval 0.5-1.2 per 1000 person years). The factors associated with SUDEP were male sex (for those >18 years) and subtherapeutic anticonvulsant medication levels (found in 55%). Where recorded, the majority of deaths happened in the person's usual residence (90%), were overnight (70%) and unwitnessed (87%), with the person found prone (74%), in or adjacent to their bed (49%) and with signs of proximate seizure (60%). A complete autopsy was undertaken for only 59% of cases, the majority in urban locations. This study provides support for an unwitnessed overnight seizure being a key factor in autopsy-confirmed SUDEP in Queensland.

[PMID: 27131289]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the leading cause for death in individuals with epilepsy. The frequency of SUDEP correlates with the severity of epilepsies and lack of response to antiepileptic drug treatment, but the underlying mechanisms of SUDEP have not been elucidated fully. GABRG2(Q390X) is a mutation associated with the epileptic encephalopathy Dravet syndrome (DS) and with genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) in patients. The Gabrg2(+/Q390X) knockin (KI) mouse phenocopies the major features of DS and GEFS+ and has SUDEP throughout life. The Gabrg2(+/-) knockout (KO) mouse is associated with infrequent absence seizures and represents a model of mild absence epilepsy syndrome without increased mortality. To explore the basis for SUDEP in DS and GEFS+, we compared mutant γ2 subunit and wild-type α1 and β2/3 subunit expression in mice in brainstem nuclei associated with respiratory function including the solitary tract, pre-Botzinger complex and Kolliker-Fuse nuclei. We found that synaptic GABAA receptors were reduced while intracellular nonfunctional γ2(Q390X) subunits were increased in the heterozygous DS and GEFS+ KI mice, but not in the heterozygous absence epilepsy KO mice. Given the critical role of these nuclei in cardiorespiratory function, it is likely the impaired GABAergic transmission and neuronal dysfunction in these brainstem nuclei are involved in the cardiorespiratory collapse in SUDEP. The study provides novel mechanistic insights into cardiorespiratory failure of SUDEP.

[PMID: 15824334]
To examine the influence of various factors on the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). The authors investigated 154 cases in which a postmortem examination was performed. Each case had four controls with epilepsy from the community, matched for age and geographic location. Backward stepwise conditional logistic regression analysis was performed and odds ratios for risk and protection were determined. The risk of SUDEP was increased with a history of generalized tonic-clonic seizures in the previous 3 months (odds ratio [OR]: 13.8, 95% CI: 6.6 to 29.1). The presence of supervision at night was found to be protective (OR: 0.4, 95% CI: 0.2 to 0.8) when a supervising individual shared the same bedroom or when special precautions such as a listening device were employed (OR: 0.1, 95% CI: 0.0 to 0.3). This work lends support to the view that SUDEP is a seizure-related phenomenon and that control of tonic-clonic seizures is important in its prevention. Nocturnal supervision seems to protect against SUDEP.

[PMID: 19232547]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most important direct seizure-related cause of death, and most cases usually occur in patients with intractable, longstanding epilepsy. Suspected mechanisms for SUDEP include central and obstructive apnea, cardiac arrhythmia, postictal respiratory arrest, and primary cessation of brain activity. We report a patient who experienced a near SUDEP following his first prolonged tonic-clonic seizure requiring intubation. Chest X-ray examination showed severe bilateral congestion of the middle and superior pulmonary fields and an enlarged heart. Observations of pulmonary compromise in near-miss patients are extremely rare. Our patient showed marked cyanosis and respiratory distress after the index seizure, in agreement with the view that respiratory distress was the primary etiology in this case. Moreover, this observation confirms that SUDEP is not exclusively an issue for patients with chronic, uncontrolled epilepsy.

[PMID: 25647769]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) remains a leading cause of epilepsy-related death, and yet, its pathogenic mechanisms remain ill-defined. Although epidemiological studies of SUDEP in heterogenous populations have established a number of clinical associations, evaluation and stratification of individual risk remains difficult. Thus, potential markers as predictors of risk of SUDEP are important not only clinically but also for research on SUDEP prevention. Recordings from rare monitored cases of SUDEP demonstrate postictal generalized EEG suppression after terminal seizures, raising expectations that postictal generalized EEG suppression may identify individuals at higher risk. In this review, we consider the literature on postictal generalized EEG suppression and evaluate its relevance and utility as a possible marker of SUDEP.

[PMID: 26038597]
Seizure-related cardiac arrhythmias are frequently reported and have been implicated as potential pathomechanisms of Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy (SUDEP). We attempted to identify clinical profiles associated with various (post)ictal cardiac arrhythmias. We conducted a systematic search from the first date available to July 2013 on the combination of two terms: 'cardiac arrhythmias' and 'epilepsy'. The databases searched were PubMed, Embase (OVID version), Web of Science and COCHRANE Library. We attempted to identify all case reports and case series. We identified seven distinct patterns of (post)ictal cardiac arrhythmias: ictal asystole (103 cases), postictal asystole (13 cases), ictal bradycardia (25 cases), ictal atrioventricular (AV)-conduction block (11 cases), postictal AV-conduction block (2 cases), (post)ictal atrial flutter/atrial fibrillation (14 cases) and postictal ventricular fibrillation (3 cases). Ictal asystole had a mean prevalence of 0.318% (95% CI 0.316% to 0.320%) in people with refractory epilepsy who underwent video-EEG monitoring. Ictal asystole, bradycardia and AV-conduction block were self-limiting in all but one of the cases and seen during focal dyscognitive seizures. Seizure onset was mostly temporal (91%) without consistent lateralisation. Postictal arrhythmias were mostly found following convulsive seizures and often associated with (near) SUDEP. The contrasting clinical profiles of ictal and postictal arrhythmias suggest different pathomechanisms. Postictal rather than ictal arrhythmias seem of greater importance to the pathophysiology of SUDEP.

[PMID: 17178458]
To evaluate risk factors for sudden and unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in a high-risk population, i.e. patients treated in a Dutch tertiary referral center for epilepsy. All patients who died between January 1999 and April 2004 while under treatment of the epilepsy center were identified. Based on clinical data, deaths were classified as definite, probable, possible or non-SUDEP. Potential risk factors were compared in SUDEP cases and non-SUDEP cases. SUDEP incidence was 1.24 per 1000 patient years. SUDEP patients died at a younger age than patients from the control group of non-SUDEP deaths with epilepsy and had an earlier onset of epilepsy. However, the frequently mentioned factors in previous studies, i.e. male sex, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, high seizure frequency, specific AEDs, polytherapy with several AEDs, mental retardation, psychiatric illness and psychotropic comedication, were not found to be correlated with SUDEP. Even in this high-risk population of patients with refractory epilepsy, treated in a tertiary referral center, SUDEP is not a frequently occurring phenomenon. Specific risk factors could not be identified within an already high-risk population.

[PMID: 12862502]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) accounts for approximately 2% of deaths in population-based cohorts of epilepsy, and up to 25% of deaths in cohorts of more severe epilepsy. When it occurs, SUDEP usually follows a generalised tonic-clonic seizure. Unresponsiveness, apnoea, and cardiac arrest occur in SUDEP, rather than the typical gradual recovery. The great majority of tonic-clonic seizures occur without difficulty and how the rare seizure associated with SUDEP differs from others is unknown.Three mechanisms have been proposed for SUDEP: cardiac arrhythmia, neurogenic pulmonary oedema, and postictal suppression of brainstem respiratory centres leading to central apnoea. Recent studies have found that the incidence of SUDEP increases with the severity of epilepsy in the population studied. The duration of epilepsy, number of tonic-clonic seizures, mental retardation, and simultaneous treatment with more than two antiepileptic drugs are independent risk factors for SUDEP. Some studies have reported that carbamazepine use, carbamazepine toxicity, and frequent, rapid changes in carbamazepine levels, may be associated with SUDEP. Other evidence indicates that carbamazepine could potentially increase the risk for SUDEP by causing arrhythmia or by altering cardiac autonomic function. However, this evidence is tenuous and most studies have not found an association between the use of carbamazepine or any other individual antiepileptic drug and SUDEP. There is little information regarding antiepileptic drugs other than phenytoin and carbamazepine. The incidence of SUDEP with gabapentin, tiagabine, and lamotrigine clinical development programmes is in the range found in other populations with refractory epilepsy. This suggests that these individual antiepileptic drugs are no more likely to cause SUDEP than antiepileptic drugs in general. Best current evidence indicates that the risk of SUDEP can be decreased by aggressive treatment of tonic-clonic seizures with as few antiepileptic drugs as necessary to achieve complete control. At present there is no strong reason to avoid any particular antiepileptic drug. Further studies are needed to elucidate the potential role of individual antiepileptic drugs in SUDEP and establish clinical relevance, if any. These studies may be challenging to conduct and interpret because SUDEP is relatively uncommon and large numbers will be necessary to narrow confidence intervals to determine the clinical relevance. Also adjustments will be needed to account for the potent risks associated with other independent factors.

[PMID: 26924854]
The baboon represents a natural model for genetic generalized epilepsy and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). In this retrospective study, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) monoamine metabolites and scalp electroencephalography (EEG) were evaluated in 263 baboons of a pedigreed colony. CSF monoamine abnormalities have been linked to reduced seizure thresholds, behavioral abnormalities and SUDEP in various animal models of epilepsy. The levels of 3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenylglycol, 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid and homovanillic acid in CSF samples drawn from the cisterna magna were analyzed using high-performance liquid chromatography. These levels were compared between baboons with seizures (SZ), craniofacial trauma (CFT) and asymptomatic, control (CTL) baboons, between baboons with abnormal and normal EEG studies. We hypothesized that the CSF levels of major monoaminergic metabolites (i.e., dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine) associate with the baboons' electroclinical status and thus can be used as clinical biomarkers applicable to seizures/epilepsy. However, despite apparent differences in metabolite levels between the groups, usually lower in SZ and CFT baboons and in baboons with abnormal EEG studies, we did not find any statistically significant differences using a logistic regression analysis. Significant correlations between the metabolite levels, especially between 5-HIAA and HVA, were preserved in all electroclinical groups. While we were not able to demonstrate significant differences in monoamine metabolites in relation to seizures or EEG markers of epilepsy, we cannot exclude the monoaminergic system as a potential source of pathogenesis in epilepsy and SUDEP. A prospective study evaluating serial CSF monoamine levels in baboons with recently witnessed seizures, and evaluation of abnormal expression and function of monoaminergic receptors and transporters within epilepsy-related brain regions, may impact the electroclinical status.

[PMID: 19130900]
This review attempts to provide up-to-date quantitative data from published reports on sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) appearing on Medline and, especially, to provide a means to predict the probability of SUDEP in a given patient. The mean incidence of SUDEP was 1.8/1000, similar to the median of 1.5. The mean standardized mortality ratio was 6.8, and the mean percentage of SUDEP cases among deaths from epilepsy was 16.6. Seventeen risk factors were identified, each given a value according to the number of studies in the literature that specified that condition as a significant risk. The addition of these 17 values then indicated the risk for a given patient. The author calculated these for a group of 91 patients who died of SUDEP and also for 91 live patients. Many of their values for the different risks were significantly different. The sensitivity of these SUDEP values was 71.3%, the specificity 81.8%, and the positive predictive value 84.6%. A discussion includes the question of whether the death in SUDEP is primarily cardiac or pulmonary and the suggestion that it may be either or both in a given patient. The most important risk factor in this study was noncompliance with antiepileptic medication, and the main message of this study to caregivers is that therapeutic drug levels are crucial to avoid SUDEP.

[PMID: 24139807]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the leading cause of epilepsy-related mortality, but how to predict which patients are at risk and how to prevent it remain uncertain. The underlying pathomechanisms of SUDEP are still largely unknown, but the general consensus is that seizures somehow disrupt normal cardiac or respiratory physiology leading to death. However, the proportion of SUDEP cases exhibiting cardiac or respiratory dysfunction as a critical factor in the terminal cascade of events remains unresolved. Although many general risk factors for SUDEP have been identified, the development of reliable patient-specific biomarkers for SUDEP is needed to provide more accurate risk prediction and personalized patient management strategies. Studies in animal models and patient groups have revealed at least nine different brain-heart genes that may contribute to a genetic susceptibility for SUDEP, making them potentially useful as genomic biomarkers. This review summarizes data on the relationship between these neurocardiac genes and SUDEP, discussing their brain-heart expression patterns and genotype-phenotype correlations in mouse models and people with epilepsy. These neurocardiac genes represent good first candidates for evaluation as genomic biomarkers of SUDEP in future studies. The development of validated reliable genomic biomarkers for SUDEP has the potential to transform the clinical treatment of epilepsy by pinpointing patients at risk of SUDEP and allowing optimized, genotype-guided therapeutic and prevention strategies.

[PMID: 24236903]
Epilepsy affects about 1 in 130 people in the UK and most have a normal life expectancy. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is a - probably heterogeneous - condition where patients with epilepsy die suddenly, almost certainly during a seizure and with no other identified cause of death. The mechanism(s) of SUDEP remain uncertain, but with a growing international scientific interest, there is reason to be optimistic that eventually most of the likely several causes will be identified. Increasing awareness of SUDEP has generated efforts to understand the underlying pathophysiology of SUDEP better to direct the search for effective preventative measures. This review addresses the epidemiology of SUDEP, its possible underlying mechanisms, risk factors, clinical implications and future directions for research.

[PMID: 16421121]
The National Institute for Clinical Excellence in the UK has issued guidelines stating all individuals with epilepsy be given information about sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). We conducted a survey of current practice among UK neurologists, using a questionnaire sent to all practising neurologists in the UK listed on the Association of British Neurologists database, asking under what circumstances they told patients about SUDEP. Of the validated respondents, 5% discussed SUDEP with all patients, 26% with a majority, 61% with a few, and 7.5% with none. The commonest reasons for SUDEP to be discussed were the patient asking about it and the neurologist counselling people with known risk factors for SUDEP. The variation we found, although not necessarily in tune with the guidelines, reflects the variation in patients' need for knowledge about their condition.

[PMID: 21737136]
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) refers to the sudden death of a seemingly healthy individual with epilepsy, usually occurring during, or immediately after, a tonic-clonic seizure. The frequency of SUDEP varies depending on the severity of the epilepsy, but overall the risk of sudden death is more than 20 times higher than that in the general population. Several different mechanisms probably exist, and most research has focused on seizure-related respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmia, cerebral depression, and autonomic dysfunction. Data from a pooled analysis of risk factors indicate that the higher the frequency of tonic-clonic seizures, the higher the risk of SUDEP; furthermore, risk of SUDEP is also elevated in male patients, patients with long-duration epilepsy, and those on antiepileptic polytherapy. SUDEP usually occurs when the seizures are not witnessed and often at night. In this Seminar, we provide advice to clinicians on ways to minimise the risk of SUDEP, information to pass on to patients, and medicolegal aspects of these deaths.

[PMID: 15129839]
Epilepsy, the commonest serious neurological condition, is associated with an increased risk in premature deaths, including an estimated 500 sudden unexpected deaths (SUDEP) per year in the UK. In some patients seizures are associated with cardiac arrhythmias, which are thought to be a major factor in SUDEP. Omega-3 fatty acids have been shown to reduce cardiac arrhythmias in animal studies and to reduce sudden cardiac deaths, thought to be due to cardiac arrhythmias, in both healthy subjects and in those who have had one myocardial infarction. Additionally, omega-3 fatty acids in animal studies and in a small clinical observation study have shown anti-seizure effects. Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in patients with refractory seizures may reduce seizures and seizure associated cardiac arrhythmias and hence SUDEP.