[PMID: 15898103]
Both multiple sclerosis (MS) and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), its animal model, involve inflammatory attack on central nervous system (CNS) white matter, leading to demyelination and axonal damage. Changes in astrocytic morphology and function are also prominent features of MS and EAE. Resting astrocytes form a network that is interconnected through gap junctions, composed mainly of connexin43 (Cx43) protein. Although astrocytic gap junctional connectivity is known to be altered in many CNS pathologies, little is known about Cx43 expression in inflammatory demyelinating disease. Therefore, we evaluated the expression of Cx43 in spinal cords of EAE mice compared with healthy controls. Lumbar ventral white matter areas were heavily infiltrated with CD11beta-immunoreactive monocytes, and within these infiltrated regions loss of Cx43 immunoreactivity was evident. These regions also showed axonal dystrophy, demonstrated by the abnormally dephosphorylated heavy-chain neurofilament proteins. Astrocytes in these Cx43-depleted lesions were strongly glial fibrillary acidic protein reactive. Significant loss (38%) of Cx43 protein in EAE mouse at the lumbar portion of spinal cords was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Decreased Cx43 transcript level was also observed on cDNA microarray analysis. In addition to changes in Cx43 expression, numerous other genes were altered, including those encoding adhesion and extracellular matrix proteins. Our data support the notion that, in addition to damage of myelinating glia, altered astrocyte connectivity is a prominent feature of inflammatory demyelination.

[PMID: 21029240]
The pathological and radiological hallmarks of multiple sclerosis (MS) include multiple demyelinated lesions disseminated throughout the white matter of the central nervous system (CNS). More recently, the cerebral cortex has been shown to be affected in MS, but the elucidation of events causing cortical demyelination has been hampered by the lack of animal models reflecting such human cortical pathology. In this report, we have described the presence of cortical gray matter and callosal white matter demyelinating lesions in the chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model of MS. Similar to the pathological lesions of MS patients, EAE lesions have been classified as type I-leukocortical, type II-intracortical and type III-subpial. All of these lesions had varying degrees of demyelination, inflammatory cells and reactive astrocytes. Similar to MS, cortical layers during EAE showed demyelination, microglia activation, synaptic protein alterations and apoptotic cells. In addition, the callosal white matter during EAE had many inflammatory demyelinating lesions and axon degeneration. Functional electrophysiological conduction analysis showed deficits in both myelinated and unmyelinated callosal axons during early and late EAE. The chronic EAE mouse model has features that mimic cortical and callosal pathology of MS, and can be potentially used to screen agents to prevent these features of disease.

[PMID: 11391780]
Data, initially anecdotal, but recently supported on more solid experimental evidence, suggest that cannabinoids might be beneficial in the treatment of some of the symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Despite this evidence, there are no data on the possible changes in cannabinoid CB(1) or CB(2) receptors, the main molecular targets for the action of cannabinoids, either in the postmortem brain of patients with MS or in animal models of this disease. The present study addressed this question using the model of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) in Lewis rats generated by inoculation of guinea pig myelin basic protein in Freund's adjuvant. After inoculation, animals were examined daily to detect the appearance of neurological signs. The first signs appeared around day 10 after inoculation, reaching the highest degree by day 13, when animals were sacrificed and their brains removed and used for analysis of CB(1) receptor binding, mRNA levels, and activation of GTP-binding proteins. CB(1) receptor binding and mRNA levels were not affected in EAE rats in brain areas such as the hippocampus, limbic structures, and cerebellum. However, there was a marked decrease in both parameters in the caudate-putamen, both in the lateral and medial parts, although this decrease did not correspond with decreases in binding in the nuclei recipient of striatal output neurons, which suggests that changes in CB(1) receptors are exclusively located in the cell bodies of striatal neurons. In addition, CB(1) receptor binding, but not mRNA levels, also decreased in the cerebral cortex, both in the deep and the superficial layers. The analysis of [(35)S]GTPgammaS binding after activation of CB(1) receptors with WIN55,212-2, a synthetic agonist, revealed that, despite the decrease in the number of CB(1) receptors in EAE rats, these were more efficiently coupled to GTP-binding protein-mediated signaling mechanisms in both the caudate-putamen and the cerebral cortex of these animals. In summary, these data suggest that the generation of EAE in Lewis rats would be associated with changes in CB(1) receptors in striatal and cortical neurons, which might be related to the alleviation of some motor signs observed after the treatment with cannabinoid receptor agonists in similar models of MS in rodents.

[PMID: 23161666]
We hypothesized that quantitative MS/MS-based proteomics at multiple time points, incorporating rapid microwave and magnetic (M(2) ) sample preparation, could enable relative protein expression to be correlated to disease progression in the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) animal model of multiple sclerosis. To test our hypothesis, microwave-assisted reduction/alkylation/digestion of proteins from brain tissue lysates bound to C8 magnetic beads and microwave-assisted isobaric chemical labeling were performed of released peptides, in 90 s prior to unbiased proteomic analysis. Disease progression in EAE was assessed by scoring clinical EAE disease severity and confirmed by histopathologic evaluation for central nervous system inflammation. Decoding the expression of 283 top-ranked proteins (p <0.05) at each time point relative to their expression at the peak of disease, from a total of 1191 proteins observed in four technical replicates, revealed a strong statistical correlation to EAE disease score, particularly for the following four proteins that closely mirror disease progression: 14-3-3ε (p = 3.4E-6); GPI (p = 2.1E-5); PLP1 (p = 8.0E-4); PRX1 (p = 1.7E-4). These results were confirmed by Western blotting, signaling pathway analysis, and hierarchical clustering of EAE risk groups. While validation in a larger cohort is underway, we conclude that M(2) proteomics is a rapid method to quantify putative prognostic/predictive protein biomarkers and therapeutic targets of disease progression in the EAE animal model of multiple sclerosis.

[PMID: 15039233]
In multiple sclerosis (MS) the structural damage to axons determines the persistent clinical deficit patients acquire during the course of the disease. It is therefore important to test therapeutic strategies that can prevent or reverse this structural damage. The conventional animal model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), typically shows disseminated inflammation in the central nervous system, which leads to a clinical deficit that cannot be directly attributed to a defined tract system. For this reason we have developed a localized EAE model, in which large inflammatory lesions are targeted to the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, an area including the corticospinal tract. These lesions show the pathological hallmarks of MS plaques and lead to reproducible and pronounced deficits in hindlimb locomotion. Because of the anatomical specificity of this technique we can now use highly sensitive behavioral tests that assess the functional integrity of specific axonal tracts. We show that these tests are predictive of the site and extent of a given lesion and are more sensitive for assessing the clinical course than the scales commonly used for disseminated EAE models. We believe that this targeted EAE model will become a helpful new tool for the evaluation of therapeutic approaches for MS that attempt to protect axons or support their repair.

[PMID: 20829083]
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease, associated, in 50-80% of patients, with persistent pain. While the type of pain that affects these patients is being more documented, the mechanisms underlying this pathology are still poorly understood and animal models of such chronic pain associated with MS are required. The aim of our study was to characterize the sensory abnormalities and in particular the clinical signs linked to persistent pain in two models of Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE) in the rat. This behavioural characterization tested several sensory modalities such as mechanical and thermal (heat/cold) hyperalgesia or allodynia and explored some of these modalities on two different extremities: the hindpaws and the tail. Our study showed that while one of the model produced more robust motor impairment, animals of both models suffer from mechanical hyperalgesia and thermal allodynia to cold, both at the level of the tail and the hindpaws. While the time-course changes of some of these modalities are shifted in the time between the two models, they represent good models of the sensory abnormalities experienced by MS patients. The second part of our study aimed at characterizing from a pharmacological point of view the most robust model ("EAE+Cyclosporine") and showed that Gabapentin, Duloxetine and Tramadol partially relieved some of the clinical signs. Our results suggest that the model "EAE+Cyclosporine" in the rat is a good model of chronic sensory abnormalities observed in MS patients both from a behavioural and pharmacological point of view.

[PMID: 7739505]
Two questions were posed at the beginning of this article. Is EAE a good model for MS? And, is MS an autoimmune disease? The first question is easier to address than the second. EAE is the best available model for the inflammatory processes that occur in MS, and for the disease process. The latter depends somewhat on study of chronic relapsing EAE, rather than early or mono-episodic EAE, which, although of great immunological interest, is of less relevance to the established disease that presents as MS. The second question asks whether MS fulfills Koch's postulates as an autoimmune disease. MS has all the hallmarks of an inflammatory disease of the CNS. The question then is whether the inflammation is autoimmune. The evidence presented shows a considerable autoimmune component to MS inflammation, raising the subsidiary question of whether autoimmune reactivity induces MS. This remains unanswerable for the present, and it should be kept in mind that the same question also would be unanswerable by observation of EAE. The major postulate therefore remains unfulfilled. Diagnosis of MS as an autoimmune disease requires definitive identification of the autoantigen; otherwise, the possibility remains open that this is a disease resulting from the inadvertent activation and dysregulation of immune processes in the CNS that, themselves, are not directed at that organ.

[PMID: 19361871]
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the neurotrophin family, is neuroprotective in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. However, BDNF has a short half-life and its efficacy in the central nervous system (CNS), when delivered peripherally, is limited due to the blood-brain barrier (BBB). We have developed a means of delivering BDNF into the CNS using genetically engineered bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs) as a vehicle, and have explored the clinical effects of BDNF on outcomes in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS). BDNF-engineered-BMSCs were transplanted (i.v.) into irradiated 2-week-old SJL/J female mice. Eight weeks after transplantation, mice were immunized with a peptide of proteolipid protein (PLP(139-151)). Mice, which had received BDNFengineered BMSCs, showed a significant delay in EAE onset and a reduction in overall clinical severity compared to mice receiving BMSC transfected with an empty vector lacking the BDNF gene. In addition, pathological examination showed that BDNF delivery reduced demyelination and increased remyelination. Inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma and enhanced expression of the antiinflammatory cytokines IL-4, IL-10, and IL-11 were found in the CNS tissues of the BDNF transplanted group. These results support the use of BMSCs as vehicles to deliver BDNF into the CNS of EAE animals. This is a potentially novel therapeutic approach that might be used to deliver BDNF gene or genes for other therapeutic proteins into the CNS in MS or in other diseases of the CNS in which accessibility of therapeutic proteins is limited due to the BBB.

[PMID: 16106061]
Abnormal immunoglobulin synthesis within the central nervous system is a common finding in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) that is often used for diagnosis. However, it is not clear whether antibodies, or the B-cells and plasma cells that make them, are critical to the pathogenesis of MS. Here we review the descriptive data that suggest a role for antibody in the pathogenesis of MS. The results of B-cell and antibody depletion studies in the animal model for MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, are summarized, as well as early data using a chimeric monoclonal antibody to deplete B-cells in patients with MS.

[PMID: 11829341]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). Most patients undergo an initial relapsing-remitting (RR-MS) course that transforms into a relentless neurodegenerative disorder, termed secondary progressive (SP)-MS. Reversible inflammation and demyelination account readily for the pattern of RR-MS but provide an unsatisfactory explanation for irrevocable decline in SP-MS. Axon loss is thought to be responsible for progressive, non-remitting neurological disability during SP-MS. There is considerable potential for neuroprotective therapies in MS, but their application awaits animal models in which axonal loss correlates with permanent neurological disability. In this report, we describe quantitative immunohistochemical methods that correlate inflammation and axonal loss with neurological disability in chronic-relapsing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). At first attack, CNS inflammation, but not axon loss, correlated with the degree of neurological disability. In contrast, fixed neurological impairment in chronic EAE correlated with axon loss that, in turn, correlated with the number of symptomatic attacks. As proposed for MS, these observations imply a causal relationship between inflammation, axon loss, and irreversible neurological disability. This chronic-relapsing EAE model provides an excellent platform for 2 critical objectives: investigating mechanisms of axon loss and evaluating efficacy of neuroprotective therapies.

[PMID: 15929040]
The tyrosine kinase receptor RON and its ligand, macrophage stimulating protein (MSP), exert inhibitory effects on systemic innate immunity, but their CNS expression and impact on human neuroinflammatory diseases are unknown were RON and MSP present in human brain perivascular macrophages and microglia, but RON mRNA and protein abundance in the CNS were diminished in both MS patients and the MS animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Treatment of differentiated human monocytoid cells with MSP resulted in significant reduction of interleukin (IL)-1beta, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and MMP-9 mRNA levels, whereas minimal effects were observed in human astrocytes. After induction of EAE, RON knockout and heterozygote animals exhibited significantly increased CNS proinflammatory gene (TNF-alpha, MMP-12) expression compared with wild-type littermate controls, although IL-4 levels were suppressed in both RON-deficient groups. Neurological disease in RON-deficient animals showed a more rapid onset with overall worsened severity, together with exacerbated demyelination, axonal injury, and neuroinflammation after EAE induction. The proto-oncogene, c-Cbl, which modulates ubiquitylation of RON, was increased in glia in both MS brains and EAE spinal cords. Thus, the MSP-RON pathway represents a novel regulatory mechanism within the CNS by which innate immunity and its pathogenic effects could be targeted for future therapeutic interventions.

[PMID: 1793022]
We examined the therapeutic effect of 15-DOS in the two models of acute and chronic relapsing EAE in Lewis rats. In the first model adult rats developed an acute severe EAE and by day 16 all animals died. Lewis rats treated with 15-DOS showed a delayed and reduced onset of clinical symptoms and mortality was prevented. In the second model Lewis rats (aged animals) developed a chronic relapsing EAE with up to three relapses. The second and third episodes were both milder and shorter in duration. All animals treated with 15-DOS survived the delayed first attack and developed no further relapses.

[PMID: 16137612]
The pathogenic events in multiple sclerosis (MS) that result in immune cell infiltration, multifocal demyelination and axonal loss have been focused by the strong impact of the classical MS model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) towards the hypothesis that MS is an entirely T cell-mediated disease. Although conspicuous humoral immune responses have been known since Kabal's seminal finding of elevated immunoglobulins (Igs) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), only in the past few years evidence derived from recent studies of the MS lesion of anti-myelin antibodies (Abs) in patients with early MS and of MS animal models has led to a renewed interest in the role for B cells, plasma cells and their products in the pathogenesis of MS. This review surveys the actual data concerning the role of the humoral immune system in MS and EAE and explains potential modes of action and long-time persistence in the inflamed brain tissue as a B cell-supportive microenvironment in MS. These mechanisms include the modulation of antigen presentation and costimulation to T cells, increased myelin opsonisation und recruitment of inflammatory cells to the CNS, but also immunoregulatory influences on the remyelination by anti-myelin B cells and Abs. So, affecting the humoral immune system in MS would be a reasonable therapeutic option.

[PMID: 21255614]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS) characterized by inflammation, but also degenerative changes. Besides neurological deficits, the rate of affective disorders such as depression and anxiety is at least six fold increased. Many aspects of MS can be mimicked in the animal model of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (MOG-EAE). Here we investigate behavioral changes in C57BL/6 mice suffering from mild MOG-EAE. In the later phase of the disease, mice were subjected to behavioral tests including the light-dark-box (LD Box), the acoustic startle response (SR) with a pre-pulse inhibition protocol as well as the learned helplessness (LH) paradigm. Behavioral data were correlated with the motor performance in an open field and rotarod test (RR). In the RR and open field, there was no significant difference in the motor performance between controls and mice suffering from mild MOG-EAE. Yet EAE mice displayed an increased anxiety-like behavior with a 23% reduction of the time spent in the bright compartment of the LD Box as well as an increased SR. In the LH paradigm, mice suffering from MOG-EAE were twice as much prone to depressive-like behavior. These changes correlate with an increase of hippocampal tissue tumor necrosis factor alpha levels and neuronal loss in the hippocampus. Modulation of monoaminergic transmission by chronic application of the antidepressant amitriptyline resulted in a decreased startle reaction and increased hippocampal norepinephrine levels. These data imply that chronic inflammation in the CNS may impact on emotional responses in rodent models of anxiety.

[PMID: 19894121]
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection of mice is an experimental model for multiple sclerosis (MS). TMEV induces a biphasic disease in susceptible mouse strains. During the acute phase, 1 week after infection, TMEV causes polioencephalomyelitis characterized by infection and apoptosis of neurons in the gray matter of the brain. During the chronic phase, about 1 month after infection, virus infects glial cells and macrophages, and induces inflammatory demyelination with oligodendrocyte apoptosis and axonal degeneration in the white matter of the spinal cord. Although antibody, CD4(+), and CD8(+) T cell responses against TMEV capsid proteins play important roles in neuropathogenesis, infectious virus with persistence is necessary to induce demyelination; in general, adoptive transfer of antibody or T cells alone did not induce central nervous system (CNS) disease. The TMEV model can be useful for testing new therapeutic strategies specifically as a viral model for MS. Therapies targeting adhesion molecules, axonal degeneration, and immunosuppression can be beneficial for pure autoimmune CNS demyelinating diseases, such as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, but could be detrimental in virus-induced demyelinating diseases, such as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

[PMID: 18673215]
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a widely recognized animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), is highly useful for studying inflammation, demyelination, and neurodegeneration in the central nervous system (CNS). EAE exhibits many similarities with MS, which is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting CNS white matter in humans. Various studies have indicated that EAE is a particularly useful animal model for understanding both the mechanisms of immune-mediated CNS pathology and also the progressive clinical course of MS. Demyelination and axonal dysfunction have previously been shown in MS and EAE but current evidences indicate that axonal damage and neuron death also occur, demonstrating that these diseases harbor a neurodegenerative component. Recent studies also have shown that the activation of calpain and caspase pathways contribute to the apoptotic death of oligodendrocytes and neurons, promoting the pathological events leading to neurological deficits. Apoptosis is involved in the disease-regulating as well as in the disease-promoting processes in EAE. This review discusses the major involvement of calpain and caspase pathways in causing demyelination and neurodegeneration in EAE animals.

[PMID: 15949496]
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is an established treatment of immune-mediated demyelinating neuropathy. Since IVIG possesses multiple immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties, IVIG therapy may represent a way of interfering with the disease process in multiple sclerosis (MS). In the MS animal model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), infusions of IVIG significantly reduced disease symptoms as well as the underlying CNS pathology. IVIG was only effective in EAE when administered in a prophylactic treatment protocol, since IVIG infusions during the established phase of EAE did not alter the disease course or the degree of inflammation found in the central nervous system. IVIG also has the potential to act through myelin repair mechanisms as evidenced by work done in the Theilers murine encephalomyelitis virus model of demyelination. Together these observations have led to certain expectations for IVIG as a treatment for MS, and have resulted in various clinical trials. Several controlled trials report beneficial effects of IVIG on relapse rate, new MRI lesions, and disease progression in relapsing-remitting MS, while a remyelinating effect of IVIG has not been documented. IVIG is, therefore, presently regarded as a second-line therapy of MS.

[PMID: 22530047]
A more detailed insight into disease mechanisms of multiple sclerosis (MS) is crucial for the development of new and more effective therapies. MS is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease of the central nervous system. The aim of this study is to identify novel disease associated proteins involved in the development of inflammatory brain lesions, to help unravel underlying disease processes. Brainstem proteins were obtained from rats with MBP induced acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a well characterized disease model of MS. Samples were collected at different time points: just before onset of symptoms, at the top of the disease and following recovery. To analyze changes in the brainstem proteome during the disease course, a quantitative proteomics study was performed using two-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) followed by mass spectrometry. We identified 75 unique proteins in 92 spots with a significant abundance difference between the experimental groups. To find disease-related networks, these regulated proteins were mapped to existing biological networks by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The analysis revealed that 70% of these proteins have been described to take part in neurological disease. Furthermore, some focus networks were created by IPA. These networks suggest an integrated regulation of the identified proteins with the addition of some putative regulators. Post-synaptic density protein 95 (DLG4), a key player in neuronal signalling and calcium-activated potassium channel alpha 1 (KCNMA1), involved in neurotransmitter release, are 2 putative regulators connecting 64% of the identified proteins. Functional blocking of the KCNMA1 in macrophages was able to alter myelin phagocytosis, a disease mechanism highly involved in EAE and MS pathology. Quantitative analysis of differentially expressed brainstem proteins in an animal model of MS is a first step to identify disease-associated proteins and networks that warrant further research to study their actual contribution to disease pathology.

[PMID: 15492125]
In multiple sclerosis (MS), inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS) leads to damage of axons and myelin. Early during the clinical course, patients can compensate this damage, but little is known about the changes that underlie this improvement of neurological function. To study axonal changes that may contribute to recovery, we made use of an animal model of MS, which allows us to target inflammatory lesions to the corticospinal tract (CST), a major descending motor pathway. We demonstrate that axons remodel at multiple levels in response to a single neuroinflammatory lesion as follows: (a) surrounding the lesion, local interneurons show regenerative sprouting; (b) above the lesion, descending CST axons extend new collaterals that establish a "detour" circuit to the lumbar target area, whereas below the lesion, spared CST axons increase their terminal branching; and (c) in the motor cortex, the distribution of projection neurons is remodeled, and new neurons are recruited to the cortical motor pool. Behavioral tests directly show the importance of these changes for recovery. This paper provides evidence for a highly plastic response of the motor system to a single neuroinflammatory lesion. This framework will help to understand the endogenous repair capacity of the CNS and to develop therapeutic strategies to support it.

[PMID: 15288396]
Many individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) experience clinically significant pain, yet the underlying neural mechanisms for MS pain are not understood. Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a well-studied disease in rodents that mimics many clinical and pathological features of MS, including central nervous system inflammation and demyelination. To determine whether EAE is an appropriate model for MS-related pain, nociceptive responses in both male and female SJL mice were measured before and after immunization with myelin proteolipid protein peptide 139-151 (PLP(139-151)) in complete Freund's adjuvant to induce 'active' EAE. To determine if changes in nociception were due to direct effects of encephalitogenic T cells, nociceptive responses in female SJL mice were measured following the transfer of activated, PLP(139-151) specific T cells to induce 'passive' EAE. Both forepaw and tail withdrawal latencies to a radiant heat stimulus were measured. In both active and passive EAE, there was an initial increase in tail withdrawal latency (hypoalgesia) that peaked several days prior to the peak in motor deficits during the acute disease phase. During the chronic disease phase, tail withdrawal latencies decreased and were significantly faster than control latencies for up to 38 days post-immunization. This hyperalgesia was seen in both sexes and in both active and passive EAE models. Forepaw withdrawal latencies remained within 1-2 s of baseline latencies for the entire testing period, indicating that the hypoalgesia and hyperalgesia were most pronounced in clinically affected body regions. These results suggest that both active and passive EAE are useful models of MS-related pain.

[PMID: 17463082]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the leading cause of neurological disability in young adults, affecting some two million people worldwide. Traditionally, MS has been considered a chronic, inflammatory disorder of the central white matter in which ensuing demyelination results in physical disability [Frohman EM, Racke MK, Raine CS (2006) N Engl J Med 354:942-955]. More recently, MS has become increasingly viewed as a neurodegenerative disorder in which neuronal loss, axonal injury, and atrophy of the CNS lead to permanent neurological and clinical disability. Although axonal pathology and loss in MS has been recognized for >100 years, very little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms. Progressive axonal loss in MS may stem from a cascade of ionic imbalances initiated by inflammation, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction and energetic deficits that result in mitochondrial and cellular Ca2+ overload. In a murine disease model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mice lacking cyclophilin D (CyPD), a key regulator of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP), developed EAE, but unlike WT mice, they partially recovered. Examination of the spinal cords of CyPD-knockout mice revealed a striking preservation of axons, despite a similar extent of inflammation. Furthermore, neurons prepared from CyPD-knockout animals were resistant to reactive oxygen and nitrogen species thought to mediate axonal damage in EAE and MS, and brain mitochondria lacking CyPD sequestered substantially higher levels of Ca2+. Our results directly implicate pathological activation of the mitochondrial PTP in the axonal damage occurring during MS and identify CyPD, as well as the PTP, as a potential target for MS neuroprotective therapies.

[PMID: 18773082]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an immune mediated demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). A potential new therapeutic approach for MS is cell transplantation which may promote remyelination and suppress the inflammatory process. We transplanted human embryonic stem cells (hESC)-derived early multipotent neural precursors (NPs) into the brain ventricles of mice induced with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the animal model of MS. We studied the effect of the transplanted NPs on the functional and pathological manifestations of the disease. Transplanted hESC-derived NPs significantly reduced the clinical signs of EAE. Histological examination showed migration of the transplanted NPs to the host white matter, however, differentiation to mature oligodendrocytes and remyelination were negligible. Time course analysis of the evolution and progression of CNS inflammation and tissue injury showed an attenuation of the inflammatory process in transplanted animals, which was correlated with the reduction of both axonal damage and demyelination. Co-culture experiments showed that hESC-derived NPs inhibited the activation and proliferation of lymph node-derived T cells in response to nonspecific polyclonal stimuli. The therapeutic effect of transplantation was not related to graft or host remyelination but was mediated by an immunosuppressive neuroprotective mechanism. The attenuation of EAE by hESC-derived NPs, demonstrated here, may serve as the first step towards further developments of hESC for cell therapy in MS.

[PMID: 18950873]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). Recent studies suggest that, beside focal lesions, diffuse inflammatory and degenerative processes take place throughout the MS brain. Especially, molecular alterations in the so-called normal appearing white matter suggest the induction of neuroprotective mechanisms against oxidative stress preserving cellular homeostasis and function. In this study we investigated whether in an animal model for MS, namely in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), similar changes occur. We isolated normal appearing white and grey matter from the corpus callosum and the above lying cerebral cortex from DA rats with rMOG-induced EAE and carried out a gene expression analysis. Examination of corpus callosum revealed only minor changes in EAE rats. In contrast, we identified a number of gene expression alterations in the cerebral cortex even though morphological and cellular alterations were not evident. One of the most striking observations was the downregulation of genes involved in mitochondrial function as well as a whole set of genes coding for different glutamate receptors. Our data imply that molecular alterations are present in neurons far distant to inflammatory demyelinating lesions. These alterations might reflect degenerative processes induced by lesion-mediated axonal injury in the spinal cord. Our results indicate that the MOG-induced EAE in DA rats is a valuable model to analyze neuronal alterations due to axonal impairment in an acute phase of a MS-like disease, and could be used for development of neuroprotective strategies.

[PMID: 16440059]
Inflammatory diseases of the CNS, such as MS and its animal model EAE, are characterized by infiltration of activated lymphocytes and phagocytes into the CNS. Within the CNS, activation of resident cells initiates an inflammatory cascade, leading to tissue destruction, demyelination, and neurologic deficit. TLRs recognize microbes and are pivotal mediators of innate immunity. Within the CNS, augmented TLR expression during EAE is observed, even in the absence of any apparent microbial involvement. To determine the functional relevance of this phenomenon during sterile autoimmunity, we studied the role of different TLRs as well as their common signaling adaptor MyD88 in the development of EAE. We found that MyD88 mice were completely EAE resistant. Surprisingly, this protection is partly due to engagement of the CpG receptor TLR9. Restricting the MyD88 or TLR9 mutation to host radio-resistant cells, including the cells within the CNS, revealed that engagement of radio-resistant cells modulated the disease course and histopathological changes. Our data clearly demonstrate that both TLR9 and MyD88 are essential modulators of the autoimmune process during the effector phase of disease and suggest that endogenous "danger signals" modulate the disease pathogenesis.

[PMID: 20623621]
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an animal model for studying multiple sclerosis (MS). Calpain has been implicated in many inflammatory and neurodegenerative events that lead to disability in EAE and MS. Thus, treating EAE animals with calpain inhibitors may block these events and ameliorate disability. To test this hypothesis, acute EAE Lewis rats were treated dose dependently with the calpain inhibitor calpeptin (50-250 microg/kg). Calpain activity, gliosis, loss of myelin, and axonal damage were attenuated by calpeptin therapy, leading to improved clinical scores. Neuronal and oligodendrocyte death were also decreased, with down-regulation of proapoptotic proteins, suggesting that decreases in cell death were due to decreases in the expression or activity of proapoptotic proteins. These results indicate that calpain inhibition may offer a novel therapeutic avenue for treating EAE and MS.

[PMID: 17343922]
Although the central nervous system (CNS) is thought to be immunoprivileged, under special circumstances it can produce antibody. Antibody production within the CNS, called intrathecal antibody production (ITAbP), is a prominent feature of neurological infections and inflammatory diseases, and is thought to possibly contribute to disease in multiple sclerosis (MS), but it has not been extensively studied. We investigated ITAbP in a viral model of MS. ELISpot, real-time RT-PCR for IgG mRNA in CNS tissue, and CSF analysis were used to assess ITAbP in two types of SJL mice infected with one of two strains of Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV). The amplitude of ITAbP increased during the first 4 months of infection. TMEV viral load remained high during the course of the infection, which likely was the main stimulus for ITAbP, since within samples of infected CNS tissues, levels of IgG gene expression were highly correlated with viral RNA levels, and a large percentage of intrathecally produced antibody was directed against TMEV. This study provides the first extensive analysis of ITAbP in TMEV infection, and demonstrates that, in this animal model of MS, antibody production within the CNS is likely driven by the presence of the causative pathogen.

[PMID: 17766043]
Although pain was previously not considered an important element of multiple sclerosis (MS), recent evidence indicates that over 50% of MS patients suffer from chronic pain. In the present study, we utilized the Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) model of MS to examine whether changes in nociception occur during disease progression and to investigate whether sex influences the development of nociception or disease-associated neurological symptoms. Using the rotarod assay, TMEV infected male mice displayed increased neurological deficits when compared to TMEV infected female mice, which mimics what is observed in human MS. While both male and female TMEV infected mice exhibited thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia, female mice developed mechanical allodynia at a faster rate and displayed significantly more mechanical allodynia than male mice. Since neuropathic symptoms have been described in MS patients, we quantified sensory nerve fibers in the epidermis of TMEV-infected and non-infected mice to determine if there were alterations in epidermal nerve density. There was a significantly higher density of PGP9.5 and CGRP-immunoreactive axons in the epidermis of TMEV-infected mice versus controls. Collectively these results indicate that the TMEV model is well suited to study the mechanisms of MS-induced nociception and suggest that alterations in peripheral nerve innervation may contribute to MS pain.

[PMID: 16126908]
Impaired remyelination due to degeneration of both postmitotic oligodendrocytes and oligodendrocyte progenitors (OPs) is the major hallmark of inflammatory demyelination in multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Here, we have demonstrated the potential of lovastatin, a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, for the restoration of impaired remyelination mediated through enhanced survival and differentiation of OPs in the spinal cord of treated EAE animals. Lovastatin treatment significantly increased the level of myelin lipids in the spinal cord of treated EAE animals, coinciding with the attenuation of disease severity and inflammatory demyelination as compared with untreated EAE animals. The increased expression of myelin proteins and transcription factors associated with differentiating oligodendrocytes along with the increase in number of NG2+/BrdU- and NG2+/BrdU+ cells, and the expression of proliferating OP-specific proteins, demonstrated the restoration of remyelination in the spinal cord of lovastatin-treated EAE animals. Corresponding to this, in vitro studies further corroborated the increased survival and differentiation of OPs in lovastatin-treated activated mixed glial cells suggesting that lovastatin protects against the degeneration of OPs and enhances their differentiation through induction of a pro-remyelinating environment in the spinal cord of treated EAE animals. Together, these data demonstrate that lovastatin has the potential to augment remyelination in MS lesions and other neuroinflammatory diseases.

[PMID: 15265674]
To assess neurological impairments quantitatively in an animal model of multiple sclerosis (MS), we have used a targeted model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which leads to the formation of anatomically defined lesions in the spinal cord. Deficits in the hindlimb locomotion are therefore well defined and highly reproducible, in contrast to the situation in generalized EAE with disseminated lesions. Behavioral tests for hindlimb sensorimotor functions, originally established for traumatic spinal cord injury, revealed temporary or persistent deficits in open field locomotion, the grid walk, the narrow beam and the measurement of the foot exorotation angle. Such refined behavioral testing in EAE will be crucial for the analysis of new therapeutic approaches for MS that seek to improve or prevent neurological impairment.

[PMID: 22272832]
Multiple sclerosis (MS) varies considerably in its incidence and progression in females and males. In spite of clinical evidence, relatively few studies have explored molecular mechanisms possibly involved in gender-related differences. The present study describes possible cellular- and molecular-involved markers which are differentially regulated in male and female rats and result in gender-dependent EAE evolution and progression. Attention was focused on markers of myelination (MBP and PDGFαR) and neuronal distress and/or damage (GABA synthesis enzymes, GAD65 and GAD67, NGF, BDNF and related receptors), in two CNS areas, i.e. spinal cord and cerebellum, which are respectively severely and mildly affected by inflammation and demyelination. Tissues were sampled during acute, relapse/remission and chronic phases and results were analysed by two-way ANOVA. 1. A strong gender-dependent difference in myelin (MBP) and myelin precursor (PDGFαR) marker mRNA expression levels is observed in control animals in the spinal cord, but not in the cerebellum. This is the only gender-dependent difference in the expression level of the indicated markers in healthy animals; 2. both PDGFαR and MBP mRNAs in the spinal cord and MBP in the cerebellum are down-regulated during EAE in gender-dependent manner; 3. in the cerebellum, the expression profile of neuron-associated markers (GAD65, GAD67) is characterized by a substantial down-regulation during the inflammatory phase of the disease, which does not differ between male and female rats (two-way ANOVA); 4. there is an up-regulation of NGF, trkA and p75 mRNA expression in the early phases of the disease (14 and 21 days post-immunization), which is not different between male and female. It is reported herein that the regulation of markers involved in demyelination and neuroprotection processes occurring during EAE, a well-established MS animal model, is gender- and time-dependent. These findings might contribute to gender- and phase disease-based therapy strategies.