[PMID: 19587388]
To determine the efficacy of CP-690,550 in improving pain, function and health status in patients with moderate to severe active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and an inadequate response to methotrexate or a tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibitor. Patients were randomised equally to placebo, CP-690,550 5, 15 or 30 mg twice daily for 6 weeks, with 6 weeks' follow-up. The patient's assessment of arthritis pain (pain), patient's assessment of disease activity, Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI) and Short Form-36 (SF-36) were recorded. At week 6, significantly more patients in the CP-690,550 5, 15 and 30 mg twice-daily groups experienced a 50% improvement in pain compared with placebo (44%, 66%, 78% and 14%, respectively), clinically meaningful reductions in HAQ-DI (> or =0.3 units) (57%, 75%, 76% and 36%, respectively) and clinically meaningful improvements in SF-36 domains and physical and mental components. CP-690,550 was efficacious in improving the pain, function and health status of patients with RA, from week 1 to week 6.

[PMID: 20732649]
CP-690,550 is an orally active and selective inhibitor of the janus kinase (JAK) molecules. The molecular pathways through which the JAK moieties function are described along with the clinical mechanisms associated with their inhibition. Animal models of JAK inhibition are reviewed as a background for the possible inhibition of JAK in humans. The pharmacokinetics of CP-690,550 in humans is described, and the Phase IIA and IIB trials are reviewed in some detail. These trials were dose-ranging and showed a general dose response with relatively robust American College of Rheumatology 20 (ACR20) responses. A proof-of-concept 6-week trial in which CP-690,550 was given as monotherapy was associated with highly efficacious responses at the mid and higher twice-daily dose ranges employed. A subsequent 24 week dose-ranging trial in which CP-690,550 was administered in combination with methotrexate showed ACR20 responses, which were also statistically significant versus placebo interventions. CP-690,550 treatment was associated with side effects, which included headache and nausea. Infections were more common versus placebo as were elevations in transaminase enzymes when administered in combination with methotrexate, and increases in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Decreases in haemoglobin and white blood cell (WBC) counts were also observed along with small increases in serum creatinine. Occasional significant decreases of haemoglobin (>2 g dl(-1)) were observed, although decreases of WBC to less than 1000 per mm(3) were not seen. Plans for long-term follow-up of the described trials are described along with the features of five presently ongoing Phase III trials of the CP-690,550 janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor. Future directions include completion and publication of these trials along with study of JAK inhibition for other indications.

[PMID: 22374445]
Dendritic cells (DCs) is the cell that act as source of the immune response by exquisitely presenting antigens to acquired immunity such as the T cells. Janus kinase (JAK) is a tyrosine kinase that is activated immediately after the cytokine binds to its unique receptor expressed on the cell surface. Among the JAKs, expression of JAK3 is limited on haematopoietic cells and is indispensable for lymphocyte development and proliferation. We have demonstrated that JAK3-deficient DCs normally develop, uptake antigens, produce inflammatory cytokines and function as an antigen-presenting cell, although they over-produce IL-10. Among the transcription factors that are known to be activated by JAK3, we explored the phenotype of Stat6-deficient DCs which is a transcription factor specifically activated by JAK3. Interestingly, development, function and inflammatory cytokine production was normal with over-production of IL-10 which was in line with the JAK3-deficient DCs. IL-4 is well known to activate JAK3-Stat6 in the cytoplasm and has been reported to be produced in the synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Hence the suppression of IL-10 production by IL-4 can be considered as one of the inflammatory process of arthritis. Moreover, induction of IL-10 production by DCs can be one mechanism of action of the JAK inhibitor (tofacitinib) which have shown high efficiency on active rheumatoid arthritis in clinical trials.

[PMID: 22899318]
The mechanistic link between Janus kinase (JAK) signaling and structural damage to arthritic joints in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is poorly understood. This study was undertaken to investigate how selective inhibition of JAK with tofacitinib (CP-690,550) affects osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in a rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model, as well as human T lymphocyte RANKL production and human osteoclast differentiation and function. Hind paw edema, inflammatory cell infiltration, and osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in rat AIA were assessed using plethysmography, histopathologic analysis, and immunohistochemistry; plasma and hind paw tissue levels of cytokines and chemokines (including RANKL) were also assessed. In vitro RANKL production by activated human T lymphocytes was evaluated by immunoassay, while human osteoclast differentiation and function were assessed via quantitative tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining and degradation of human bone collagen, respectively. Edema, inflammation, and osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in rats with AIA were dramatically reduced after 7 days of treatment with the JAK inhibitor, which correlated with reduced numbers of CD68/ED-1+, CD3+, and RANKL+ cells in the paws; interleukin-6 (transcript and protein) levels were rapidly reduced in paw tissue within 4 hours of the first dose, whereas it took 4-7 days of therapy for RANKL levels to decrease. Tofacitinib did not impact human osteoclast differentiation or function, but did decrease human T lymphocyte RANKL production in a concentration-dependent manner. These results suggest that the JAK inhibitor tofacitinib suppresses osteoclast-mediated structural damage to arthritic joints, and this effect is secondary to decreased RANKL production.

[PMID: 22121136]
The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of the novel Janus kinase inhibitor CP-690,550 in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA FLSs were isolated from tissue obtained by arthroplasty, cultured and serum-starved 48 h prior to stimulation. Messenger RNA and protein levels were determined by quantitative PCR and ELISA or multiplex bead assay, respectively. Phosphorylation of STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins was determined by western blot. Interleukin-6-induced phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3 was inhibited by CP-690,550 with IC(50) values of 23 and 77 nM, respectively. Unexpectedly, although tumour necrosis factor (TNF) did not induce immediate phosphorylation of either STAT, CP-690,550 inhibited TNF-induced expression of several chemokines (IP-10, RANTES and MCP1) at the messenger RNA and protein levels. Chemokine expression was inhibited by cycloheximide, implying a need for de novo protein synthesis, and cycloheximide abolished the effect of CP-690,550 (tofacitinib). TNF induced early interferon (IFN) β expression and STAT1 phosphorylation beginning at 3 h, which was blocked by CP-690,550. The dependence of TNF-induced chemokine expression on type I IFN was confirmed in FLSs from mice lacking type I IFN receptors (IFNARs) and in RA FLSs using an IFNAR blocking antibody. The Janus kinase/STAT pathway in FLS is indirectly activated by TNF through autocrine expression of type I IFN, resulting in IFNAR engagement and production of T cell chemokines. These findings illuminate a novel role of CP-690,550 in the treatment of RA: the reduction of chemokine synthesis by FLS, thereby limiting recruitment of T cells and other infiltrating leucocytes.

[PMID: 22777068]
Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has dramatically changed during the last 15 years. A limited number of conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD) in combination with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) and corticosteroids are facing a variety of biologics that are increasingly being used. Because of the high costs of biologics as well as the necessity for subcutaneous or intravenous administration, there is currently a growing interest in new and potent oral compounds such as the small molecules. Inflammatory pathways and mechanisms in signal transduction have been characterized in detail. Instead of neutralizing the action of a proinflammatory cytokine by antagonizing its biologic effect by an antibody, these small molecules interfere with the intracellular pathways of the inflammatory cascade. Intracellular kinases are among these enzymes which are crucially involved in intracellular signal transduction. Kinase inhibitors have been successfully used within the last few years in the treatment of various hematological malignancies, such as imatinib in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. More recently, the Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor tofacitinib has been evaluated as a potential new treatment option in RA and is awaiting approval. While an overview about JAK inhibition will be given elsewhere, other inhibitors such as spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) inhibitor, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitor and Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) inhibitor are currently in preclinical and clinical development.

[PMID: 23599436]
To summarise the adverse events (AE) reported in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treated with protein kinase inhibitors (PKi), and identify family and molecule-related AEs. Systematic review of the PKi used in clinical trials (CTs) in RA. Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, Web of Knowledge, and international abstracts of congress were reviewed, (up to 31 October 2012). Search was limited to interventional studies of PKi used in CTs in RA, written in English, and reporting frequencies of AE. Diseases with similar comorbidity burden also were included. Frequency of AE, serious AE (SAE), death and discontinuation due to  AEs (DCAE) were recorded. Risk of bias was assessed. Meta-analysis was carried using pooled relative risk (RR) with 95% CI as effect measure. The search produced 4410 hits. Forty-one articles reporting data on 21 PKi of the Janus kinase (JAK), SYK, p38 and cKit families were selected for detailed analysis. In patients treated with p38 inhibitors, RR for dizziness was 2.36 (1.20 to 4.63), and in patients treated with c-Kit inhibitors, RR for oedema was 3.43 (1.58 to 7.42). In patients treated with the JAK inhibitor tofacitinib, RR for hypercholesterolaemia was 1.70 (1.10 to 2.63) that was dose related. In patients treated with the Syk inhibitor fostamatinib, pooled RR for hypertransaminasaemia, hypertension, diarrhoea and neutropenia were 2.93 (1.02 to 8.43), 2.80 (1.58 to 5.99), 5.20 (3.19 to 8.49) and 9.24 (2.22 to 38.42), respectively. Serious infections and malignancies were not significantly more frequent in PKi-treated patients than in comparator groups. Event rates of serious infections and malignancies with PKi are not different from biologics. In addition, PKi have a unique safety profile related to target and off-target inhibition of kinases, at times dose related.

[PMID: 23212593]
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a representative autoimmune disease characterized by chronic and destructive inflammatory synovitis. The multiple cytokines play pivotal roles in RA pathogenesis by inducing intracellular signaling, and members of the Janus kinase (JAK) family are essential for such signal transduction. An orally available JAK3 inhibitor, tofacitinib, has been applied for RA, with satisfactory effects and acceptable safety in multiple clinical examinations. From phase 2 dose-finding studies, tofacitinib 5 mg and 10 mg twice a day appear suitable for further evaluation. Subsequently, multiple phase 3 studies were carried out, and tofacitinib with or without methotrexate (MTX) is efficacious and has a manageable safety profile in active RA patients who are MTX naïve or show inadequate response to methotrexate (MTX-IR), disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD)-IR, or tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-inhibitor-IR. The common adverse events were infections, such as nasopharyngitis; increases in cholesterol, transaminase, and creatinine; and decreases in neutrophil counts. Although the mode of action of tofacitinib remains unclear, we clarified that the inhibitory effects of tofacitinib could be mediated through suppression of interleukin (IL)-17 and interferon (IFN)-γ production and proliferation of CD4(+) T cells in the inflamed synovium. Taken together, an orally available kinase inhibitor tofacitinib targeting JAK-mediated signals would be expected to be a new option for RA treatment.

[PMID: 23961674]
Biologics targeting inflammatory cytokine has become a standardized tool for remission induction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, it is handled under restricted conditions and their cost of acquisition is high. Small molecule drugs targeting Janus kinase (JAK), a molecule involved in intracellular signaling pathway has shown similar treatment effect as biologics. Moreover, inhibitory effect on bone destruction has been demonstrated and has been approved in 2012 as a new disease modifying anti-rheumatic drug in USA. However, since the inhibition of JAK results in inhibition of multiple cytokine signaling pathways, the clinical studies have also shown adverse events differing from biologics.

[PMID: 24285764]
To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety, dosage administration, and adverse effects of tofacitinib for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treatment. Primary sources of information were obtained from clinical studies, which were identified through PubMed (1966 to June 2013) and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970 to March 2013) using terms: tofacitinib, tasocitinib, CP-690550, and CP-690,550. Information was used from tofacitinib package insert, guidelines, and published abstracts from the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and the European League Against Rheumatism. Data search was limited to include publications in English language and from human subjects. Tofacitinib is the first oral Janus kinase inhibitor indicated for treatment of moderate to severe RA. Tofacitinib demonstrated efficacy and safety comparable to other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Tofacitinib was efficacious in RA patients, indicated by achievements of ACR20, ACR50, and ACR70 criteria. Similar improvements were observed in patients who met remission criteria based on the Disease Activity Scores 28 criteria and quality of life as measured by the Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI). Tofacitinib was associated with infections and malignancies; and elevations in serum creatinine and lipids were observed. Drug interactions with inducers and inhibitors of the cytochrome P-450 3A4 and 2C9 isoenzymes were reported. Tofacitinib is an oral treatment option for RA patients who have inadequate response or intolerance to methotrexate. Postmarket surveillance will provide further insight to tofacitinib's role in RA therapy, especially in patients who may require different types of combination therapy with DMARDS.

[PMID: 19404006]
Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has developed dramatically by the appearance of biologics. However the development of a new anti-rheumatic drug is necessary because of its issue on route of administration and expense. Recently, inhibitors targeting tyrosine kinase known as Janus kinase (Jak) has shown prominent effect on RA. Jak family is comprised by Jak1, Jak2, Jak3 and Tyk2 which is necessary for signal transduction for inflammatory cytokines. INCB18424 targeting Jak1/2 and CP690,550 targeting Jak3 has been developed and is now on phase II clinical study for RA. Results from those clinical studies have proven that these inhibitors can be effective as biologics with few side effects. However, it has been reported that inhibitors are less specific than it has been expect and that non-specificity can be important for its effect. Therefore, we think that the mechanism of inhibitors cannot be explained by its inhibition of a single kinase. Herein, we describe IL-10 overproduction by Jak3 and Stat6 deficient dendritic cell. We speculate that this is one possible mechanism of action for CP690,550 although as for its non-specificity we need further investigation to predict not only its effect but also its side effect in a long term administration.

[PMID: 19565475]
To determine the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 3 different dosages of CP-690,550, a potent, orally active JAK inhibitor, in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in whom methotrexate, etanercept, infliximab, or adalimumab caused an inadequate or toxic response. Patients (n = 264) were randomized equally to receive placebo, 5 mg of CP-690,550, 15 mg of CP-690,550, or 30 mg of CP-690,550 twice daily for 6 weeks, and were followed up for an additional 6 weeks after treatment. The primary efficacy end point was the American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) response rate at 6 weeks. By week 6, the ACR20 response rates were 70.5%, 81.2%, and 76.8% in the 5 mg, 15 mg, and 30 mg twice daily groups, respectively, compared with 29.2% in the placebo group (P < 0.001). Improvements in disease activity in CP-690,550-treated patients compared with placebo were seen in all treatment groups as early as week 1. ACR50 and ACR70 response rates significantly improved in all treatment groups by week 4. The most common adverse events reported were headache and nausea. The infection rate in both the 15 mg twice daily group and the 30 mg twice daily group was 30.4% (versus 26.2% in the placebo group). No opportunistic infections or deaths occurred. Increases in mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, and increases in mean serum creatinine level (0.04-0.06 mg/dl) were seen in all CP-690,550 treatment arms. Our findings indicate that CP-690,550 is efficacious in the treatment of RA, resulting in rapid, statistically significant, and clinically meaningful reductions in the signs and symptoms of RA. Further studies of CP-690,550 in RA are warranted.

[PMID: 20701804]
The Janus kinase (JAK) family of tyrosine kinases includes JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2, and is required for signaling through Type I and Type II cytokine receptors. CP-690,550 is a potent and selective JAK inhibitor currently in clinical trials for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other autoimmune disease indications. In RA trials, dose-dependent decreases in neutrophil counts (PBNC) were observed with CP-690,550 treatment. These studies were undertaken to better understand the relationship between JAK selectivity and PBNC decreases observed with CP-690,550 treatment. Potency and selectivity of CP-690,550 for mouse, rat and human JAKs was evaluated in a panel of in vitro assays. The effect of CP-690,550 on granulopoiesis from progenitor cells was also assessed in vitro using colony forming assays. In vivo the potency of orally administered CP-690,550 on arthritis (paw edema), plasma cytokines, PBNC and bone marrow differentials were evaluated in the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model. CP-690,550 potently inhibited signaling through JAK1 and JAK3 with 5-100 fold selectivity over JAK2 in cellular assays, despite inhibiting all four JAK isoforms with nM potency in in vitro enzyme assays. Dose-dependent inhibition of paw edema was observed in vivo with CP-690,550 treatment. Plasma cytokines (IL-6 and IL-17), PBNC, and bone marrow myeloid progenitor cells were elevated in the context of AIA disease. At efficacious exposures, CP-690,550 returned all of these parameters to pre-disease levels. The plasma concentration of CP-690,550 at efficacious doses was above the in vitro whole blood IC50 of JAK1 and JAK3 inhibition, but not that of JAK2. Results from this investigation suggest that CP-690,550 is a potent inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK3 with potentially reduced cellular potency for JAK2. In rat AIA, as in the case of human RA, PBNC were decreased at efficacious exposures of CP-690,550. Inflammatory end points were similarly reduced, as judged by attenuation of paw edema and cytokines IL-6 and IL-17. Plasma concentration at these exposures was consistent with inhibition of JAK1 and JAK3 but not JAK2. Decreases in PBNC following CP-690,550 treatment may thus be related to attenuation of inflammation and are likely not due to suppression of granulopoiesis through JAK2 inhibition.

[PMID: 22006202]
To compare the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 6 dosages of oral tofacitinib (CP-690,550) with placebo for the treatment of active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in patients receiving a stable background regimen of methotrexate (MTX) who have an inadequate response to MTX monotherapy. In this 24-week, double-blind, phase IIb study, patients with active RA (n = 507) were randomized to receive placebo or tofacitinib (20 mg/day, 1 mg twice daily, 3 mg twice daily, 5 mg twice daily, 10 mg twice daily, or 15 mg twice daily). All patients continued to receive a stable dosage of MTX. The primary end point was the American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) response rate at week 12. At week 12, ACR20 response rates for patients receiving all tofacitinib dosages ≥3 mg twice daily (52.9% for 3 mg twice daily, 50.7% for 5 mg twice daily, 58.1% for 10 mg twice daily, 56.0% for 15 mg twice daily, and 53.8% for 20 mg/day) were significantly (P ≤ 0.05) greater than those for placebo (33.3%). Improvements were sustained at week 24 for the ACR20, ACR50, and ACR70 responses, scores for the Health Assessment Questionnaire disability index, the 3-variable Disease Activity Score in 28 joints using the C-reactive protein level (DAS28-CRP), and a 3-variable DAS28-CRP of <2.6. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events occurring in >10% of patients in any tofacitinib group were diarrhea, upper respiratory tract infection, and headache; 21 patients (4.1%) experienced serious adverse events. Sporadic increases in transaminase levels, increases in cholesterol and serum creatinine levels, and decreases in neutrophil and hemoglobin levels were observed. In patients with active RA in whom the response to MTX has been inadequate, the addition of tofacitinib at a dosage ≥3 mg twice daily showed sustained efficacy and a manageable safety profile over 24 weeks.

[PMID: 24193189]
Protein kinase inhibitors represent a novel and promising approach to the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). By targeting intracellular signaling pathways of cytokine-mediated reactions, these substances are able to interfere with critical immune processes that underly the pathology of RA. With tofacitinib, the first Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor has been approved in the USA, as well as in Switzerland and other countries. Several other substances are currently undergoing phase II or phase III trials.A crucial question that will shape the future of these new drugs is whether they are safe and in particular, whether they are safer than biological therapies. This article provides an overview on current data concerning the efficacy and safety of the most promising substances and discusses the potential future role of intracellular kinase inhibitors.

[PMID: 22209716]
Janus kinases have proved to be essential for many immunological processes but there is growing evidence that they also play a critical role in pathogenesis of many diseases including inflammatory diseases and cancer where they promote multiple steps of tumorigenesis. Several companies are in late stage clinical programs for the development of JAK kinase inhibitors and the first small molecule JAK inhibitor, Jakafi® (ruxolitinib) has been just approved for treatment of myeloproliferative neoplasms. Several other molecules are on the rise to treat arthritis, psoriasis and multiple types of cancer. This commentary will provide a review of the JAK kinase field as it pertains to small molecule inhibition for the treatment of cancer and autoimmune diseases with an emphasis on JAK2. The use of experimental and clinical inhibitors of JAK will be discussed for solid tumor and hematological malignancies, lupus, arthritis, colitis, neurological disorders, pain, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. In addition, it will review current paradigms in the field and treatment programs which could be complemented by small molecule inhibitors of Janus kinase.

[PMID: 22147632]
Tofacitinib (CP-690,550) is a novel JAK inhibitor that is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this study was to examine the effects of tofacitinib in vitro and in vivo in RA, in order to elucidate the role of JAK in the disease process. CD4+ T cells, CD14+ monocytes, and synovial fibroblasts (SFs) were purified from the synovium and peripheral blood of patients with RA and were evaluated for the effect of tofacitinib on cytokine production and cell proliferation. For in vivo analysis, synovium and cartilage samples obtained from patients with RA were implanted in immunodeficient mice (SCID-HuRAg mice), and tofacitinib was administered via an osmotic minipump. Tofacitinib treatment of CD4+ T cells originating from synovium and peripheral blood inhibited the production of interleukin-17 (IL-17) and interferon-γ (IFNγ) in a dose-dependent manner, affecting both proliferation and transcription, but had no effect on IL-6 and IL-8 production. Tofacitinib did not affect IL-6 and IL-8 production by RASFs and CD14+ monocytes. However, conditioned medium from CD4+ T cells cultured with tofacitinib inhibited IL-6 production by RASFs and IL-8 production by CD14+ monocytes. Treatment of SCID-HuRAg mice with tofacitinib decreased serum levels of human IL-6 and IL-8 and markedly suppressed invasion of synovial tissue into cartilage. Tofacitinib directly suppressed the production of IL-17 and IFNγ and the proliferation of CD4+ T cells, resulting in inhibition of IL-6 production by RASFs and IL-8 production by CD14+ cells and decreased cartilage destruction. In CD4+ T cells, presumably Th1 and Th17 cells, JAK plays a crucial role in RA synovitis.

[PMID: 23523202]
After two decades of research and development activity focussed on orally active kinase inhibitors, the first such drug (the JAK inhibitor Xeljanz, tofacitinib) was approved by the FDA in November 2012 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). There is an intense activity in many companies both on expanding the utility of JAK inhibitors in other auto-immune indications and in discovering inhibitors of the JAK family with different and more selective profiles. Progress is also being made with orally active Syk inhibitors. One such inhibitor (fostamatinib) is currently in large-scale phase 3 trials, and there are others in clinical development. The last two to three years have been transformative for kinase inhibitors in auto-immune diseases, as several inhibitors have finally progressed beyond phase 2 trials after so many failures on other targets. Thus, there are new treatment options for RA patients beyond existing oral DMARDs and parenteral biologics.

[PMID: 22252297]
Th17 cells, which have been implicated in autoimmune diseases, require STAT3 signaling activated by IL-6 or IL-23 for their development. Other Th1 and Th2 cytokines such as IL-2, IFN-γ and IL-4 strongly suppress Th17 development. Recently, CP-690,550 (tofacitinib), originally developed as a JAK3 inhibitor, has been shown to be effective in phase III clinical trials of rheumatoid arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) models, but the precise mechanism of the effect, especially with respect to Th17 cells, is poorly understood. To our surprise, a low dose CP-690,550 was found to accelerate the onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) at a concentration that suppressed CIA. At an early stage after immunization, more IL-17 production was observed in 15mg/kg body weight CP-690,550-treated mice than in untreated mice. In vitro, CP-690,550 inhibited both Th1 and Th2 development, while promoting Th17 differentiation at 10-50nM concentrations. Enhancement of Th17 by CP-690,550 is probably due to suppression of IL-2 signaling, because anti-IL-2 antibodies cancel the Th17-promoting effect of CP-690,550. CP-690,550 selectively inhibited IFN--induced STAT1, IL-4-induced STAT6 and IL-2-induced STAT5 at 3-30nM, while suppression of IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation required a concentration greater than 100nM. In HEK293T cells, CP-690,550 less effectively suppressed JAK1-mediated STAT3 phosphorylation compared with JAK3. These results suggest that CP-690,550 has a different effects among JAKs and STATs, thereby affecting helper T cell differentiation, and murine autoimmune disease models.

[PMID: 20233177]
To investigate the effects of methotrexate (MTX) on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CP-690,550, a novel Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor in development as a therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), to determine the effects of multiple doses of CP-690,550 on the PK of MTX, and to evaluate the short-term safety and tolerability of co-administration of CP-690,550 and MTX. This was a fixed-dose drug-drug interaction study. Twelve patients diagnosed with RA for at least 6 months were enrolled in a Phase I, open-label study of the PK of multiple doses of CP-690,550 (30 mg b.i.d.) and single doses of MTX (15-25 mg per week). All patients completed the study and were evaluated for PK and safety. CP-690,550 exposure was not affected by co-administration with MTX; AUC(12) ratio (CP-690,550 + MTX/CP-690,550) was 103.06% [90% confidence interval (CI) 99.00, 107.29]. MTX exposure decreased by 10%; AUC(12) ratio (CP-690,550 + MTX/MTX) was 89.53% (90% CI 77.38, 103.57), which was not considered clinically significant. Co-administration of CP-690,550 and MTX was safe and well tolerated. There were no serious adverse events or withdrawals from the study and there was no trend in the incidence or severity of adverse events across treatments. Co-administration of CP-690,550 and MTX was safe and well tolerated. There was no clinically significant effect on the PK profile of either drug. Therefore, dose adjustments should not be required when co-administering CP-690,550 and MTX.

[PMID: 23384668]
In this review, we describe the current knowledge of the biology of the JAKs. The JAK family comprises the four nonreceptor tyrosine kinases JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and Tyk2, all key players in the signal transduction from cytokine receptors to transcription factor activation. We also review the progresses made towards the optimization of JAK inhibitors and the importance of their selectivity profile. Indeed, the full array of many medicinal chemistry enabling tools (HTS, X-ray crystallography, scaffold morphing, etc.) has been deployed to successfully design molecules that discriminate among JAK family and other kinases. While the first JAK inhibitor was launched in 2011, this review also summarizes the status of several other small-molecule JAK inhibitors currently in development to treat arthritis, psoriasis, organ rejection, and multiple cancer types.

[PMID: 22971156]
The JAK family comprises of the four non-receptor tyrosine kinases JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and Tyk2, which play key, but differing, roles in cytokine receptor signal transduction. A non-selective JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib, has recently been approved to treat myelofibrosis whereas tofacitinib is poised for approval to treat rheumatoid arthritis. Selective inhibition of JAK3, JAK1 or Tyk2 provides the opportunity to achieve clinical efficacy in the treatment of inflammatory diseases while reducing the risk of dose-limiting effects attributable to JAK2 inhibition. This review considers the small number of published patent filings that claim either selective JAK1 or selective Tyk2 inhibitors. These are considered in the context of the considerably larger number of disclosures and patent filings claiming selective JAK2 or JAK3 inhibitors. The recent disclosure of the clinical efficacy of a selective JAK1 inhibitor (GLPG-0634) in rheumatoid arthritis and detailed disclosure of the some potent and highly selective JAK1 inhibitors provide a clear stimulus for further activity in this area. The availability of a selective Tyk2 inhibitor will provide the opportunity for better understanding of the physiological role of this kinase. Recent patent applications indicate that Tyk2 selectivity is achievable and Tyk2 inhibitors have potential in the treatment of multiple sclerosis.

[PMID: 24218541]
A critical piece in the translation of preclinical studies to clinical trials is the determination of dosing regimens that allow maximum therapeutic benefit with minimum toxicity. The preclinical pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) profile of tofacitinib, an oral Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, in a mouse collagen-induced arthritis (mCIA) model was compared with clinical PK/PD data from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Preclinical evaluations included target modulation and PK/PD modeling based on continuous subcutaneous infusion or oral once- or twice-daily (BID) dosing paradigms in mice. The human PK/PD profile was obtained from pooled data from four phase 2 studies in patients with RA, and maximal effect models were used to evaluate efficacy after 12 weeks of tofacitinib treatment (1-15 mg BID). In mCIA, the main driver of efficacy was inhibition of cytokine receptor signaling mediated by JAK1 heterodimers, but not JAK2 homodimers, and continuous daily inhibition was not required to maintain efficacy. Projected efficacy could be predicted from total daily exposure irrespective of the oral dosing paradigm, with a total steady-state plasma concentration achieving 50% of the maximal response (Cave50) of ~100 nM. Tofacitinib potency (ED50) in clinical studies was ~3.5 mg BID (90% confidence interval: 2.3, 5.5) or total Cave50 of ~40 nM, derived using Disease Activity Scores from patients with RA. The collective clinical and preclinical data indicated the importance of Cave as a driver of efficacy, rather than maximum or minimum plasma concentration (Cmax or Cmin), where Cave50 values were within ~2-fold of each other.

[PMID: 23642011]
Conventional immunosuppressive therapies have radically transformed patient survival in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), but their use is associated with considerable toxicity and a substantial proportion of patients remain refractory to treatment. A more comprehensive understanding of the complexity of SLE immunopathogenesis has evolved over the past decade and has led to the testing of several biologic agents in clinical trials. There is a clear need for new therapeutic agents that overcome these issues, and biologic agents offer exciting prospects as future SLE therapies.An array of promising new therapies are currently emerging or are under development including B-cell depletion therapies, agents targeting B-cell survival factors, blockade of T-cell co-stimulation and anti-cytokine therapies, such as monoclonal antibodies against interleukin-6 and interferon-α.

[PMID: 21884580]
The new JAK3 inhibitor, CP690,550, has shown efficacy in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. The present study was undertaken to assess the effects of CP690,550 on cytokine production and cellular signaling in human CD4(+) T cells. CD4(+) T cells produced IL-2, IL-4, IL-17, IL-22 and IFN-γ in following stimulation with a CD3 antibody. At the optimal concentration, CP690,550 almost completely inhibited the production of IL-4, IL-17, IL-22 and IFN-γ from these activated CD4(+) T cells, but only had marginal effects on IL-2 production. Moreover CP690,550 inhibited anti-CD3-induced phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5, and STAT6, but not the TCR-associated phosphorylation of ZAP-70. Therefore, CP690,550-mediated modification of the JAK/STAT pathway may be a new immunosuppressive strategy in the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

[PMID: 21105711]
There is a critical need for safer and more convenient treatments for organ transplant rejection and autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis. Janus tyrosine kinases (JAK1, JAK3) are expressed in lymphoid cells and are involved in the signaling of multiple cytokines important for various T cell functions. Blockade of the JAK1/JAK3-STAT pathway with a small molecule was anticipated to provide therapeutic immunosuppression/immunomodulation. The Pfizer compound library was screened against the catalytic domain of JAK3 resulting in the identification of a pyrrolopyrimidine-based series of inhibitors represented by CP-352,664 (2a). Synthetic analogues of 2a were screened against the JAK enzymes and evaluated in an IL-2 induced T cell blast proliferation assay. Select compounds were evaluated in rodent efficacy models of allograft rejection and destructive inflammatory arthritis. Optimization within this chemical series led to identification of CP-690,550 1, a potential first-in-class JAK inhibitor for treatment of autoimmune diseases and organ transplant rejection.

[PMID: 22460142]
Multiple cytokines play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The appropriate intracellular signalling pathways must be activated via cytokine receptors on the cell surface, and the tyrosine kinases transduce the first 'outside to in' signals to be phosphorylated after receptor binding to its ligand. Among them, members of the Janus kinase (JAK) family are essential for the signalling pathways of various cytokines and are implicated in the pathogenesis of RA. The in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo effects of a JAK inhibitor CP-690,550 (tofacitinib) for the treatment of RA are reported. In vitro experiments indicated that the effects of tofacitinib were mediated through suppression of interleukin 17 (IL-17) and interferon γ production and proliferation of CD4 T cells, presumably Th1 and Th17. A treatment study was conducted in the severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)-HuRAg mice, an RA animal model using SCID mice implanted with synovium and cartilage from patients. Tofacitinib reduced serum levels of human IL-6 and IL-8 in the mice and also reduced synovial inflammation and invasion into the implanted cartilage. A phase 2 double-blind study using tofacitinib was carried out in Japanese patients with active RA and inadequate response to methotrexate (MTX). A total of 140 patients were randomised to tofacitinib 1, 3, 5, 10 mg or placebo twice daily and the American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) response rate at week 12, a primary end point, was significant for all tofacitinib treatment groups. Thus, an orally available tofacitinib in combination with MTX was efficacious and had a manageable safety profile. Tofacitinib at 5 and 10 mg twice a day appears suitable for further evaluation to optimise the treatment of RA.

[PMID: 23627915]
The advent of anti-Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) therapy has changed the way of treating inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, primary and secondary failure are relatively frequent with all anti-TNF agents, which are available only as parenteral agents. Tofacitinib is an oral janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor that inhibits JAK family kinase members, in particular JAK1 and JAK3, achieving a broad limitation of inflammation by interfering with several cytokine receptors. It first proved its efficacy as an immunosuppressive regimen after renal transplantation, and was recently approved by the FDA for rheumatoid arthritis. First data in IBD are promising, especially in ulcerative colitis. Ongoing clinical trials in both UC and Crohn's disease (CD) are needed to further explore its efficacy in CD and to better assess its safety profile.

[PMID: 24013646]
Tofacitinib, which is a Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, has shown clinical effects in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. JAKs are important kinases in lymphocyte differentiation; however, their function in dendritic cells (DCs) is unknown. In this study, the function of JAKs in DCs was investigated with tofacitinib. The effects of tofacitinib on the maturation of human monocyte-derived DCs induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation were investigated. In addition, its effects on T cell stimulatory capability was investigated by coculturing with naïve CD45RA-positive T cells. Tofacitinib decreased expression of CD80/CD86 in a concentration-dependent manner in LPS-stimulated DCs; however, it did not affect HLA-DR expression. Tofacitinib suppressed tumour necrosis factor, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1β production without affecting transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and IL-10 production. Meanwhile, CD80/CD86 expression in DCs was enhanced by type I interferon (IFN) stimulation, and the LPS-induced CD80/CD86 expression was inhibited by an antibody to type I IFN receptor. Furthermore, tofacitinib suppressed production of type I IFN and activation of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7, which is a transcription factor involved in CD80/CD86 and type I IFN expression. Tofacitinib also decreased the T cell stimulatory capability of DCs and increased expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)-1 and IDO-2. Tofacitinib, a JAK1/JAK3 inhibitor, affected the activities of human DCs. It decreased CD80/CD86 expression and T cell stimulatory capability through suppression of type I IFN signalling. These results suggest a novel mode of action for tofacitinib and a pivotal role for JAKs in the differentiation of DCs.

[PMID: 21548952]
Interleukin (IL)-6-type cytokines exert their effects through activation of the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling cascade. The JAK/STAT pathways play an important role in rheumatoid arthritis, since JAK inhibitors have exhibited dramatic effects on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in clinical trials. In this study, we investigated the molecular effects of a small molecule JAK inhibitor, CP690,550 on the JAK/STAT signaling pathways and examined the role of JAK kinases in rheumatoid synovitis. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) were isolated from RA patients and stimulated with recombinant oncostatin M (OSM). The cellular supernatants were analyzed using cytokine protein chips. IL-6 mRNA and protein expression were analyzed by real-time PCR method and ELISA, respectively. Protein phosphorylation of rheumatoid synoviocytes was assessed by Western blot using phospho-specific antibodies. OSM was found to be a potent inducer of IL-6 in FLS. OSM stimulation elicited rapid phosphorylation of STATs suggesting activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in FLS. CP690,550 pretreatment completely abrogated the OSM-induced production of IL-6, as well as OSM-induced JAK/STAT, and activation of mitogen-activated kinases (MAPKs) in FLS. These findings suggest that IL-6-type cytokines contribute to rheumatoid synovitis through activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in rheumatoid synoviocytes. Inhibition of these pro-inflammatory signaling pathways by CP690,550 could be important in the treatment of RA.

[PMID: 21952978]
To compare the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 5 doses of oral tofacitinib (CP-690,550) or adalimumab monotherapy with placebo for the treatment of active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in patients with an inadequate response to disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. In this 24-week, double-blind, phase IIb study, patients with RA (n = 384) were randomized to receive placebo, tofacitinib at 1, 3, 5, 10, or 15 mg administered orally twice a day, or adalimumab at 40 mg injected subcutaneously every 2 weeks (total of 6 injections) followed by oral tofacitinib at 5 mg twice a day for 12 weeks. The primary end point was the responder rate according to the American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) at week 12. Treatment with tofacitinib at a dose of ≥3 mg twice a day resulted in a rapid response with significant efficacy when compared to placebo, as indicated by the primary end point (ACR20 response at week 12), achieved in 39.2% (3 mg; P ≤ 0.05), 59.2% (5 mg; P < 0.0001), 70.5% (10 mg; P < 0.0001), and 71.9% (15 mg; P < 0.0001) in the tofacitinib group and 35.9% of patients in the adalimumab group (P = 0.105), compared with 22.0% of patients receiving placebo. Improvements were sustained at week 24, according to the ACR20, ACR50, and ACR70 response rates as well as classifications of remission according to the 3-variable Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28) using C-reactive protein and the 4-variable DAS28 using the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) in patients across all tofacitinib treatment arms (n = 272) were urinary tract infection (7.7%), diarrhea (4.8%), headache (4.8%), and bronchitis (4.8%). Tofacitinib monotherapy at ≥3 mg twice a day was efficacious in the treatment of patients with active RA over 24 weeks and demonstrated a manageable safety profile.