[PMID: 19138672]
Bax is a pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family proteins involved in the release of apoptogenic factors from mitochondria to the cytosol. Recently, it has been shown both in mammals and yeast that Bax insertion in the mitochondrial outer membrane involves at least two distinct mechanisms, one of which uses the TOM complex. Here, we show that in Drosophila, heterozygous loss of function mutations of Tom22 or Tom70, two receptors of the TOM complex, attenuates bax-induced phenotypes in vivo. These results argue that the TOM complex may be used as a mitochondrial Bax receptor in Drosophila.

[PMID: 12732850]
Bax (Bcl2-associated X protein) is an apoptosis-inducing protein that participates in cell death during normal development and in various diseases. Bax resides in an inactive state in the cytosol of many cells. In response to death stimuli, Bax protein undergoes conformational changes that expose membrane-targeting domains, resulting in its translocation to mitochondrial membranes, where Bax inserts and causes release of cytochrome c and other apoptogenic proteins. It is unknown what controls conversion of Bax from the inactive to active conformation. Here we show that Bax interacts with humanin (HN), an anti-apoptotic peptide of 24 amino acids encoded in mammalian genomes. HN prevents the translocation of Bax from cytosol to mitochondria. Conversely, reducing HN expression by small interfering RNAs sensitizes cells to Bax and increases Bax translocation to membranes. HN peptides also block Bax association with isolated mitochondria, and suppress cytochrome c release in vitro. Notably, the mitochondrial genome contains an identical open reading frame, and the mitochondrial version of HN can also bind and suppress Bax. We speculate therefore that HN arose from mitochondria and transferred to the nuclear genome, providing a mechanism for protecting these organelles from Bax.

[PMID: 17494694]
Prion protein (PrP) inhibits the activation of proapoptotic Bax in primary human neurons and MCF-7 cells. Because neuronal apoptosis occurs in human prion diseases, here we examine the anti-Bax function of familial PrP mutants. All Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and fatal familial insomnia-associated prion protein mutations partially or completely lose the anti-Bax function in human neurons and, except for A117V and V203I, in MCF-7 cells. The ability of the mutants to protect against Bax-mediated cell death is divided into three groups: (1) group I, retention of anti-Bax function in both the Val129 and Met129 mutants; (2) group II, retention of anti-Bax function only in Val129 mutants; and (3) group III, reduction or no anti-Bax function in Val129 and Met129 mutants. The loss of anti-Bax function in these PrP mutants correlates completely with a significant decrease in the production of cytosolic PrP, a form of PrP shown previously to have anti-Bax function in human neurons. Cotransfection of the full-length PrP mutants with wild-type or mutant cytosolic PrP, but not with wild type full-length PrP, rescues the anti-Bax function of PrP. The results show that the failure of PrP mutants to produce cytosolic PrP is responsible for the loss of anti-Bax function and that the effect of the PrP mutants is dominant over wild-type PrP. Furthermore, these results imply that misfolded PrP that escapes retrotranslocation could accumulate at the cell surface and cause neuronal dysfunction.

[PMID: 24712408]
Disturbance of the balance between mitochondrial fission and fusion has been implicated in cerebral ischemia and several neurodegenerative diseases, whereas the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In the present study, we attempted to investigate the role of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), a key mitochondrial fission protein, in the pathogenesis of cerebral ischemia. Using Drp1 siRNA or Mdivi-1, a small molecule inhibitor of Drp1, we examined the effect of Drp1 knockdown or inhibition on oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD)-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and death of SH-SY-5Y cells. Cell death and viability were evaluated with LDH and MTT assays, respectively, and mitochondrial morphology, mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm), and ATP production were assessed using epifluorescence microscopy, flow cytometry, and HPLC, respectively. Moreover, to examine the effect of Drp1 inhibition on ischemic brain injury, middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) mice were injected (i.p.) with Mdivi1, and blood-brain barrier permeability, brain water content, and cell apoptosis were assessed. Knockdown or inhibition of Drp1 by Mdivi-1 significantly attenuated OGD-induced cell death in SH-SY-5Y cells, associated with reduced morphological change of mitochondria and attenuated Bax insertion,oligomerization. Moreover, treatment of the MCAO mice with Mdivi-1 remarkably reduced the infarct volume and neurological deficits in a dose-dependent manner, associated with marked reduction of mitochondrial fragmentation and BAX expression. Down-regulation or inhibition of Drp1 may reduce cerebral ischemic damage through maintaining normal mitochondrial morphology and function, and decreasing Bax insertion and oligomerization in mitochondria.

[PMID: 27164337]
The aim of the present study was to find out if there is an increase in the expression of pro-apoptotic Bax and reduction in expression of anti-apoptotic Blc-2A1 in newborn intestines with necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). We compared 8 consecutive newborn patients undergoing bowel resection for NEC with 8 neonates undergoing intestinal resection for ileal atresia. Histopathological evaluation of tissue injury and apoptosis was performed by using light microscopic examination and TUNEL method. The mRNA level of apoptotic (CASP3, CASP6, CASP7, Bax, BIRC2) and anti-apoptotic genes were evaluated by PCR array method. Protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry. We compared 8 consecutive newborn patients undergoing bowel resection for NEC with 8 neonates undergoing intestinal resection for ileal atresia. Histopathological evaluation of tissue injury and apoptosis was performed by using light microscopic examination and TUNEL method. The mRNA level of apoptotic (CASP3, CASP6, CASP7, Bax, BIRC2) and anti-apoptotic genes were evaluated by PCR array method. Protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Our data in humannewborns suggest that alteration of the balance between pro-apoptotic Bax expression and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2A1 expression in the site of injury is a possible mechanism in the pathogenesis of NEC.

[PMID: 8798665]
Adenovirus E1B 19-kDa protein (19K) is a member of the Bcl-2 family of suppressors of apoptosis. The suppressors function through heterodimerization with the death promoters, Bax and related proteins, thus establishing a set point within the cell that determines whether or not apoptosis is executed in response to a death signal. Sequence similarities between 19K and Bcl-2 are largely restricted to short Bcl-2 homology (BH) domains that mediate interaction with Bax. The BH1 sequence in 19K is degenerate but nevertheless contains a conserved glycine residue found in all family members that when mutated to alanine in Bcl-2 results in loss of Bcl-2 function and ability to dimerize with Bax (Yin, X.-M., Oltvai, Z. N., and Korsmeyer, S. J. (1994) Nature 369, 321-323). Here, we show that the analogous mutation in BH1 of 19K also abrogates the anti-apoptotic properties of 19K and its ability to interact with Bax, thus establishing the critical importance of this residue within BH1 and the likely similarity of Bcl-2 and 19K function. In distinct contrast to Bcl-2, however, 19K interaction was not detected with Bad, a Bcl-2/Bcl-XL dimerizing protein that can potentially regulate a Bax middle dotBcl-2/Bcl-XL survival set point and reinstate susceptibility to a death signal. Furthermore, the anti-apoptotic function of 19K was not overcome by enforced expression of Bad in transfected cells. This feature of 19K may provide adenovirus with a selective advantage in evading premature induction of apoptosis by the host cell.

[PMID: 17519046]
Bcl-2 family proteins are key regulators of mitochondrial integrity and comprise both pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins. Bax a pro-apoptotic member localizes as monomers in the cytosol of healthy cells and accumulates as oligomers in mitochondria of apoptotic cells. The Bcl-2 homology-3 (BH3) domain regulates interactions within the family, but regions other than BH3 are also critical for Bax function. Thus, the N-terminus has been variously implicated in targeting to mitochondria, interactions with BH3-only proteins as well as conformational changes linked to Bax activation. The transmembrane (TM) domains (alpha5-alpha6 helices in the core and alpha9 helix in the C-terminus) in Bax are implicated in localization to mitochondria and triggering cytotoxicity. Here we have investigated N-terminus modulation of TM function in the context of regulation by the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL. Deletion of 29 amino acids in the Bax N-terminus (Bax 30-192) caused constitutive accumulation at mitochondria and triggered high levels of cytotoxicity, not inhibited by Bcl-xL. Removal of the TM domains (Bax 30-105) abrogated mitochondrial localization but resulted in Bcl-xL regulated activation of endogenous Bax and Bax-Bak dependent apoptosis. Inclusion of the alpha5-alpha6 helices/TMI domain (Bax 30-146) phenocopied Bax 30-192 as it restored mitochondrial localization, Bcl-xL independent cytotoxicity and was not dependent on endogenous Bax-Bak. Inhibition of function and localization by Bcl-xL was restored in Bax 1-146, which included the TM1 domain. Regardless of regulation by Bcl-xL, all N-terminal deleted constructs immunoprecipitated Bcl-xLand converged on caspase-9 dependent apoptosis consistent with mitochondrial involvement in the apoptotic cascade. Sub-optimal sequence alignments of Bax and Bcl-xL indicated a sequence similarity between the alpha5-alpha6 helices of Bax and Bcl-xL. Alanine substitutions of three residues (T14A-S15A-S16A) in the N-terminus (Bax-Ala3) attenuated regulation by the serine-threonine kinase Akt/PKB but not by Bcl-xL indicative of distinct regulatory mechanisms. Collectively, the analysis of Bax deletion constructs indicates that the N-terminus drives conformational changes facilitating inhibition of cytotoxicity by Bcl-xL. We speculate that the TM1 helices may serve as 'structural antagonists' for BH3-Bcl-xL interactions, with this function being regulated by the N-terminus in the intact protein.

[PMID: 23744350]
The multi-BCL-2 homology domain pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family members BAK and BAX have critical roles in apoptosis. They are essential for mitochondrial outer-membrane permeabilization, leading to the release of apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome-c, which promote activation of the caspase cascade and cellular demolition. The BOK protein has extensive amino-acid sequence similarity to BAK and BAX and is expressed in diverse cell types, particularly those of the female reproductive tissues. The BOK-deficient mice have no readily discernible abnormalities, and its function therefore remains unresolved. We hypothesized that BOK may exert functions that overlap with those of BAK and/or BAX and examined this by generating Bok(-/-)Bak(-/-) and Bok(-/-)Bax(-/-) mice. Combined loss of BOK and BAK did not elicit any noticeable defects, although it remains possible that BOK and BAK have critical roles in developmental cell death that overlap with those of BAX. In most tissues examined, loss of BOK did not exacerbate the abnormalities caused by loss of BAX, such as defects in spermatogenesis or the increase in neuronal populations in the brain and retina. Notably, however, old Bok(-/-)Bax(-/-) females had abnormally increased numbers of oocytes from different stages of development, indicating that BOK may have a pro-apoptotic function overlapping with that of BAX in age-related follicular atresia.

[PMID: 24503763]
The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression of the gene coding for the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2, the proapoptotic molecule Bax, and the apoptosis executor enzyme caspase-3 in preimplantation renal biopsies (PIB) as markers for delayed graft function. In this prospective single-center study, gene expression levels were evaluated using real-time TaqMan polymerase chain reaction in PIB of kidneys from 72 deceased donors (DDs) and 18 living donors (LDs). CASP3 and BAX expression levels were higher, whereas those of BCL2 were lower, in DD than in LD PIB. In biopsies from DD, BCL2 levels were lower in cases with DGF, whereas no differences were observed concerning CASP3 and BAX. The BAX/BCL2 gene expression ratio greater than 2.29 associated with DGF with an odds ratio of 2.00. A multiple regression analysis including data of TLR4 expression in the first day posttransplant PB from a previous study of our group conducted in the same patients revealed a very strong association of the combination of BAX/BCL2 greater than 2.3 in PIB and TLR4 of 0.95 uRE or lesser in PB with the occurrence of DGF, with OR of 120 and positive and negative predictive values of 91% and 92%, respectively. The power to predict DGF of the combination of high BAX/BCL2 expression in PIB and low TLR4 expression in the first day posttransplant peripheral blood observed in the present study is extremely high, in comparison to any other marker or combinations of markers so far published in the literature.

[PMID: 21069436]
Bax induces mitochondrial-dependent cell apoptosis signals in mammalian cells. However, the mechanism of how Bax is kept inactive is not fully elucidated. Here, we identify FIH1 as a potential interactor of Bax through mass spectrometry analysis. Coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down experiments show that FIH1 can directly interact with Bax. Bax-mediated apoptosis is suppressed by FIH1 overexpression, but accelerated by FIH1 deficiency. FIH1 functions as a cytosol retention factor of Bax, blocking Bax translocation from cytosol to mitochondria in response to apoptotic stimuli. Overall, there results unveil a novel role of FIH1 in the regulation of Bax-mediated apoptosis.

[PMID: 11932420]
Adenovirus infection and expression of E1A induces both proliferation and apoptosis, the latter of which is blocked by the adenovirus Bcl-2 homologue E1B 19K. The mechanism of apoptosis induction and the role that it plays in productive infection are not known. Unlike apoptosis mediated by death receptors, infection with proapoptotic E1B 19K mutant viruses did not induce cleavage of Bid but nonetheless induced changes in Bak and Bax conformation, Bak-Bax interaction, caspase 9 and 3 activation, and apoptosis. In wild-type-adenovirus-infected cells, in which E1B 19K inhibits apoptosis, E1B 19K was bound to Bak, precluding Bak-Bax interaction and changes in Bax conformation. Infection with E1B 19K mutant viruses induced apoptosis in wild-type and Bax- or Bak-deficient baby mouse kidney cells but not in those deficient for both Bax and Bak. Furthermore, Bax and Bak deficiency dramatically increased E1A expression and virus replication. Thus, Bax- and Bak-mediated apoptosis severely limits adenoviral replication, demonstrating that Bax and Bak function as an antiviral response at the cellular level.

[PMID: 22442658]
One of two proapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins, Bak or Bax, is required to permeabilize the mitochondrial outer membrane during apoptosis. While Bax is mostly cytosolic and translocates to mitochondria following an apoptotic stimulus, Bak is constitutively integrated within the outer membrane. Membrane anchorage occurs via a C-terminal transmembrane domain that has been studied in Bax but not in Bak, therefore what governs their distinct subcellular distribution is uncertain. In addition, whether the distinct subcellular distributions of Bak and Bax contributes to their differential regulation during apoptosis remains unclear. To gain insight into Bak and Bax targeting to mitochondria, elements of the Bak C-terminus were mutated, or swapped with those of Bax. Truncation of the C-terminal six residues (C-segment) or substitution of three basic residues within the C-segment destabilized Bak. Replacing the Bak C-segment with that from Bax rescued stability and function, but unexpectedly resulted in a semi-cytosolic protein, termed Bak/BaxCS. When in the cytosol, both Bax and Bak/BaxCS sequestered their hydrophobic transmembrane domains in their hydrophobic surface groove. Upon apoptotic signalling, Bak/BaxCS translocated to the mitochondrial outer membrane, inserted its transmembrane domain, oligomerized, and released cytochrome c. Despite this Bax-like subcellular distribution, Bak/BaxCS retained Bak-like regulation following targeting of Mcl-1. Residues in the C-segment of Bak and of Bax contribute to their distinct subcellular localizations. That a semi-cytosolic form of Bak, Bak/BaxCS, could translocate to mitochondria and release cytochrome c indicates that Bak and Bax share a conserved mode of activation. In addition, the differential regulation of Bak and Bax by Mcl-1 is predominantly independent of the initial subcellular localizations of Bak and Bax.

[PMID: 11340567]
A popular model of BCL-2 and BAX involvement in apoptosis suggests that upon apoptosis induction cytosolic BAX translocates to the mitochondria, where it displays the pro-apoptotic function, which involves its homodimerization. BCL-2 exerts anti-apoptotic function by forming heterodimers with BAX, thus neutralizing the pro-apoptotic activity of the latter. We have shown that irradiation of the human myeloma cell line RPMI-8226 induced apoptosis as determined by DNA degradation, cytochrome c release into cytoplasm and BCL-2 caspase-mediated cleavage. BCL-2 protein was present only in the membrane fraction, whereas BAX was found both in cytosol and membranes isolated from non-irradiated cells. Radiation induced moderate redistribution of BAX from cytosol to membranes with a concomitant increase in BCL-2/BAX heterodimer formation. Rapid and transient BCL-2 phosphorylation in membrane fractions of irradiated cells did not affect BCL-2/BAX heterodimerization. We failed to detect any BAX/BAX homodimers in apoptotic cells. Our findings show that in irradiated RPMI-8226 cells the formation of BCL-2/BAX heterodimers correlates with apoptosis. We conclude that BCL-2/BAX heterodimers are negative regulators of death protection, and our data agree with those who propose that BCL-2 does not require BAX to exert its survival function.

[PMID: 17074758]
Vaccinia virus, the prototypic member of the orthopoxvirus genus, encodes the mitochondrial-localized protein F1L that functions to protect cells from apoptotic death and inhibits cytochrome c release. We previously showed that F1L interacts with the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bak and inhibits activation of Bak following an apoptotic stimulus (Wasilenko, S. T., Banadyga, L., Bond, D., and Barry, M. (2005) J. Virol. 79, 14031-14043). In addition to Bak, the pro-apoptotic protein Bax is also capable of initiating cytochrome c release suggesting that vaccinia virus infection could also inhibit Bax activity. Here we show that F1L inhibits the activity of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax by inhibiting oligomerization and N-terminal activation of Bax. F1L expression also inhibited the subcellular redistribution of Bax to the mitochondria and the insertion of Bax into the outer mitochondrial membrane. The ability of F1L to inhibit Bax activation does not require Bak, because F1L expression inhibited cytochrome c release and Bax activation in Bak-deficient cells. No interaction between Bax and F1L was detected during infection, suggesting that F1L functions upstream of Bax activation. Notably, F1L was capable of interacting with the BH3-only protein BimL as shown by co-immunoprecipitation, and F1L expression inhibited apoptosis induced by BimL. These studies suggest that, in addition to interacting with the pro-apoptotic protein Bak, F1L also functions to indirectly inhibit the activation of Bax, likely by interfering with the pro-apoptotic activity of BH3-only proteins such as BimL.

[PMID: 16679323]
Bax is a major proapoptotic member of the Bcl2 family that is required for apoptotic cell death. We have recently discovered that Bax phosphorylation at serine 184 induced by nicotine through activation of protein kinase AKT abolishes its proapoptotic function in human lung cancer cells. Here we found that either treatment of cells with the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) inhibitor okadaic acid or specific disruption of PP2A activity by expression of SV40 small tumor antigen enhanced Bax phosphorylation, whereas C(2)-ceramide, a potent PP2A activator, reduced nicotine-induced Bax phosphorylation, suggesting that PP2A may function as a physiological Bax phosphatase. PP2A co-localized and interacted with Bax. Purified, active PP2A directly dephosphorylated Bax in vitro. Overexpression of the PP2A catalytic subunit (PP2A/C) suppressed nicotine-stimulated Bax phosphorylation in association with increased apoptotic cell death. By contrast, depletion of PP2A/C by RNA interference enhanced Bax phosphorylation and prolonged cell survival. Mechanistically C(2)-ceramide-induced Bax dephosphorylation caused a conformational change by exposure of the 6A7 epitope (amino acids 13-19) that is normally hidden at its N terminus that promoted the insertion of Bax into mitochondrial membranes and formation of Bax oligomers leading to cytochrome c release and apoptosis. In addition, PP2A directly disrupted the Bcl2/Bax association to liberate Bax from the heterodimer complex. Thus, PP2A may function as a physiological Bax regulatory phosphatase that not only dephosphorylates Bax but also activates its proapoptotic function.

[PMID: 23784543]
The function Bax and/or Bak in constituting a gateway for mitochondrial apoptosis in response to apoptotic stimuli has been unequivocally demonstrated. However, recent work has suggested that Bax/Bak may have unrecognized nonapoptotic functions related to mitochondrial function in nonstressful environments. Wild-type (WT) and Bax/Bak double knockout (DKO) mice were used to determine alternative roles for Bax and Bak in mitochondrial morphology and protein import in skeletal muscle. The absence of Bax and/or Bak altered mitochondrial dynamics by regulating protein components of the organelle fission and fusion machinery. Moreover, DKO mice exhibited defective mitochondrial protein import, both into the matrix and outer membrane compartments, which was consistent with our observations of impaired membrane potential and attenuated expression of protein import machinery (PIM) components in intermyofibrillar mitochondria. Furthermore, the cytosolic chaperones heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP) were markedly increased with the deletion of Bax/Bak, indicating that the cytosolic environment related to protein folding may be changed in DKO mice. Interestingly, endurance training fully restored the deficiency of protein import in DKO mice, likely via the upregulation of PIM components and through improved cytosolic chaperone protein expression. Thus our results emphasize novel roles for Bax and/or Bak in mitochondrial function and provide evidence, for the first time, of a curative function of exercise training in ameliorating a condition of defective mitochondrial protein import.

[PMID: 20885444]
Members of the Bcl-2 family play key roles as proapoptotic (e.g., Bax) and antiapoptotic (e.g., Bcl-x(L)) regulators of programmed cell death. We previously identified the mitochondrial potassium channel Kv1.3 as a novel target of Bax. Incubating Kv1.3-positive isolated mitochondria with Bax triggered apoptotic events, whereas Kv1.3-deficient mitochondria were resistant to this stimulus. Mutation of Bax at lysine 128 (BaxK128E) abrogated its effects on Kv1.3 and the induction of apoptotic changes in mitochondria. These data indicate a toxin-like action of Bax on Kv1.3 to trigger at least some of the mitochondrial changes typical for apoptosis. To gain insight into the mechanism of Bax-Kv1.3 interaction, we mutated Glu158 of Bcl-x(L) (corresponding to K128 in Bax) to lysine. This substitution turned Bcl-x(L) proapoptotic. Transfection of double knockout (Bax(-/-)/Bak(-/-)) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (DKO MEFs) with either wild-type Bax, BaxK128E, or Bcl-x(L)E158K showed that apoptosis induced by various stimuli was defective in DKO MEFs and BaxK128E-transfected cells, but was recovered upon transfection with Bcl-xLE158K or wild-type Bax. Both wild-type Bax and BaxK128E can form similar ion-conducting pores upon incorporation into planar lipid bilayers. Our results point to a physiologically relevant interaction of Bax with Kv1.3 and further indicate a crucial role of a distinct lysine in determining the proapoptotic character of Bcl2-family proteins.

[PMID: 23475110]
Bax and Bak (Bax/Bak) are essential pro-apoptotic proteins of the Bcl-2 family that trigger mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) in a Bcl-2/Bcl-xL-inhibitable manner. We recently discovered a new stress-related function for Bax/Bak-regulation of nuclear protein redistribution (NPR) from the nucleus to cytoplasm. This effect was independent of Bax/Bak N-terminus exposure and not inhibited by Bcl-xL over-expression. Here, we studied the molecular mechanism governing this novel non-canonical response. Wild-type (WT) and mutant versions of Bax were re-expressed in Bax/Bak double-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts and their ability to promote NPR, apoptotic events, and changes in lamin A mobility was examined. Our results show that, in this system, Bax expression was sufficient to restore NPR such as in WT cells undergoing apoptosis. This activity of Bax was uncoupled from cytochrome c release from the mitochondria (indicative of MOMP) and required its membrane localization, α helices 5/6, and the Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3) domain. Moreover, enrichment of Bax in the nuclear envelope by the so-called Klarsicht/ANC-1/Syne-1 homology domain effectively triggered NPR as in WT Bax, but without inducing MOMP or cell death. Bax-induced NPR was associated with impairment in lamin A mobility, implying a connection between these two nuclear envelope-associated events. Overall, the results indicate a new MOMP-independent, stress-induced Bax function on the nuclear envelope.

[PMID: 19680558]
Previously, we have shown the loss of anti-Bax function in Creutzfeldt Jakob disease (CJD)-associated prion protein (PrP) mutants that are unable to generate cytosolic PrP (CyPrP). To determine if the anti-Bax function of PrP modulates the manifestation of prion diseases, we further investigated the anti-Bax function of eight familial Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker Syndrome (GSS)-associated PrP mutants. These PrP mutants contained their respective methionine ((M)) or valine ((V)) at codon 129. All of the mutants lost their ability to prevent Bax-mediated chromatin condensation or DNA fragmentation in primary human neurons. In the breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells, the F198S(V), D202N(V), P102L(V) and Q217R(V) retained, whereas the P102L(M), P105L(V), Y145stop(M) and Q212P(M) PrP mutants lost their ability to inhibit Bax-mediated condensed chromatin. The inhibition of Bax-mediated condensed chromatin depended on the ability of the mutants to generate cytosolic PrP. However, except for the P102L(V), none of the mutants significantly inhibited Bax-mediated caspase activation. These results show that the cytosolic PrP generated from the GSS mutants is not as efficient as wild type PrP in inhibiting Bax-mediated cell death. Furthermore, these results indicate that the anti-Bax function is also disrupted in GSS-associated PrP mutants and is not associated with the difference between CJD and GSS.

[PMID: 24269152]
For stressed cells to induce the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis, a cohort of pro-apoptotic BCL-2 proteins must collaborate with the outer mitochondrial membrane to permeabilize it. BAK and BAX are the two pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family members that are required for mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization. While biochemical and structural insights of BAK/BAX function have expanded in recent years, very little is known about the role of the outer mitochondrial membrane in regulating BAK/BAX activity. In this review, we will highlight the impact of mitochondrial composition (both protein and lipid) and mitochondrial interactions with cellular organelles on BAK/BAX function and cellular commitment to apoptosis. A better understanding of how BAK/BAX and mitochondrial biology are mechanistically linked will likely reveal novel insights into homeostatic and pathological mechanisms associated with apoptosis.

[PMID: 8600029]
The E1B 19K protein is a potent apoptosis inhibitor and the putative adenovirus Bcl-2 homolog. To investigate the mechanism of apoptosis regulation, 19K-interacting cellular proteins were identified using the yeast two-hybrid system, and Bax was one of seven 19-K interacting clones. Residues 50-78 of Bax containing a conserved region designated Bcl-2 homology region 3 (BH3) were sufficient for specific binding to both the E1B 19K and Bcl-2 proteins. The Bax-E1B 19K interaction was detectable in vitro and in lysates from mammalian cells, and Bax expression antagonized E1B 19K protein function. bax mRNA and protein levels were p53-inducible with kinetics identical to that of p21/Waf-1/Cip-1, and E1B 19K and Bcl-2 expression did not affect Bax or p21/Waf-1/Cip-1 accumulation. In cells where p53 was mutant, Bax expression induced apoptosis, suggesting that Bax was sufficient for apoptosis, and acted downstream of p53. p53 may simultaneously activate the transcription of genes required for both growth arrest (p21/Waf-1/Cip-1) and death (bax), and E1B 19K and Bcl-2 may act distally and function through interaction with and antagonism of Bax to prevent apoptosis. With the death pathway disabled, induction of growth arrest by p53 can then be manifested.

[PMID: 8887678]
Expression of the proapoptotic protein Bax under the control of a GAL10 promoter in Saccharomyces cerevisiae resulted in galactose-inducible cell death. Immunofluorescence studies suggested that Bax is principally associated with mitochondria in yeast cells. Removal of the carboxyl-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain from Bax [creating Bax (deltaTM)] prevented targeting to mitochondrial and completely abolished cytotoxic function in yeast cells, suggesting that membrane targeting is crucial for Bax-mediated lethality. Fusing a TM domain from Mas70p, a yeast mitochondrial outer membrane protein, to Bax (deltaTM) restored targeting to mitochondria and cytotoxic function in yeast cells. Deletion of four well-conserved amino acids (IGDE) from the BH3 domain of Bax ablated its ability to homodimerize and completely abrogated lethality in yeast cells. In contrast, several Bax mutants which retained ability to homodimerize (deltaBH1, deltaBH2, and delta1-58) also retained at least partial lethal function in yeast cells. In coimmunoprecipitation experiments, expression of the wild-type Bax protein in Rat-1 fibroblasts and 293 epithelial cells induced apoptosis, whereas the Bax (deltaIGDE) mutant failed to induce apoptosis and did not associate with endogenous wild-type Bax protein. In contrast to yeast cells, Bax (deltaTM) protein retained cytotoxic function in Rat-1 and 293 cells, was targeted largely to mitochondria, and dimerized with endogenous Bax in mammalian cells. Thus, the dimerization-mediating BH3 domain and targeting to mitochondrial membranes appear to be essential for the cytotoxic function of Bax in both yeast and mammalian cells.

[PMID: 20723427]
The Bcl-2 associated X protein (Bax), belonging to the Bcl-2 family, plays a pivotal role in mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. The aims of this study are to revalidate the functional significance of Bax G(-248)A polymorphism, and investigate its association with lung cancer risk in Chinese population. The biological function of Bax G(-248)A was tested by luciferase assays, and its effects on lung cancer risk was determined by case-control analysis of 989 patients with lung cancer and 990 controls. Bax -248A allele exhibited significantly higher transcriptional activity compared with G allele. The Bax-248A allele carriers yielded a significantly decreased risk of lung cancer, compared with -248G allele carriers (OR = 0.68, 95% CI = 0.48 approximately 0.90, P = 0.01). Furthermore, a significant gene-smoking interaction between Bax G(-248)A polymorphism and smoking existed among the light smokers. Bax G(-248)A polymorphism is associated with lung cancer susceptibility in Chinese population.

[PMID: 9565621]
Cell death plays an important role in a number of physiological processes in all complex multicellular organisms. One of the molecules that regulates this process is BAX, an integral membrane protein, that promotes apoptosis. The function of BAX is countered by BCL-2 and BCL-XL. The differential expression of these proteins can influence the ability of the cell to die or survive. In this paper, we describe the cloning, biochemical, and functional characterization of a novel splice isoform of BAX, called BAX-omega. Transient overexpression of BAX-omega protein potentiates cell death at levels comparable to that of BAX-alpha overexpression.

[PMID: 25497728]
BAX protein plays a key role in the mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. However, it remains unclear by what mechanism BAX is triggered to initiate apoptosis. Here, we reveal the mechanism using electron spin resonance (ESR) techniques. An inactive BAX monomer was found to exhibit conformational heterogeneity and exist at equilibrium in two conformations, one of which has never been reported. We show that upon apoptotic stimulus by BH3-only peptides, BAX can be induced to convert into either a ligand-bound monomer or an oligomer through a conformational selection mechanism. The kinetics of reaction is studied by means of time-resolved ESR, allowing a direct in situ observation for the transformation of BAX from the native to the bound states. In vitro mitochondrial assays provide further discrimination between the proposed BAX states, thereby revealing a population-shift allosteric mechanism in the process. BAX's apoptotic function is shown to critically depend on excursions between different structural conformations.

[PMID: 12213925]
The murine proapoptotic protein Bax was expressed in Kluyveromyces lactis to investigate its effect on cell survival and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Bax expression decreased the number of cells capable of growing and forming colonies, and it increased the number of cells producing ROS, as detected by both dihydrorhodamine 123 fluorescence and the intracellular content of SH groups. Mutation in the beta-subunit of F(1)-ATPase, or mitochondrial deficiency resulting from deletion of mtDNA (rho(0) mutant), increased the sensitivity to Bax, indicating that Bax cytotoxicity does not require mitochondrial respiratory-chain functions. The antiapoptotic protein Bcl-x(L), when co-expressed with Bax, localized to the mitochondria and prevented Bax cytotoxicity. However, this co-expression did not prevent the production of ROS. These data suggest that in K. lactis cells expressing Bax, ROS are not the sine qua non of cell death and that the antiapoptotic function of Bcl-x(L) is not limited to its antioxidant property.

[PMID: 26395559]
Bax, a central cell death regulator, is an indispensable gateway to mitochondrial dysfunction and a major proapoptotic member of the B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family proteins that control apoptosis in normal and cancer cells. Dysfunction of apoptosis renders the cancer cell resistant to treatment as well as promotes tumorigenesis. Bax activation induces mitochondrial membrane permeabilization, thereby leading to the release of apoptotic factor cytochrome c and consequently cancer cell death. A number of drugs in clinical use are known to indirectly activate Bax. Intriguingly, recent efforts demonstrate that Bax can serve as a promising direct target for small-molecule drug discovery. Several direct Bax activators have been identified to hold promise for cancer therapy with the advantages of specificity and the potential of overcoming chemo- and radioresistance. Further investigation of this new class of drug candidates will be needed to advance them into the clinic as a novel means to treat cancer.

[PMID: 15642728]
Nicotine-induced cell survival is associated with chemoresistance of human lung cancer cells, but our understanding of the intracellular mechanism(s) is fragmentary. Bax is a major proapoptotic member of the Bcl2 family and a molecule required for apoptotic cell death. Growth factor (i.e. granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor)-induced phosphorylation of Bax has been reported to negatively regulate its proapoptotic function. Because Bax is ubiquitously expressed in both small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer cells, nicotine may mimic growth factor(s) to regulate the activity of Bax. We found that nicotine potently induces Bax phosphorylation at Ser-184, which results in abrogation of the proapoptotic activity of Bax and increased cell survival. AKT, a known physiological Bax kinase, is activated by nicotine, co-localizes with Bax in the cytoplasm, and can directly phosphorylate Bax in vitro. Treatment of cells with the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 or specific depletion of AKT expression by RNA interference can block both nicotine-induced Bax phosphorylation and cell survival. Importantly, nicotine-induced Bax phosphorylation potently blocks stress-induced translocation of Bax from cytosol to mitochondria, impairs Bax insertion into mitochondrial membranes, and reduces the half-life of Bax protein (i.e. from 9-12 h to <6 h). Because knockdown of Bax expression by gene silencing results in prolonged cell survival following treatment with cisplatin in the absence or presence of nicotine, Bax may be an essential component in the nicotine survival signaling pathway. Thus, nicotine-induced survival and chemoresistance of human lung cancer cells may occur in a novel mechanism involving activation of PI3K/AKT that directly phosphorylates and inactivates the proapoptotic function of Bax.

[PMID: 18547146]
Although Bcl-XL and Bax are structurally similar, activated Bax forms large oligomers that permeabilize the outer mitochondrial membrane, thereby committing cells to apoptosis, whereas Bcl-XL inhibits this process. Two different models of Bcl-XL function have been proposed. In one, Bcl-XL binds to an activator, thereby preventing Bax activation. In the other, Bcl-XL binds directly to activated Bax. It has been difficult to sort out which interaction is important in cells, as all three proteins are present simultaneously. We examined the mechanism of Bax activation by tBid and its inhibition by Bcl-XL using full-length recombinant proteins and measuring permeabilization of liposomes and mitochondria in vitro. Our results demonstrate that Bcl-XL and Bax are functionally similar. Neither protein bound to membranes alone. However, the addition of tBid recruited molar excesses of either protein to membranes, indicating that tBid activates both pro- and antiapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Bcl-XL competes with Bax for the activation of soluble, monomeric Bax through interaction with membranes, tBid, or t-Bid-activated Bax, thereby inhibiting Bax binding to membranes, oligomerization, and membrane permeabilization. Experiments in which individual interactions were abolished by mutagenesis indicate that both Bcl-XL-tBid and Bcl-XL-Bax binding contribute to the antiapoptotic function of Bcl-XL. By out-competing Bax for the interactions leading to membrane permeabilization, Bcl-XL ties up both tBid and Bax in nonproductive interactions and inhibits Bax binding to membranes. We propose that because Bcl-XL does not oligomerize it functions like a dominant-negative Bax in the membrane permeabilization process.

[PMID: 26252372]
The aim of this study was to determine the anti-tumour activity of tanshinone IIA in SKOV3 cells. Results suggested that tanshinone IIA could significantly inhibit (IC50 value  =  19.6 μM) the proliferation and induce apoptosis of SKOV3 cells as demonstrated by flow cytometry analysis. In addition, tanshinone IIA treatment induced G2/M phase cell cycle arrest in SKOV3 cells. The results of Western blotting indicated that tanshinone IIA can suppress the expression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, increase (0.28 vs. 0.62) the expression of pro-apoptotic protein Bax (0.83 vs. 0.24) in SKOV3 cells. It can be concluded that the tanshinone IIA may be a possible therapeutic candidate having cytotoxic and anti-tumour potential.

[PMID: 10669738]
Bax is a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins which localizes to and uses mitochondria as its major site of action. Bax normally resides in the cytoplasm and translocates to mitochondria in response to apoptotic stimuli, and it promotes apoptosis in two ways: (i) by disrupting mitochondrial membrane barrier function by formation of ion-permeable pores in mitochondrial membranes and (ii) by binding to antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins via its BH3 domain and inhibiting their functions. A hairpin pair of amphipathic alpha-helices (alpha5-alpha6) in Bax has been predicted to participate in membrane insertion and pore formation by Bax. We mutagenized several charged residues in the alpha5-alpha6 domain of Bax, changing them to alanine. These substitution mutants of Bax constitutively localized to mitochondria and displayed a gain-of-function phenotype when expressed in mammalian cells. Furthermore, substitution of 8 out of 10 charged residues in the alpha5-alpha6 domain of Bax resulted in a loss of cytotoxicity in yeast but a gain-of-function phenotype in mammalian cells. The enhanced function of this Bax mutant was correlated with increased binding to Bcl-X(L), through a BH3-independent mechanism. These observations reveal new functions for the alpha5-alpha6 hairpin loop of Bax: (i) regulation of mitochondrial targeting and (ii) modulation of binding to antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins.