[PMID: 23400715]
To evaluate the safety and tolerability of multiple intravenous (IV) doses of sifalimumab in adults with moderate-to-severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, sequential dose-escalation study, patients were randomized 3:1 to receive IV sifalimumab (0.3, 1.0, 3.0, or 10.0 mg/kg) or placebo every 2 weeks to week 26, then followed up for 24 weeks. Safety assessment included recording of treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) and serious AEs. Pharmacokinetics, immunogenicity, and pharmacodynamics were evaluated, and disease activity was assessed. Of 161 patients, 121 received sifalimumab (26 received 0.3 mg/kg; 25, 1.0 mg/kg; 27, 3.0 mg/kg; and 43, 10 mg/kg) and 40 received placebo. Patients were predominantly female (95.7%). At baseline, patients had moderate-to-severe disease activity (mean SLE Disease Activity Index score 11.0), and most (75.2%) had a high type I interferon (IFN) gene signature. In the sifalimumab group versus the placebo group, the incidence of ≥1 treatment-emergent AE was 92.6% versus 95.0%, ≥1 serious AE was 22.3% versus 27.5%, and ≥1 infection was 67.8% versus 62.5%; discontinuations due to AEs occurred in 9.1% versus 7.5%, and death occurred in 3.3% (n=4) versus 2.5% (n=1). Serum sifalimumab concentrations increased in a linear and dose-proportional manner. Inhibition of the type I IFN gene signature was sustained during treatment in patients with a high baseline signature. No statistically significant differences in clinical activity (SLEDAI and British Isles Lupus Assessment Group score) between sifalimumab and placebo were observed. However, when adjusted for excess burst steroids, SLEDAI change from baseline showed a positive trend over time. A trend toward normal complement C3 or C4 level at week 26 was seen in the sifalimumab groups compared with baseline. The observed safety/tolerability and clinical activity profile of sifalimumab support its continued clinical development for SLE.

[PMID: 15593221]
To study the contribution of interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) and IFNgamma to the IFN gene expression signature that has been observed in microarray screens of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of healthy control PBMCs was used to determine the relative induction of a panel of IFN-inducible genes (IFIGs) by IFNalpha and IFNgamma. PBMCs from 77 SLE patients were compared with those from 22 disease controls and 28 healthy donors for expression of IFIGs. Expression of IFNalpha-inducible genes was significantly higher in SLE PBMCs than in those from disease controls or healthy donors. The level of expression of all IFIGs in PBMCs from SLE patients with IFNalpha pathway activation correlated highly with the inherent responsiveness of those genes to IFNalpha, suggesting coordinate activation of that cytokine pathway. Expression of genes preferentially induced by IFNgamma was not significantly increased in SLE PBMCs compared with control PBMCs. IFNalpha-regulated gene-inducing activity was detected in some SLE plasma samples. The coordinate activation of IFNalpha-induced genes is a characteristic of PBMCs from many SLE patients, supporting the hypothesis that IFNalpha is the predominant stimulus for IFIG expression in lupus.

[PMID: 18075793]
Recently much attention was attracted to the importance of the type I interferon pathway in the initiation and development of the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Many SLE patients have increased serum levels of IFN-alpha and display an IFN gene expression "signature" characterized by strong overexpression of IFN-responsive genes in leukocytes and target tissues. Moreover, about 20% of cancer patients treated with IFN-alpha therapy manifest symptoms resembling SLE and some later develop the disease. One of the key genes of the IFN-alpha pathway, IRF5, was found to be strongly associated with SLE. Two functional SNPs lead to alternative splicing and altered steady-state level of IRF5 gene expression. Besides, the gene has a polymorphic inserion/deletion in exon 6, which contributes to the diversity in the isoform pattern of IRF5. Interestingly, recent studies have not found association of IRF5 with the other autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis or psoriasis, suggesting the unique role for IRF5 in the development of lupus. Here, we present the current knowledge on IRF5 genetics and its biological function and discuss the possible ways in which IRF5 contributes to susceptibility to SLE.

[PMID: 27009916]
The efficacy and safety of sifalimumab were assessed in a phase IIb, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study (NCT01283139) of adults with moderate to severe active systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 431 patients were randomised and received monthly intravenous sifalimumab (200 mg, 600 mg or 1200 mg) or placebo in addition to standard-of-care medications. Patients were stratified by disease activity, interferon gene-signature test (high vs low based on the expression of four genes) and geographical region. The primary efficacy end point was the percentage of patients achieving an SLE responder index response at week 52. Compared with placebo, a greater percentage of patients who received sifalimumab (all dosages) met the primary end point (placebo: 45.4%; 200 mg: 58.3%; 600 mg: 56.5%; 1200 mg 59.8%). Other improvements were seen in Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index score (200 mg and 1200 mg monthly), Physician's Global Assessment (600 mg and 1200 mg monthly), British Isles Lupus Assessment Group-based Composite Lupus Assessment (1200 mg monthly), 4-point reductions in the SLE Disease Activity Index-2000 score and reductions in counts of swollen joints and tender joints. Serious adverse events occurred in 17.6% of patients on placebo and 18.3% of patients on sifalimumab. Herpes zoster infections were more frequent with sifalimumab treatment. Sifalimumab is a promising treatment for adults with SLE. Improvement was consistent across various clinical end points, including global and organ-specific measures of disease activity. NCT01283139; Results.

[PMID: 19790071]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by unpredictable flares of disease activity and irreversible damage to multiple organ systems. An earlier study showed that SLE patients carrying an interferon (IFN) gene expression signature in blood have elevated serum levels of IFN-regulated chemokines. These chemokines were associated with more-severe and active disease and showed promise as SLE disease activity biomarkers. This study was designed to validate IFN-regulated chemokines as biomarkers of SLE disease activity in 267 SLE patients followed up longitudinally. To validate the potential utility of serum chemokine levels as biomarkers of disease activity, we measured serum levels of CXCL10 (IFNgamma-inducible 10-kd protein), CCL2 (monocyte chemotactic protein 1), and CCL19 (macrophage inflammatory protein 3beta) in an independent cohort of 267 SLE patients followed up longitudinally over 1 year (1,166 total clinic visits). Serum chemokine levels correlated with lupus activity at the current visit (P = 2 x 10(-10)), rising at the time of SLE flare (P = 2 x 10(-3)) and decreasing as disease remitted (P = 1 x 10(-3)); they also performed better than the currently available laboratory tests. Chemokine levels measured at a single baseline visit in patients with a Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index of < or =4 were predictive of lupus flare over the ensuing year (P = 1 x 10(-4)). Monitoring serum chemokine levels in SLE may improve the assessment of current disease activity, the prediction of future disease flares, and the overall clinical decision-making.

[PMID: 30745462]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease in which 70% of patients experience disfiguring skin inflammation (grouped under the rubric of cutaneous lupus erythematosus [CLE]). There are limited treatment options for SLE and no Food and Drug Administration-approved therapies for CLE. Studies have revealed that IFNs are important mediators for SLE and CLE, but the mechanisms by which IFNs lead to disease are still poorly understood. We aimed to investigate how IFN responses in SLE keratinocytes contribute to development of CLE. A cohort of 72 RNA sequencing samples from 14 individuals (seven SLE and seven healthy controls) were analyzed to study the transcriptomic effects of type I and type II IFNs on SLE versus control keratinocytes. In-depth analysis of the IFN responses was conducted. Bioinformatics and functional assays were conducted to provide implications for the change of IFN response. A significant hypersensitive response to IFNs was identified in lupus keratinocytes, including genes (<i>IFIH1</i>, <i>STAT1</i>, and <i>IRF7</i>) encompassed in SLE susceptibility loci. Binding sites for the transcription factor PITX1 were enriched in genes that exhibit IFN-sensitive responses. PITX1 expression was increased in CLE lesions based on immunohistochemistry, and by using small interfering RNA knockdown, we illustrated that <i>PITX1</i> was required for upregulation of IFN-regulated genes in vitro. SLE patients exhibit increased IFN signatures in their skin secondary to increased production and a robust, skewed IFN response that is regulated by PITX1. Targeting these exaggerated pathways may prove to be beneficial to prevent and treat hyperinflammatory responses in SLE skin.

[PMID: 31130331]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease which affects multiple organs. The type I interferon (IFN) gene signature and circulating autoantibodies are hallmarks of SLE. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are considered the main producers of type I IFN and production is modulated by multiple other immune cell types. In SLE, essentially every immune cell type is dysregulated and aberrant deregulation is thought to be due, in part, to direct or indirect exposure to IFN. Genetic variants within or around the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) associate with SLE risk. Elevated IFNα activity was detected in the sera of SLE patients carrying IRF5 risk polymorphisms who were positive for either anti-RNA binding protein (anti-RBP) or anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) autoantibodies. Neutrophils are also an important source of type I IFNs and are found in abundance in human blood. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are considered a potential source of antigenic trigger in SLE that can lead to type I IFN gene induction, as well as increased autoantibody production. In this review, we will focus on immune cell types that produce type I IFNs and/or are affected by type I IFN in SLE. In addition, we will discuss potential inducers of endogenous type I IFN production in SLE. Last, we will postulate how the different immune cell populations may be affected by an IRF5-SLE risk haplotype.

[PMID: 25861459]
The interferon (IFN) signature (IS) in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) includes over 100 genes induced by type I IFN pathway activation. We developed a method to quantify the IS using three genes-the IS metric (ISM)-and characterised the clinical characteristics of patients with SLE with different ISM status from multiple clinical trials. Blood microarray expression data from a training cohort of patients with SLE confirmed the presence of the IS and identified surrogate genes. We assayed these genes in a quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay, yielding an ISM from the IS. The association of ISM status with clinical disease characteristics was assessed in patients with extrarenal lupus and lupus nephritis from four clinical trials. Three genes, HERC5, EPSTI and CMPK2, correlated well with the IS (p>0.96), and composed the ISM qPCR assay. Using the 95th centile for healthy control data, patients with SLE from different studies were classified into two ISM subsets-ISM-Low and ISM-High-that are longitudinally stable over 36 weeks. Significant associations were identified between ISM-High status and higher titres of anti-dsDNA antibodies, presence of anti extractable nuclear antigen autoantibodies, elevated serum B cell activating factor of the tumour necrosis factor family (BAFF) levels, and hypocomplementaemia. However, measures of overall clinical disease activity were similar for ISM-High and ISM-Low groups. The ISM is an IS biomarker that divides patients with SLE into two subpopulations-ISM-High and ISM-Low-with differing serological manifestations. The ISM does not distinguish between high and low disease activity, but may have utility in identifying patients more likely to respond to treatment(s) targeting IFN-α. NCT00962832.

[PMID: 31044165]
A role for interferon (IFN) in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis is inferred from the prominent IFN gene signature (IGS), but the major IFN species and its relationship to disease activity are unknown. A bioinformatic approach employing individual IFN species gene signatures to interrogate SLE microarray datasets demonstrates a putative role for numerous IFN species, with prominent expression of IFNB1 and IFNW signatures. In contrast with other SLE-affected organs, the IGS is less prominent in lupus nephritis. SLE patients with active and inactive disease have readily detectable IGS and the IGS changes synchronously with a monocyte signature but not disease activity, and is significantly related to monocyte transcripts. Monocyte over-expression of three times as many IGS transcripts as T and B cells and IGS retention in monocytes, but not T and B cells from inactive SLE patients contribute to the lack of correlation between the IGS and SLE disease activity.

[PMID: 28130918]
To assess the efficacy and safety of anifrolumab, a type I interferon (IFN) receptor antagonist, in a phase IIb, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of adults with moderate-to-severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Patients (n = 305) were randomized to receive intravenous anifrolumab (300 mg or 1,000 mg) or placebo, in addition to standard therapy, every 4 weeks for 48 weeks. Randomization was stratified by SLE Disease Activity Index 2000 score (<10 or ≥10), oral corticosteroid dosage (<10 or ≥10 mg/day), and type I IFN gene signature test status (high or low) based on a 4-gene expression assay. The primary end point was the percentage of patients achieving an SLE Responder Index (SRI[4]) response at week 24 with sustained reduction of oral corticosteroids (<10 mg/day and less than or equal to the dose at week 1 from week 12 through 24). Other end points (including SRI[4], British Isles Lupus Assessment Group [BILAG]-based Composite Lupus Assessment [BICLA], modified SRI[6], and major clinical response) were assessed at week 52. The primary end point was analyzed in the modified intent-to-treat (ITT) population and type I IFN-high subpopulation. The study result was considered positive if the primary end point was met in either of the 2 study populations. The Type I error rate was controlled at 0.10 (2-sided), within each of the 2 study populations for the primary end point analysis. The primary end point was met by more patients treated with anifrolumab (34.3% of 99 for 300 mg and 28.8% of 104 for 1,000 mg) than placebo (17.6% of 102) (P = 0.014 for 300 mg and P = 0.063 for 1,000 mg, versus placebo), with greater effect size in patients with a high IFN signature at baseline (13.2% in placebo-treated patients versus 36.0% [P = 0.004] and 28.2% [P = 0.029]) in patients treated with anifrolumab 300 mg and 1,000 mg, respectively. At week 52, patients treated with anifrolumab achieved greater responses in SRI(4) (40.2% versus 62.6% [P < 0.001] and 53.8% [P = 0.043] with placebo, anifrolumab 300 mg, and anifrolumab 1,000 mg, respectively), BICLA (25.7% versus 53.5% [P < 0.001] and 41.2% [P = 0.018], respectively), modified SRI(6) (28.4% versus 49.5% [P = 0.002] and 44.7% [P = 0.015], respectively), major clinical response (BILAG 2004 C or better in all organ domains from week 24 through week 52) (6.9% versus 19.2% [P = 0.012] and 17.3% [P = 0.025], respectively), and several other global and organ-specific end points. Herpes zoster was more frequent in the anifrolumab-treated patients (2.0% with placebo treatment versus 5.1% and 9.5% with anifrolumab 300 mg and 1,000 mg, respectively), as were cases reported as influenza (2.0% versus 6.1% and 7.6%, respectively), in the anifrolumab treatment groups. Incidence of serious adverse events was similar between groups (18.8% versus 16.2% and 17.1%, respectively). Anifrolumab substantially reduced disease activity compared with placebo across multiple clinical end points in the patients with moderate-to-severe SLE.

[PMID: 32334613]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex multi-system disease, characterized by both autoimmune and autoinflammatory clinical and laboratory features. The role of type I interferon (IFN) in SLE has been demonstrated from the 2000s, by gene expression analyses showing significant over-expression of genes related to type I IFN signalling pathway (IFN signature). However, several studies questioned the role of measuring the intensity of IFN signature (IFN score) to chase SLE activity. We would assess if the IFN signature can help the clinical and therapeutic stratification of patients with pediatric SLE. We measured the IFN score in peripheral whole blood from a series of subjects with childhood-onset SLE and correlated the results with clinical and laboratory parameters. Thirty-one subjects were included in the study, among which the 87% displayed a positive IFN score. The only significant relation was found for high IFN score in subjects with normocomplementemia. No correlation was observed between IFN score and SLEDAI-2K, BILAG-2004 and SLICC. Patients with high IFN score and normal complement levels also presented lower anti-dsDNA antibodies. The integration between IFN signature analysis and complement levels may easily distinguish two groups of subjects, in which the autoimmune or autoinflammatory component of the disease seems to be prevalent.

[PMID: 17849124]
To date, the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is only partially understood. A characteristic feature of this disease is the occurrence of antibodies against nuclear antigens. Further, SLE is characterized by a type-I interferon gene signature. A dysregulation of apoptosis and phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is discussed as a central pathogenetic mechanism in the development of SLE. Several publications in recent years have described an accumulation of autoantigens within apoptotic cells, as well as an exposition of these antigens on the surface of apoptotic cells. During late stages of apoptosis, autoantigens are posttranslationally modified, leading to the formation of neoantigens. Subcellular fragments such as apoptotic microparticles also seem to be involved in the pathogenesis of SLE. It has been shown that microparticles contain relevant antigens and stimulate B- and T-lymphocytes. Moreover, apoptotic microparticles have the ability to stimulate plasmacytoid dendritic cells, causing a secretion of interferon alpha. These observations provide a link between dysregulation of apoptosis and phagocytosis and the type-I interferon signature observed in SLE patients.

[PMID: 20538795]
Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have a markedly increased risk to develop cardiovascular disease, and traditional cardiovascular risk factors fail to account for this increased risk. We used microarray to probe the platelet transcriptome in patients with SLE and healthy controls, and the gene and protein expression of a subset of differentially expressed genes was further investigated and correlated to platelet activation status. Real-time PCR was used to confirm a type I interferon (IFN) gene signature in patients with SLE, and the IFN-regulated proteins PRKRA, IFITM1 and CD69 (P < .0001) were found to be up-regulated in platelets from SLE patients compared with healthy volunteers. Notably, patients with a history of vascular disease had increased expression of type I IFN-regulated proteins as well as more activated platelets compared with patients without vascular disease. We suggest that interferogenic immune complexes stimulate production of IFNα that up-regulates the megakaryocytic type I IFN-regulated genes and proteins. This could affect platelet activation and contribute to development of vascular disease in SLE. In addition, platelets with type I IFN signature could be a novel marker for vascular disease in SLE.

[PMID: 24598455]
A hallmark of systemic autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the increased expression of interferon (IFN) type I inducible genes, so-called IFN type I signature. Recently, T-helper 17 subset (Th17 cells), which produces IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-22, has been implicated in SLE. As CCR6 enriches for Th17 cells, we used this approach to investigate whether CCR6⁺ memory T-helper cells producing IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and/or IL-22 are increased in SLE patients and whether this increase is related to the presence of IFN type I signature. In total, 25 SLE patients and 15 healthy controls (HCs) were included. SLE patients were divided into IFN type I signature-positive (IFN⁺) (n = 16) and negative (IFN⁻) (n = 9) patients, as assessed by mRNA expression of IFN-inducible genes (IFIGs) in monocytes. Expression of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-22 by CD4⁺CD45RO⁺CCR6⁺ T cells (CCR6⁺ cells) was measured with flow cytometry and compared between IFN⁺, IFN⁻ patients and HCs. Increased percentages of IL-17A and IL-17A/IL-17F double-producing CCR6⁺ cells were observed in IFN⁺ patients compared with IFN⁻ patients and HCs. IL-17A and IL-17F expression within CCR6⁺ cells correlated significantly with IFIG expression. In addition, we found significant correlation between B-cell activating factor of the tumor necrosis family (BAFF)-a factor strongly correlating with IFN type I - and IL-21 producing CCR6⁺ cells. We show for the first time higher percentages of IL-17A and IL-17A/IL-17F double-producing CCR6⁺ memory T-helper cells in IFN⁺ SLE patients, supporting the hypothesis that IFN type I co-acts with Th17 cytokines in SLE pathogenesis.

[PMID: 31660791]
Type I interferon (IFN) is implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. We aimed to identify type I IFN signaling-dependent and -independent molecular pathways in a large population of patients with SLE. Baseline blood samples from adult patients with moderate to severe SLE from two Phase IIb studies (NCT01438489, <i>n</i> = 265; NCT01283139, <i>n</i> = 416) were profiled using whole transcriptome array analyses. Type I IFN gene signature (IFNGS) test status (high or low) was determined using a validated qualitative polymerase chain reaction-based test. IFN-type-specific signatures were developed by stimulating healthy blood with IFN-β, IFN-γ, IFN-λ, IFN-ω, or pooled IFN-α. These, and multiple literature-derived cell type and cytokine pathway signatures, were evaluated in individual and pooled study populations. A Fisher's exact test was used for associations, adjusted for false discovery rate. Whole blood samples from IFNGS test-high patients were enriched versus IFNGS test-low patients for CD40L signaling (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), CXC cytokine (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), TLR8-mediated monocyte activation (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), IgG (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), major histocompatibility complex class I (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), and plasma cell (<i>Q</i> < 0.001) gene expression signatures. IFNGS test-low patients had significant enrichment of eosinophil (<i>Q</i> < 0.001), IFN-γ-specific (<i>Q</i> = 0.005), and T-cell or B-cell (<i>Q</i> < 0.001) signatures. Similar enrichment profiles were demonstrated in patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, and dermatomyositis. IFNGS test-high patients overexpressed many gene signatures associated with SLE pathogenesis compared with IFNGS test-low patients, reflecting broad immune activation. These results provide new insights into the molecular heterogeneity underlying SLE pathogenesis, highlighting shared mechanisms beyond type I IFN, across several autoimmune diseases. Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01438489 and NCT01283139.

[PMID: 24379124]
Inappropriate activation of type I IFN plays a key role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this study, we report the presence of IFN activation in SLE bone marrow (BM), as measured by an IFN gene signature, increased IFN regulated chemokines, and direct production of IFN by BM-resident cells, associated with profound changes in B cell development. The majority of SLE patients had an IFN signature in the BM that was more pronounced than the paired peripheral blood and correlated with both higher autoantibodies and disease activity. Pronounced alterations in B cell development were noted in SLE in the presence of an IFN signature with a reduction in the fraction of pro/pre-B cells, suggesting an inhibition in early B cell development and an expansion of B cells at the transitional stage. These B cell changes strongly correlated with an increase in BAFF and APRIL expression in the IFN-high BM. Furthermore, we found that BM neutrophils in SLE were prime producers of IFN-α and B cell factors. In NZM lupus-prone mice, similar changes in B cell development were observed and mediated by IFN, given abrogation in NZM mice lacking type-I IFNR. BM neutrophils were abundant, responsive to, and producers of IFN, in close proximity to B cells. These results indicate that the BM is an important but previously unrecognized target organ in SLE with neutrophil-mediated IFN activation and alterations in B cell ontogeny and selection.

[PMID: 19479852]
Type I interferons (IFNs) play an important role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This phase Ia trial was undertaken to evaluate the safety, pharmacokinetics, and immunogenicity of anti-IFNalpha monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy in SLE. During the trial, we also examined whether overexpression of an IFNalpha/beta-inducible gene signature in whole blood could serve as a pharmacodynamic biomarker to evaluate IFNalpha neutralization and investigated downstream effects of neutralizing IFNalpha on BAFF and other key signaling pathways, i.e., granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-10 (IL-10), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), and IL-1beta, in SLE. Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays were used to profile whole blood and lesional skin of patients receiving standard therapy for mild to moderate SLE. Selected IFNalpha/beta-inducible proteins were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. With the study treatment, we observed anti-IFNalpha mAb-specific and dose-dependent inhibition of overexpression of IFNalpha/beta-inducible genes in whole blood and skin lesions from SLE patients, at both the transcript and the protein levels. In SLE patients with overexpression of messenger RNA for BAFF, TNFalpha, IL-10, IL-1beta, GM-CSF, and their respective inducible gene signatures in whole blood and/or skin lesions, we observed a general trend toward suppression of the expression of these genes and/or gene signatures upon treatment with anti-IFNalpha mAb. IFNalpha/beta-inducible gene signatures in whole blood are effective pharmacodynamic biomarkers to evaluate anti-IFNalpha mAb therapy in SLE. Anti-IFNalpha mAb can neutralize overexpression of IFNalpha/beta-inducible genes in whole blood and lesional skin from SLE patients and has profound effects on signaling pathways that may be downstream of IFNalpha in SLE.

[PMID: 15511676]
Recent studies of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, together with data from lupus-prone mice, suggest that inappropriate activation of type I interferon might have a role in disease pathogenesis. Serum levels of IFN-alpha are elevated in SLE patients, and gene expression profiling of peripheral blood cells shows that most lupus cases demonstrate an upregulation of IFN-responsive genes. Of interest, the IFN gene 'signature' correlates with more severe disease. The available data support a model whereby chromatin-containing immune complexes circulating in the blood of lupus patients stimulate leukocytes to produce IFN, which perpetuates disease. These emerging insights into the connection between IFN and lupus provide a host of new diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities.

[PMID: 23754736]
Sifalimumab is a fully human immunoglobulin G1κ monoclonal antibody that binds to and neutralizes a majority of the subtypes of human interferon-α. Sifalimumab is being evaluated as a treatment for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The primary objectives of this analysis were (a) to develop a population pharmacokinetic model for sifalimumab in SLE; (b) to identify and quantitate the impact of patient/disease characteristics on pharmacokinetic variability; and (c) to evaluate fixed versus body weight (WT)-based dosing regimens. Sifalimumab serum concentration-time data were collected from a phase Ib study (MI-CP152) designed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of sifalimumab in adult patients with SLE. Sifalimumab was administered every 14 days as a 30- to 60-minute intravenous infusion with escalating doses of 0.3, 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mg/kg and serum concentrations were collected over 350 days. A total of 120 patients provided evaluable pharmacokinetic data with a total of 2,370 serum concentrations. Sifalimumab serum concentrations were determined using a validated colorimetric enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with a lower limit of quantitation of 1.25 μg/mL. Population pharmacokinetic modeling of sifalimumab was performed using a non-linear mixed effects modeling approach with NONMEM VII software. Impact of patient demographics, clinical indices, and biomarkers on pharmacokinetic parameters were explored using a stepwise forward selection and backward elimination approach. The appropriateness of the final model was tested using visual predictive check (VPC). The impact of body WT-based and fixed dosing of sifalimumab was evaluated using a simulation approach. The final population model was utilized for phase IIb dosing projections. Sifalimumab pharmacokinetics were best described using a two-compartment linear model with first order elimination. Following intravenous dosing, the typical clearance (CL) and central volume of distribution (V 1) were estimated to be 176 mL/day and 2.9 L, respectively. The estimates (coefficient of variation) of between-subject variability for CL and V 1 were 28 and 31 %, respectively. Patient baseline body WT, interferon gene signature from 21 genes, steroid use, and sifalimumab dose were identified as significant covariates for CL, whereas only baseline body WT was a significant covariate for V 1 and peripheral volume of distribution (V 2). Although the above-mentioned covariates were statistically significant, they did not explain variability in pharmacokinetic parameters to any relevant extent (<7 %). Thus, no dosing adjustments are necessary. VPC confirmed good predictability of the final population pharmacokinetic model. Simulation results demonstrate that both fixed and body WT-based dosing regimens yield similar median steady state concentrations and overall variability. Fixed sifalimumab doses of 200, 600, and 1,200 mg monthly (with a loading dose at Day 14) were selected for a phase IIb clinical trial. A two-compartment population pharmacokinetic model adequately described sifalimumab pharmacokinetics. The estimated typical pharmacokinetic parameters were similar to other monoclonal antibodies without target mediated elimination. Although the population pharmacokinetic analysis identified some statistically significant covariates, they explained <7 % between-subject variability in pharmacokinetic parameters indicating that these covariates are not clinically relevant. The population pharmacokinetic analysis also demonstrated the feasibility of switching to fixed doses in phase IIb clinical trials of sifalimumab.

[PMID: 29644082]
We investigated the mechanistic and pharmacological properties of anifrolumab, a fully human, effector-null, anti-type I interferon (IFN) alpha receptor 1 (IFNAR1) monoclonal antibody in development for SLE. IFNAR1 surface expression and internalisation on human monocytes before and after exposure to anifrolumab were assessed using confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. The effects of anifrolumab on type I IFN pathway activation were assessed using signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) phosphorylation, IFN-stimulated response element-luciferase reporter cell assays and type I IFN gene signature induction. The ability of anifrolumab to inhibit plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDC) function and plasma cell differentiation was assessed by flow cytometry and ELISA. Effector-null properties of anifrolumab were assessed in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) assays with B cells. Anifrolumab reduced cell surface IFNAR1 by eliciting IFNAR1 internalisation. Anifrolumab blocked type I IFN-dependent STAT1 phosphorylation and IFN-dependent signalling induced by recombinant and pDC-derived type I IFNs and serum of patients with SLE. Anifrolumab suppressed type I IFN production by blocking the type I IFN autoamplification loop and inhibited proinflammatory cytokine induction and the upregulation of costimulatory molecules on stimulated pDCs. Blockade of IFNAR1 suppressed plasma cell differentiation in pDC/B cell co-cultures. Anifrolumab did not exhibit CDC or ADCC activity. Anifrolumab potently inhibits type I IFN-dependent signalling, including the type I IFN autoamplification loop, and is a promising therapeutic for patients with SLE and other diseases that exhibit chronic dysfunctional type I IFN signalling.

[PMID: 23028528]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a generalized autoimmune disease characterized by abnormal B cell activation and the occurrence of increased frequencies of circulating plasma cells (PC). The molecular characteristics and nature of circulating PC and B cells in SLE have not been completely characterized. Microarray analysis of gene expression was used to characterize circulating PC in subjects with active SLE. Flow cytometry was used to sort PC and comparator B cell populations from active SLE blood, normal blood and normal tonsil. The gene expression profiles of the sorted B cell populations were then compared. SLE PC exhibited a similar gene expression signature as tonsil PC. The differences in gene expression between SLE PC and normal tonsil PC and tonsil plasmablasts (PB) suggest a mature Ig secreting cell phenotype in the former population. Despite this, SLE PC differed in expression of about half the genes from previously published gene expression profiles of normal bone marrow PC, indicating that these cells had not achieved a fully mature status. Abnormal expression of several genes, including CXCR4 and S1P(1), suggests a mechanism for the persistence of SLE PC in the circulation. All SLE B cell populations revealed an interferon (IFN) gene signature previously only reported in unseparated SLE peripheral blood mononuclear cells. These data indicate that SLE PC are a unique population of Ig secreting cells with a gene expression profile indicative of a mature, but not fully differentiated phenotype.

[PMID: 24839407]
Blood gene expression profiling has led to major advances in the field of rheumatology over the last few decades. Specifically, DNA microarray technology has been integral in increasing our knowledge of key players in the pathogenesis of some rare pediatric rheumatic diseases. Our group, using microarray analysis, identified the interferon (IFN) gene signature in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and has published data that suggest high doses of intravenous corticosteroid treatment may have benefit over strictly oral regimens. Additionally, DNA microarray technology led to our discovery that the interleukin (IL)-1 gene signature is associated with systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and to the use of IL-1 blockade with anakinra in this disease. We also reported the biologic rationale for use of anakinra early in the disease course. Anakinra is now being used as first-line treatment in sJIA in multiple centers. Herein, we review how information obtained from blood gene expression profiling has changed our clinical practice.

[PMID: 12642603]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototype systemic autoimmune disease characterized by flares of high morbidity. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we now show that active SLE can be distinguished by a remarkably homogeneous gene expression pattern with overexpression of granulopoiesis-related and interferon (IFN)-induced genes. Using the most stringent statistical analysis (Bonferroni correction), 15 genes were found highly up-regulated in SLE patients, 14 of which are targets of IFN and one, defensin DEFA-3, a major product of immature granulocytes. A more liberal correction (Benjamini and Hochberg correction) yielded 18 additional genes, 12 of which are IFN-regulated and 4 granulocyte-specific. Indeed immature neutrophils were identified in a large fraction of SLE patients white blood cells. High dose glucocorticoids, a standard treatment of disease flares, shuts down the interferon signature, further supporting the role of this cytokine in SLE. The expression of 10 genes correlated with disease activity according to the SLEDAI. The most striking correlation (P < 0.001, r = 0.55) was found with the formyl peptide receptor-like 1 protein that mediates chemotactic activities of defensins. Therefore, while the IFN signature confirms the central role of this cytokine in SLE, microarray analysis of blood cells reveals that immature granulocytes may be involved in SLE pathogenesis.

[PMID: 24834763]
Type I interferons (IFN) are primarily regarded as an inhibitor of viral replication. However, type I IFN, mainly IFNalpha, plays a major role in activation of both the innate and adaptive immune systems. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, multi-systemic, inflammatory autoimmune disease with undefined etiology. SLE is characterized by dysregulation of both the innate and the adaptive immune systems. An increased expression of type I IFN-regulated genes, termed IFN signature, has been reported in patients with SLE. We review here the role of IFNalpha in the pathogenesis and course of SLE and the possible role of IFNalpha inhibition as a novel treatment for lupus patients.

[PMID: 31890206]
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), through the production of type 1 interferons (IFNs) and other cytokines, are major contributors to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. IL-3 promotes pDC survival, but its role in SLE is not well characterised. This study investigated serum IL-3 and IFN levels, and a whole blood 'IL-3 gene signature', in human SLE. Serum cytokine levels were measured by ELISA in <i>n</i> = 42 SLE patients, and <i>n</i> = 44 healthy donors. IL-3-regulated genes were determined by RNASeq of healthy donor whole blood cells (WBCs) stimulated <i>in vitro</i> with IL-3 for 6 or 24 h. Whole blood cell RNASeq analysis was undertaken in a separate cohort of <i>n</i> = 31 SLE patients, and <i>n</i> = 28 healthy donors. Serum IL-3 levels correlated with IFNα (<i>r</i> = 0.612, 95% CI 0.455-0.733, <i>P</i> < 0.001) and type III IFN (<i>r</i> = 0.585, 95% CI 0.406-0.720, <i>P</i> < 0.0001). IL-3 stimulation of WBC <i>in vitro</i> altered 794 genes (-1 ≥ logFC ≥ 1, FDR < 0.05), of which 35 overlapped with genes differentially expressed between SLE and healthy donors. These 35 genes were expressed in 27/31 SLE donors, revealing the presence of an 'IL-3 gene signature'. There was strong correlation between the IL-3 signature and an IFN signature, as determined by hierarchical clustering of the 500 most variable genes in SLE donors (<i>r</i> = 0.939, 95% CI 0.898-0.964, <i>P</i> < 0.0001). A dual IL-3/IFN gene signature is a feature of SLE. An association between IL-3 and IFN raises the possibility that dual blockade of IL-3 and IFN may be especially useful for SLE patients with this dual cytokine gene signature.

[PMID: 23083033]
In recent years, biomarkers have shown significant promise in helping decision-making in drug development. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complicated and highly heterogeneous disease that involves all organs. Only one drug, belimumab, has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat SLE during the last 50 years and there remains a high unmet medical need to develop new and effective therapies to benefit different patient populations in SLE. Due to the extreme heterogeneity of the disease and the complex and rigorous process to validate individual biomarkers, there is currently a very limited number of consensus biomarkers to aid the treatment decision-making in SLE. This review provides a snapshot of some biomarkers in the field that have the potential to make a big impact on drug development and/or treatment decisions by physicians. These include: type I interferon (IFN) gene signature as a pharmacodynamic marker and potential predictive marker for anti-type I IFN therapy; anti-double stranded DNA as a disease marker and potential predictive marker for flares; the complements and neutrophil signatures as disease marker of SLE; and TWEAK (a tumor necrosis factor family member produced by macrophages) and MCP-1 as potential markers to predict renal flares. Most of these markers need carefully planned and prospective studies with high statistical power to confirm their respective utilities. With the development and application of powerful new technologies, more successful biomarkers will emerge in SLE. This could improve the management of patients in the clinic and facilitate the development of novel and more effective therapeutics for this difficult-to-treat disease.

[PMID: 30185417]
The interferon (IFN) signature is related to disease activity and vascular disease in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and represents a promising therapeutic target. Quantification of the IFN signature is currently performed by gene expression analysis, limiting its current applicability in clinical practice. Therefore, the objective of this study was to establish an easy to measure biomarker for the IFN signature. Serum levels of galectin-9, CXCL-10 (IP-10) and tumour necrosis factor receptor type II (TNF-RII) were measured in patients with SLE, SLE+APS and primary APS (PAPS) and healthy controls (n=148) after an initial screening of serum analytes in a smaller cohort (n=43). Analytes were correlated to measures of disease activity and the IFN signature. The performance of galectin-9, CXCL-10 and TNF-RII as biomarkers to detect the IFN signature was assessed by receiver operating characteristic curves. Galectin-9, CXCL-10 and TNF-RII were elevated in patients with SLE, SLE+APS and PAPS (p<0.05) and correlated with disease activity and tissue factor expression. Galectin-9 correlated stronger than CXCL-10 or TNF-RII with the IFN score (r=0.70, p<0.001) and was superior to CXCL-10 or TNF-RII in detecting the IFN signature (area under the curve (AUC) 0.86). Importantly, in patients with SLE(±APS), galectin-9 was also superior to anti-dsDNA antibody (AUC 0.70), or complement C3 (AUC 0.70) and C4 (AUC 0.78) levels in detecting the IFN signature. Galectin-9 is a novel, easy to measure hence clinically applicable biomarker to detect the IFN signature in patients with systemic autoimmune diseases such as SLE and APS.

[PMID: 27723281]
To characterize baseline gene expression and pharmacodynamically induced changes in whole blood gene expression in 1,760 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients from 2 phase III, 52-week, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind studies in which patients were treated with the BAFF-blocking IgG4 monoclonal antibody tabalumab. Patient samples were obtained from SLE patients from the ILLUMINATE-1 and ILLUMINATE-2 studies, and control samples were obtained from healthy donors. Blood was collected in Tempus tubes at baseline, week 16, and week 52. RNA was analyzed using Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 and NanoString. At baseline, expression of the interferon (IFN) response gene was elevated in patients compared with controls, with 75% of patients being positive for this IFN response gene signature. There was, however, substantial heterogeneity of IFN response gene expression and complex relationships among gene networks. The IFN response gene signature was a predictor of time to disease flare, independent of anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody and C3 and C4 levels, and overall disease activity. Pharmacodynamically induced changes in gene expression following tabalumab treatment were extensive, occurring predominantly in B cell-related and immunoglobulin genes, and were consistent with other pharmacodynamic changes including anti-dsDNA antibody, C3, and immunoglobulin levels. SLE patients demonstrated increased expression of an IFN response gene signature (75% of patients had an elevated IFN response gene signature) at baseline in ILLUMINATE-1 and ILLUMINATE-2. Substantial heterogeneity of gene expression was detected among individual patients and in gene networks. The IFN response gene signature was an independent risk factor for future disease flares. Pharmacodynamic changes in gene expression were consistent with the mechanism of BAFF blockade by tabalumab.

[PMID: 27094810]
Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have an increased expression of type I interferon (IFN)-regulated genes (an IFN signature), which is caused by an ongoing production of type I IFNs by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). The reasons behind the continuous IFN production in SLE are the presence of self-derived IFN inducers and a lack of negative feed-back signals that downregulate the IFN response. In addition, several cells in the immune system promote the IFN production by pDCs and gene variants in the type I IFN signaling pathway contribute to the IFN signature. The type I IFNs act as an immune adjuvant and stimulate T cells, B cells, and monocytes, which all play an important role in the loss of tolerance and persistent autoimmune reaction in SLE. Consequently, new treatments aiming to inhibit the activated type I IFN system in SLE are now being developed and investigated in clinical trials.

[PMID: 21803750]
To characterise activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic scleroderma (SSc) and to evaluate the potential to develop a molecular diagnostic tool from the peripheral blood that reflects this activation in disease-affected tissues. Overexpressed transcripts were identified in the whole blood (WB) of 262 patients with SLE, 44 with DM, 33 with PM, 28 with SSc and 89 with RA and compared with 24 healthy subjects using Affymetrix microarrays. A five gene type I IFN signature was assessed in these subjects to identify subpopulations showing both activation and concordance of the type I IFN pathway in the peripheral blood and disease-affected tissues of each disease and to correlate activation of this pathway in the WB with clinical measurements. A common set of 36 type I IFN inducible transcripts were identified among the most overexpressed in the WB of all subjects. Significant activation of the type I IFN pathway in subgroups of each of the five diseases studied was observed. Baseline disease activity measurements correlated with a type I IFN gene signature in the WB of subjects with SLE, PM and SSc, as did various serum autoantibody levels in subjects with SLE and DM. This signature was also well correlated between disease-affected tissue and WB in subjects with SLE, DM, PM and SSc. The results indicate that the type I IFN pathway is activated in patient subsets of five rheumatic diseases and suggest that these subsets may benefit from anti-IFN therapy.

[PMID: 19968664]
Interferon (IFN) signature genes have been shown to be expressed highly in peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), especially in the presence of active disease. However, the expression of this gene signature in individuals with incomplete forms of lupus and the pathogenic relationship between IFN signature genes and autoantibody production have not been explored fully. In the present study, we examined the gene expression and autoantibody profiles of patients diagnosed with incomplete lupus erythematosus (ILE) to determine correlations of the gene expression signature with autoantibody production. Gene expression analysis was carried out on the 24K Illumina Human Refseq-8 arrays using blood samples from 84 subjects, including patients with SLE (n = 27) or ILE (n = 24), first-degree relatives (FDR) of these patients (n = 22) and non-autoimmune control (NC) individuals (n = 11). Autoantibody expression was measured using standard immunoassays and autoantigen proteomic arrays. Up-regulation of a set of 63 IFN signature genes was seen in 83% of SLE patients and 50% of ILE patients. High levels of IFN gene expression in ILE and SLE showed significant correlations with the expression of a subset of IgG autoantibodies, including chromatin, dsDNA, dsRNA, U1snRNP, Ro/SSA, La/SSB, topoisomerase I and Scl 70, while low IFN levels were correlated with immunoglobulin (Ig)M autoreactivity. These studies suggest that in patients with ILE the IFN gene expression signature may identify a subset of these individuals who are at risk for disease progression. Furthermore, high levels of alpha IFN may promote autoantibody class-switch from IgM to the more pathogenic IgG class.

[PMID: 22242767]
There is increased expression of type I interferon (IFN)-regulated proteins in the blood and target tissues of patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Patients with SLE have increased IFN-regulated gene expression pointing towards a possible underlying genetic defect. To determine expression levels of five type I IFN-regulated genes that are highly expressed in SLE in the peripheral blood of patients with CLE and to correlate the expression levels with cutaneous disease activity. Peripheral blood was obtained from 10 healthy controls and 30 patients with CLE, including eight with concomitant SLE. Total RNA was extracted and reverse transcribed into complementary DNA. Gene expression levels were measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Gene expression was normalized to GAPDH, standardized to healthy controls and then summed to calculate an IFN score for each patient. Disease activity was assessed with the Cutaneous Lupus Area and Severity Index (CLASI). Patients with subacute CLE (SCLE) and discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) had elevated IFN scores compared with healthy controls regardless of concomitant SLE (P < 0·01 with SLE and P < 0·05 without SLE). There was no difference between patients with tumid lupus erythematosus (TLE) and healthy controls. The IFN score correlated with CLASI scores (Spearman's rho = 0·55, P = 0·0017). Patients with SCLE and DLE have an IFN signature, as seen in SLE. The level of gene expression correlates with cutaneous disease activity. These findings support a shared pathogenesis between SLE and some subtypes of CLE.