[PMID: 15014128]
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is found in amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains, but its role in their pathogenesis is unclear. Previously, we found C-terminal-truncated fragments of apoE in AD brains and showed that such fragments can cause neurodegeneration and can induce NFT-like inclusions in cultured neuronal cells and in transgenic mice. Here, we analyzed apoE fragmentation in brain tissue homogenates from transgenic mice expressing apoE3 or apoE4 in neurons [neuron-specific enolase (NSE)-apoE] or astrocytes [glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-apoE] by Western blotting. The C-terminal-truncated fragments of apoE accumulated, in an age-dependent manner, in the brains of NSE-apoE4 and, to a significantly lesser extent, NSE-apoE3 mice; however, no fragments were detected in GFAP-apoE3 or GFAP-apoE4 mice. In NSE-apoE mice, the pattern of apoE fragmentation resembled that seen in AD brains, and the fragmentation was specific for certain brain regions, occurring in the neocortex and hippocampus, which are vulnerable to AD-related neurodegeneration, but not in the less vulnerable cerebellum. Excitotoxic challenge with kainic acid significantly increased apoE fragmentation in NSE-apoE4 but not NSE-apoE3 mice. Phosphorylated tau (p-tau) also accumulated in an age-dependent manner in NSE-apoE4 mice and, to a much lesser extent, in NSE-apoE3 mice but not in GFAP-apoE3 or GFAP-apoE4 mice. Intraneuronal p-tau inclusions in the hippocampus were prominent in 21-month-old NSE-apoE4 mice but barely detectable in NSE-apoE3 mice. Thus, the accumulation of potentially pathogenic C-terminal-truncated fragments of apoE depends on both the isoform and the cellular source of apoE. Neuron-specific proteolytic cleavage of apoE4 is associated with increased phosphorylation of tau and may play a key role in the development of AD-related neuronal deficits.

[PMID: 16903824]
Three isoforms of human plasma apolipoprotein E (apoE) are ligands to lipoprotein receptors and influence in different manner the synthesis and catabolism of pro-atherogenic triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Among three isoforms, the apoE4 isoform is associated with increased frequency of atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The conformational transitions of beta-amyloid (Abeta) influenced by apoE and serum amyloid P (SAP) component are key events in AD development, the accumulation of intermediate diffusible and soluble oligomers of Abeta being of particular significance. SAP and apoE, in a different manner for the three isoforms, serve as "pathological" chaperones during the aggregation of Abeta considered as a conformation-prone process. In turn, apoE consisting of two domains self-associates in solution and intermediate structures differently populated for the three isoforms exist. The different structures of the three isoforms determine their different distribution among various plasma lipoproteins. The structural and metabolic consideration of the common apoE pathway(s) in two pathologies assumes four molecular targets for AD correction: (i) inhibition of the accumulation of diffusible soluble Abeta oligomers; (ii) inhibition of apoE synthesis and secretion by astrocytes, in particular, under lipid-lowering therapy; (iii) inhibition of the binding of apoE and/or SAP to Abeta; (iv) stimulation of the expression of cholesterol transporter ABCA1.

[PMID: 14614898]
Dendritic spines are postsynaptic sites of excitatory input in the mammalian nervous system. Apolipoprotein (apo) E participates in the transport of plasma lipids and in the redistribution of lipids among cells. A role for apoE is implicated in regeneration of synaptic circuitry after neural injury. The apoE4 allele is a major risk factor for late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) and is associated with a poor outcome after brain injury. ApoE isoforms are suggested to have differential effects on neuronal repair mechanisms. In vitro studies have demonstrated the neurotrophic properties of apoE3 on neurite outgrowth. We have investigated the influence of apoE genotype on neuronal cell dendritic spine density in mice and in human postmortem tissue. In order to compare the morphology of neurons developing under different apoE conditions, gene gun labeling studies of dendritic spines of dentate gyrus (DG) granule cells of the hippocampus were carried out in wild-type (WT), human apoE3, human apoE4 expressing transgenic mice and apoE knockout (KO) mice; the same dendritic spine parameters were also assessed in human postmortem DG from individuals with and without the apoE4 gene. Quantitative analysis of dendritic spine length, morphology, and number was carried out on these mice at 3 weeks, 1 and 2 years of age. Human apoE3 and WT mice had a higher density of dendritic spines than human E4 and apoE KO mice in the 1 and 2 year age groups (P<0.0001), while at 3 weeks there were no differences between the groups. These age dependent differences in the effects of apoE isoforms on neuronal integrity may relate to the increased risk of dementia in aged individuals with the apoE4 allele. Significantly in human brain, apoE4 dose correlated inversely with dendritic spine density of DG neurons cell in the hippocampus of both AD (P=0.0008) and aged normal controls (P=0.0015). Our findings provide one potential explanation for the increased cognitive decline seen in aged and AD patients expressing apoE4.

[PMID: 18823563]
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is a molecular scavenger in the blood and brain. Aberrant function of the molecule causes formation of protein and lipid deposits or "plaques" that characterize Alzheimer's disease (AD) and atherosclerosis. There are three human isoforms of ApoE designated epsilon2, epsilon3, and epsilon4. Each isoform differentially affects the structure and function of the protein and thus the development of disease. Homozygosity for ApoE epsilon4 is associated with atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease whereas ApoE epsilon2 and epsilon3 tend to be protective. Furthermore, the epsilon2 form may cause forms of hyperlipoproteinemia. Therefore, introduction of ApoE epsilon3 may be beneficial to patients that are susceptible to or suffering from these diseases. Mesenchymal stem cells or multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are adult progenitor cells found in numerous tissues. They are easily expanded in culture and engraft into host tissues when administered appropriately. Furthermore, MSCs are immunosuppressive and have been reported to engraft as allogeneic transplants. In our previous study, mouse MSCs (mMSCs) were implanted into the brains of ApoE null mice, resulting in production of small amounts of ApoE in the brain and attenuation of cognitive deficits. Therefore human MSCs (hMSCs) are a promising vector for the administration of ApoE epsilon3 in humans. Unlike mMSCs, hMSCs were found not to express ApoE in culture; therefore a molecular screen was performed for compounds that induce expression. PPARgamma agonists, neural stem cell conditioned medium, osteo-inductive media, dexamethasone, and adipo-inductive media (AIM) were tested. Of the conditions tested, only AIM or dexamethasone induced sustained secretion of ApoE in MSCs and the duration of secretion was only limited by the length of time MSCs could be sustained in culture. Upon withdrawal of the inductive stimuli, the ApoE secretion persisted for a further 14 days. The data demonstrated that pre-treatment and perhaps co-administration of MSCs homozygous for ApoE epsilon3 and dexamethasone may represent a novel therapy for severe instances of AD, atherosclerosis and other ApoE-related diseases.

[PMID: 15570172]
Inheritance of the epsilon4 allele for apolipoprotein E (apoE) increases the risk of Alzheimer disease and memory impairment, whereas epsilon2 decreases these risks compared with the most common epsilon3 allele, but the mechanism for these effects is unknown. Long-term potentiation (LTP) is an experimentally induced increase in synaptic efficacy that models memory. Using hippocampal slices from wild type (WT), apoE knockout (apoE-KO), and targeted replacement mice expressing human apoE2, E3, or E4 (apoE-TR) we found that although all strains had comparable basal synaptic transmission, LTP was significantly greater in WT and apoE3-TR than in apoE-KO, apoE2-TR or apoE4-TR. This novel system may be used to investigate the mechanisms of apoE isoform dependent modulation of susceptibility to memory impairment.

[PMID: 24633805]
The apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele is the strongest risk factor of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), however, the fluid concentrations of ApoE and its different isoforms (ApoE2, ApoE3 and ApoE4) in AD patients and among APOE genotypes (APOE ε2, ε3, ε4) remain controversial. Using a novel mass spectrometry-based method, we quantified total ApoE and specific ApoE isoform concentrations and potential associations with age, cognitive status, cholesterol levels and established AD biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from AD patients versus non-AD individuals with different APOE genotypes. We also investigated plasma total ApoE and ApoE isoform composition in a subset of these individuals. In total n = 43 AD and n = 43 non-AD subjects were included. We found that CSF and plasma total ApoE levels did not correlate with age or cognitive status and did not differ between AD and non-AD subjects deeming ApoE as an unfit diagnostic marker for AD. Also, whereas CSF ApoE levels did not vary between APOE genotypes APOE ε4 carriers exhibited significantly decreased plasma ApoE levels attributed to a specific decrease in the ApoE4 isoform concentrations. CSF total ApoE concentrations were positively associated with CSF, total tau, tau phosphorylated at Thr181 and Aβ1-42 of which the latter association was weaker and only present in APOE ε4 carriers indicating a differential involvement of ApoE in tau versus Aβ-linked neuropathological processes. Future studies need to elucidate whether the observed plasma ApoE4 deficiency is a life-long condition in APOE ɛ4 carriers and whether this decrease in plasma ApoE predisposes APOE ɛ4 carriers to AD.

[PMID: 27683909]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in individuals over the age of 65 years. The most prevalent genetic risk factor for AD is the ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (ApoE4), and novel AD treatments that target ApoE are being considered. One unresolved question in ApoE biology is whether ApoE is necessary for healthy brain function. ApoE knock-out (KO) mice have synaptic loss and cognitive dysfunction; however, these findings are complicated by the fact that ApoE knock-out mice have highly elevated plasma lipid levels, which may independently affect brain function. To bypass the effect of ApoE loss on plasma lipids, we generated a novel mouse model that expresses ApoE normally in peripheral tissues, but has severely reduced ApoE in the brain, allowing us to study brain ApoE loss in the context of a normal plasma lipid profile. We found that these brain ApoE knock-out (bEKO) mice had synaptic loss and dysfunction similar to that of ApoE KO mice; however, the bEKO mice did not have the learning and memory impairment observed in ApoE KO mice. Moreover, we found that the memory deficit in the ApoE KO mice was specific to female mice and was fully rescued in female bEKO mice. Furthermore, while the AMPA/NMDA ratio was reduced in ApoE KO mice, it was unchanged in bEKO mice compared with controls. These findings suggest that plasma lipid levels can influence cognition and synaptic function independent of ApoE expression in the brain. One proposed treatment strategy for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the reduction of ApoE, whose ε4 isoform is the most common genetic risk factor for the disease. A major concern of this strategy is that an animal model of ApoE deficiency, the ApoE knock-out (KO) mouse, has reduced synapses and cognitive impairment; however, these mice also develop dyslipidemia and severe atherosclerosis. Here, we have shown that genetic restoration of plasma ApoE to wild-type levels normalizes plasma lipids in ApoE KO mice. While this does not rescue synaptic loss, it does completely restore learning and memory in the mice, suggesting that both CNS and plasma ApoE are independent parameters that affect brain health.

[PMID: 15475580]
Human apolipoprotein E (apoE) is a 299-amino-acid protein with a molecular weight of 34 kDa. The difference between the apoE3 and apoE4 isoforms is a single residue substitution involving a Cys-Arg replacement at residue 112. ApoE4 is positively associated with atherosclerosis and late-onset and sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD). ApoE4 and its C-terminal truncated fragments have been found in the senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain of AD patients. However, detail structural information regarding isoform and domain interaction remains poorly understood. We prepared full-length, N-, and C-terminal truncated apoE3 and apoE4 proteins and studied their structural variation. Sedimentation velocity and continuous size distribution analysis using analytical ultracentrifugation revealed apoE3(72-299) as consisting of a major species with a sedimentation coefficient of 5.9. ApoE4(72-299) showed a wider and more complicated species distribution. Both apoE3 and E4 N-terminal domain (1-191) existed with monomers as the major component together with some tetramer. The oligomerization and aggregation of apoE protein increased when the C-terminal domain (192-271) was incorporated. The structural influence of the C-terminal domain on apoE is to assist self-association with no significant isoform preference. Circular dichroism and fluorescence studies demonstrated that apoE4(72-299) possessed a more alpha-helical structure with more hydrophobic residue exposure. The structural variation of the N-terminal truncated apoE3 and apoE4 protein provides useful information that helps to explain the greater aggregation of the apoE4 isoform and thus has implication for the involvement of apoE4 in AD.

[PMID: 22918225]
Allelic polymorphism of the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene (ApoE ε2, ApoE ε3 and ApoE ε4 alleles) gives rise to three protein isoforms (ApoE2, ApoE3 and ApoE4) that differ by 1 or 2 amino acids. Inheritance of the ApoE ε4 allele is a risk factor for developing Alzheimer's disease (AD). The potential diagnostic value of ApoE protein levels in biological fluids (i.e. cerebrospinal fluid, plasma and serum) for distinguishing between AD patients and healthy elderly subjects is subject to great controversy. Although a recent study reported subnormal total ApoE and ApoE4 levels in the plasma of AD patients, other studies have found normal or even elevated protein levels (versus controls). Because all previously reported assays were based on immunoenzymatic techniques, we decided to develop an orthogonal assay based on targeted mass spectrometry by tracking (i) a proteotypic peptide common to all ApoE isoforms and (ii) a peptide that is specific for the ε4 allele. After trypsin digestion, the ApoE4-specific peptide contains an oxidation-prone methionine residue. The endogenous methionine oxidation level was evaluated in a small cohort (n=68) of heterozygous ε3ε4 carriers containing both healthy controls and AD patients. As expected, the proportion of oxidized residues varied from 0 to 10%, with an average of 5%. We therefore developed a standardized strategy for the unbiased, absolute quantification of ApoE4, based on performic acid oxidization of methionine. Once the sample workflow had been thoroughly validated, it was applied to the concomitant quantification of total ApoE and ApoE4 isoform in a large case-control study (n=669). The final measurements were consistent with most previously reported ApoE concentration values and confirm the influence of the different alleles on the protein expression level. Our results illustrate (i) the reliability of selected reaction monitoring-based assays and (ii) the value of the oxidization step for unbiased monitoring of methionine-containing proteotypic peptides. Furthermore, a statistical analysis indicated that neither total ApoE and ApoE4 levels nor the ApoE/ApoE4 ratio correlated with the diagnosis of AD. These findings reinforce the conclusions of previous studies in which plasma ApoE levels had no obvious clinical significance.

[PMID: 25871773]
Human apolipoprotein E (apoE) exists in three major isoforms: apoE2, apoE3 and apoE4. In the brain, apoE is produced mostly by astrocytes and transports cholesterol to neurons via apoE receptors. Among the gene alleles encoding the three isoforms, the APOE4 allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD), whereas APOE2 is protective. ApoE4 confers a gain of toxic function, a loss of neuroprotective function or a combination of both in AD pathogenesis. Given that therapeutic impacts of modulating apoE expression may be isoform-dependent, we sought to investigate the relationship between overexpressing apoE isoform and apoE-related functions in apoE-targeted replacement (TR) mice. Specifically, apoE isoform expression driven by the astrocyte-specific glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter was built into an adeno-associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8) vector and injected into the ventricles of postnatal day 2 (P2) apoE3-TR or apoE4-TR mice. Upon confirmation of apoE isoform expression, effects on apoE lipidation and the levels of amyloid-β (Aβ) in the brain were assessed. AAV8-GFAP-apoE isoforms were specifically expressed in astrocytes throughout all brain regions, which led to overall increased apoE levels in the brain. Viral mediated overexpression of apoE4 in the apoE4-TR background increased poorly-lipidated apoE lipoprotein particles and decreased apoE-associated cholesterol in apoE4-TR mice. Conversely, apoE2 overexpression in apoE4-TR mice enhanced apoE lipidation and associated cholesterol. Furthermore, overexpression of apoE4 elevated the levels of endogenous Aβ, whereas apoE2 overexpression trended to lower endogenous Aβ. Overexpression of apoE isoforms induces differential effects in the apoE4-TR background: apoE4 decreases apoE lipidation and enhances Aβ accumulation, whereas apoE2 has the opposite effects. Our findings suggest that increasing apoE2 in APOE4 carriers is a beneficial strategy to treat AD, whereas increasing apoE4 in APOE4 carriers is likely harmful. We have also established novel methods to express apoE isoforms in mouse brain to study apoE-related pathways in AD and related dementia.

[PMID: 10816430]
The inheritance of the apolipoprotein E (apoE) epsilon4 allele is a prevailing risk factor for sporadic and familial Alzheimer's disease (AD). ApoE isoforms bind directly to Alzheimer's amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides both in vitro and in vivo. Recent studies suggest that association of apoE with lipids may modulate its interaction with Abeta. We examined the binding of lipid-associated and delipidated apoE3 and apoE4 isoforms to Abeta utilizing a solid-phase binding assay and estimated the dissociation constants for the interaction of various apoE and Abeta species. Using native apoE isoforms from stably transfected RAW 264 and human embryonic kidney 293 cells, apoE3 had greater affinity than apoE4 for both Abeta1-40 and Abeta1-42. Delipidation of apoE decreased its affinity for Abeta peptides by 5-10-fold and abolished the isoform-specificity. Conversely, incorporation of apoE isoforms produced by baculovirus-infected Sf9 cells into reconstituted human high-density-lipoprotein lipoparticles restored the affinity values for Abeta peptides and resulted in preferential binding of apoE3. The data demonstrate that native lipid-associated apoE3 binds to Abeta peptides with 2-3-fold higher affinity than lipid-associated apoE4. Since the isoforms' binding efficiency correlate inversely with the risk of developing late-onset AD, the results suggest a possible involvement of apoE3 in the clearance or routing out of Abeta from the central nervous system as one of the mechanisms underlying the pathology of the disease.

[PMID: 7846048]
The apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) allele is associated with an early age of onset of the nonfamilial form of Alzheimer disease (AD) and with increased beta protein amyloid deposition in the brain. These two observations may both arise from an effect of the apoE family of proteins on the rate of in vivo amyloidogenesis. We report here that apoE3, the common apoE isoform, is an in vitro amyloid nucleation inhibitor at physiological concentrations. A significant delay in the onset of amyloid fibril formation by the beta-amyloid protein of AD (beta 1-40) was observed at a low apoE3 concentration (40 nM), corresponding to an apoE3/beta protein molar ratio of 1:1000. The inhibitory activity of a proteolytic fragment of apoE3, containing the N-terminal 191 amino acids, is comparable to the native protein, whereas the C-terminal fragment has no activity. ApoE4 is equipotent or slightly less potent than apoE3, which may be due to its inability to form a disulfide dimer, since the apoE3 dimer is a significantly more potent nucleation inhibitor than apoE4. Neither apoE3 nor apoE4 inhibits the seeded growth of amyloid or affects the solubility or structure of the amyloid fibrils, indicating that apoE is not a thermodynamic amyloid inhibitor. We propose that the linkage between the APOE4 allele and AD reflects the reduced ability of APOE4 homozygotes to suppress in vivo amyloid formation.

[PMID: 21705182]
APOE alleles and apolipoprotein E isoforms control plasma cholesterol level on population level. Among three ɛ2, ɛ3, ɛ4 alleles, ɛ4 allele is associated with the increase in cholesterol level, risk of atherosclerosis and Alzheimer disease, while ɛ2 allele is associated with the decrease in cholesterol level and risk of atherosclerosis. The increase in plasma triglyceride is an independent risk factor of atherosclerosis and triglyceride-high density lipoprotein coupling determines the efficiency of reverse cholesterol transport. The impairment of this coupling specifically at hypertriglyceridemia may be followed by specific lipoprotein markers. The influence of major lipid-lowering drugs on lipoprotein metabolism and association of apoE isoforms with the efficiency of therapy by statins and fibrates are summarized both at isolated and combined increase in plasma triglyceride and cholesterol. APOE polymorphism seems to be a single genetic variant with a confirmed stratification both at candidate gene and at wide genome analyses.

[PMID: 22401921]
In humans, apolipoprotein E (apoE) is encoded by three major alleles (ε2, ε3, and ε4) and, compared to apoE3, apoE4 increases the risk of developing Alzheimer disease and cognitive impairments following various environmental challenges. Exposure to irradiation, including that of (56)Fe, during space missions poses a significant risk to the central nervous system, and apoE isoform might modulate this risk. We investigated whether apoE isoform modulates hippocampus-dependent cognitive performance starting 2 weeks after (56)Fe irradiation. Changes in reactive oxygen species (ROS) can affect cognition and are induced by irradiation. Therefore, after cognitive testing, we assessed hippocampal ROS levels in ex vivo brain slices, using the ROS-sensitive fluorescent probe, dihydroethidium (DHE). Brain levels of 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT), CuZn superoxide dismutase (CuZnSOD), extracellular SOD, and apoE were assessed using Western blotting analysis. In the water maze, spatial memory retention was impaired by irradiation in apoE2 and apoE4 mice but enhanced by irradiation in apoE3 mice. Irradiation reduced DHE-oxidation levels in the enclosed blade of the dentate gyrus and levels of 3-NT and CuZnSOD in apoE2 but not apoE3 or apoE4 mice. Finally, irradiation increased apoE levels in apoE3 but not apoE2 or apoE4 mice. The short-term effects of (56)Fe irradiation on hippocampal ROS levels and hippocampus-dependent spatial memory retention are apoE isoform-dependent.

[PMID: 16540478]
There are three major apolipoprotein E (apoE) isoforms. Although APOE-epsilon3 is considered a longevity gene, APOE-epsilon4 is a dual risk factor to atherosclerosis and Alzheimer disease. We have expressed full-length and N- and C-terminal truncated apoE3 and apoE4 tailored to eliminate helix and domain interactions to unveil structural and functional disturbances. The N-terminal truncated apoE4-(72-299) and C-terminal truncated apoE4-(1-231) showed more complicated or aggregated species than those of the corresponding apoE3 counterparts. This isoformic structural variation did not exist in the presence of dihexanoylphosphatidylcholine. The C-terminal truncated apoE-(1-191) and apoE-(1-231) proteins greatly lost lipid binding ability as illustrated by the dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine turbidity clearance. The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor binding ability, determined by a competition binding assay of 3H-LDL to the LDL receptor of HepG2 cells, showed that apoE4 proteins with N-terminal (apoE4-(72-299)), C-terminal (apoE4-(1-231)), or complete C-terminal truncation (apoE4-(1-191)) maintained greater receptor binding abilities than their apoE3 counterparts. The cholesterol-lowering abilities of apoE3-(72-299) and apoE3-(1-231) in apoE-deficient mice were decreased significantly. The structural preference of apoE4 to remain functional in solution may explain the enhanced opportunity of apoE4 isoform to display its pathophysiologic functions in atherosclerosis and Alzheimer disease.

[PMID: 21907569]
The largest genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) resides at the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) locus, which has three common alleles (ɛ2, ɛ3, ɛ4) that encode three isoforms (apoE2, apoE3, apoE4). The very strong association of the APOE ɛ4 allele with AD risk and its role in the accumulation of amyloid β in brains of people and animal models solidify the biological relevance of apoE isoforms but do not provide mechanistic insight. The innate immune response is consistently observed in AD and is a likely contributor to neuronal injury and response to injury. Here we review emerging data showing that apoE isoform regulation of multiple facets of the innate immune response in the brain may alter AD not only through amyloid β-dependent mechanisms, but also through other, amyloid β-independent mechanisms.

[PMID: 8726460]
The apolipoprotein E (apoE) type epsilon 4 isoform specifies increased cerebral and cerebrovascular accumulation of amyloid-beta protein (A beta) and contributes to the genetic susceptibility underlying a large proportion (approximately 60%) of typical, sporadic Alzheimer disease. Unfortunately, in vitro biochemical studies of direct apoE isoform-specific interactions with A beta have been inconsistent, perhaps due to the use by different research groups of apoE isoform preparations in different conformational states (purified denatured versus native). In the current study, we have investigated the possibility that synthetic A beta(1-40) preferentially associates with native apoE of either the type epsilon 3 or the type epsilon 4 isoform. Here, we demonstrate the preferential association of synthetic A beta(1-40) with native apoE epsilon 3. The complex between apoE epsilon 3 and A beta(1-40) could not be disrupted by sodium dodecyl sulfate. In a parallel assay, no denaturant-resistant association of A beta(1-40) with apoE epsilon 4 was detectable. These results support the notion that the apoE epsilon 4 isoform may foster beta-amyloidogenesis because apoE epsilon 4 is inefficient in forming complexes with A beta.

[PMID: 10949525]
There are three major isoforms of apolipoprotein E (apoE), namely apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4, that are products of three alleles (epsilon2,epsilon3,epsilon4) at a single gene locus on chromosome 19. It is well known that the presence of apoE4 increases the risk for the development of Alzheimer's disease and atherosclerosis. The aim of the study was to examine if apoE polymorphism or apoE levels contribute to the severity of the disease in patients with multiple sclerosis or the outcome of nerve damage in patients with herpes zoster infection. We examined apoE phenotype of 105 MS patients and 41 patients with herpes zoster. We also measured serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of apoE from 93 patients with definite MS using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. There were no differences in apoE allele frequencies in MS or herpes zoster patients compared to the allele frequencies of controls. The levels of serum or CSF apoE did not differ from those of age-matched controls, nor did they correlate with the disease activity. We conclude that apoE does not contribute to the activity of MS or the outcome of herpes zoster.

[PMID: 22393530]
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype is the major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer disease (AD); the ε4 allele increases risk and the ε2 allele is protective. In the central nervous system (CNS), apoE is produced by glial cells, is present in high-density-like lipoproteins, interacts with several receptors that are members of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) family, and is a protein that binds to the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide. There are a variety of mechanisms by which apoE isoform may influence risk for AD. There is substantial evidence that differential effects of apoE isoform on AD risk are influenced by the ability of apoE to affect Aβ aggregation and clearance in the brain. Other mechanisms are also likely to play a role in the ability of apoE to influence CNS function as well as AD, including effects on synaptic plasticity, cell signaling, lipid transport and metabolism, and neuroinflammation. ApoE receptors, including LDLRs, Apoer2, very low-density lipoprotein receptors (VLDLRs), and lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) appear to influence both the CNS effects of apoE as well as Aβ metabolism and toxicity. Therapeutic strategies based on apoE and apoE receptors may include influencing apoE/Aβ interactions, apoE structure, apoE lipidation, LDLR receptor family member function, and signaling. Understanding the normal and disease-related biology connecting apoE, apoE receptors, and AD is likely to provide novel insights into AD pathogenesis and treatment.

[PMID: 26427386]
The cholesterol transporting protein apolipoprotein E (ApoE) occurs in three allelic variants in humans unlike in other species. The resulting protein isoforms E2, E3 and E4 exhibit differences in lipid binding, integrating into lipoprotein particles and affinity for lipoprotein receptors. ApoE isoforms confer genetic risk for several diseases of aging including atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). A single E4 allele increases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, whereas the E2 allele is protective. Intriguingly, the E4 allele is protective in AMD. Current thinking about different functions of ApoE isoforms comes largely from studies on Alzheimer's disease. These data cannot be directly extrapolated to AMD since the primary cells affected in these diseases (neurons vs. retinal pigment epithelium) are so different. Here, we propose that ApoE serves a fundamentally different purpose in regulating cholesterol homeostasis in the retinal pigment epithelium and this could explain why allelic risk factors are flipped for AMD compared to Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 15649697]
Amyloid-beta1-42 (Abeta1-42) is crucial to Alzheimer disease (AD) pathogenesis but the conformation of the toxic Abeta species remains uncertain. AD risk is increased by apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4) and decreased by apoE2 compared with the apoE3 isoform, but whether inheritance of apoE4 represents a gain of negative or a loss of protective function is also unresolved. Using hippocampal slices from apoE knockout (apoE-KO) and human apoE2, E3, and E4 targeted replacement (apoE-TR) mice, we found that oligomeric Abeta1-42 inhibited long-term potentiation (LTP) with a hierarchy of susceptibility mirroring clinical AD risk (apoE4-TR > apoE3-TR = apoE-KO > apoE2-TR), and that comparable doses of unaggregated Abeta1-42 did not affect LTP. These data provide a novel link among apoE isoform, Abeta1-42, and a functional cellular model of memory. In this model, apoE4 confers a gain of negative function synergistic with Abeta1-42, apoE2 is protective, and the apoE-Abeta interaction is specific to oligomeric Abeta1-42.

[PMID: 11701639]
First recognized as a major determinant in lipoprotein metabolism and cardiovascular disease, apolipoprotein (apo) E has emerged as an important molecule in several biological processes not directly related to its lipid transport function, including Alzheimer's disease and cognitive function, immunoregulation, and possibly even infectious diseases. ApoE is a polymorphic protein arising from three alleles at a single gene locus. The three major isoforms, apoE4, apoE3, and apoE2, differ from one another only by single amino acid substitutions, yet these changes have profound functional consequences at both the cellular and molecular levels. ApoE3 seems to be the normal isoform in all known functions, while apoE4 and apoE2 can each be dysfunctional. Isoform (allele)-specific effects include the association of apoE2 with the genetic disorder type III hyperlipoproteinemia and with both increased and decreased risk for atherosclerosis and the association of apoE4 with increased risk for both atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease, impaired cognitive function, and reduced neurite outgrowth; isoform-specific differences in cellular signaling events may also exist. Functional differences in the apoE isoforms that affect (or did affect) survival before the reproductive years probably account, at least in part, for the allele frequencies of the present day.

[PMID: 18359298]
After receptor-mediated endocytosis of apolipoprotein E (apoE)-containing lipoproteins in hepatocytes, the isoform apoE3 is efficiently recycled in a process which is associated with cholesterol efflux. Recycling and cholesterol efflux are greatly reduced when apoE4 is the only isoform present. ApoE is the main apolipoprotein in cerebrospinal fluid, and it plays a pivotal role in maintaining cholesterol homeostasis in the brain. The isoform apoE4 is associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease and it has been postulated that high intracellular cholesterol levels promote the amyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein. Therefore we investigated the cellular processing of different apoE isoforms as well as the associated cholesterol efflux in the murine neuronal cell line HT-22. Uptake of apoE3-containing lipoproteins resulted in the expected recycling while, as seen in non-neuronal cells, recycling of apoE4 was significantly reduced. However, despite these differences in apoE recycling, there was no difference in rates of cholesterol efflux. Therefore we conclude that in this neuronal cell model the reduced recycling of apoE4 does not affect cellular cholesterol metabolism.

[PMID: 24754513]
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is an abundant plasma protein that interacts with low density lipoprotein receptors and other proteins, participating in the transport of cholesterol and lipids. Research has revealed many other roles for this multifunctional protein. ApoE is polymorphic and exists in three major isoforms: ApoE2, ApoE3 (the most common isoform) and ApoE4, which differ by only one amino acid, at positions 112 and 158. The altered binding to lipids and receptors by ApoE isoforms E2 and E4 results in an elevated risk for neurological, cerebrovascular and cardiovascular pathologies. Most notably, ApoE4 is associated with an elevated risk (relative to E3) for Alzheimer's disease. The application of mass spectrometry for genotyping and also direct measurement of ApoE protein isoforms is a recent development and is well suited to high-throughput applications. The precise quantification of protein isoforms will allow better characterization of effects resulting from heterozygous APOE genotypes.

[PMID: 23293020]
Human apolipoprotein E (apoE) isoforms may differentially modulate amyloid-β (Aβ) levels. Evidence suggests physical interactions between apoE and Aβ are partially responsible for these functional effects. However, the apoE/Aβ complex is not a single static structure; rather, it is defined by detection methods. Thus, literature results are inconsistent and difficult to interpret. An ELISA was developed to measure soluble apoE/Aβ in a single, quantitative method and was used to address the hypothesis that reduced levels of soluble apoE/Aβ and an increase in soluble Aβ, specifically oligomeric Aβ (oAβ), are associated with APOE4 and AD. Previously, soluble Aβ42 and oAβ levels were greater with APOE4 compared with APOE2/APOE3 in hippocampal homogenates from EFAD transgenic mice (expressing five familial AD mutations and human apoE isoforms). In this study, soluble apoE/Aβ levels were lower in E4FAD mice compared with E2FAD and E3FAD mice, thus providing evidence that apoE/Aβ levels isoform-specifically modulate soluble oAβ clearance. Similar results were observed in soluble preparations of human cortical synaptosomes; apoE/Aβ levels were lower in AD patients compared with controls and lower with APOE4 in the AD cohort. In human CSF, apoE/Aβ levels were also lower in AD patients and with APOE4 in the AD cohort. Importantly, although total Aβ42 levels decreased in AD patients compared with controls, oAβ levels increased and were greater with APOE4 in the AD cohort. Overall, apoE isoform-specific formation of soluble apoE/Aβ modulates oAβ levels, suggesting a basis for APOE4-induced AD risk and a mechanistic approach to AD biomarkers.

[PMID: 8782820]
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) E4 allele is associated with Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular disease, and decreased longevity. To probe the mechanism of these associations, cell lines were created which secrete each apoE isoform. ApoE conditioned media, purified apoE, and commercially obtained apoE protected B12 cells from hydrogen peroxide cytotoxicity with E2 > E3 > E4. Physiological levels of apoE protected cells from beta-amyloid peptides, while higher doses of apoE led to increased cytotoxicity. E2 > E3 > E4 possessed antioxidant activity, and apoE bound certain metal ions. The decreased antioxidant activity of E4 could contribute to its association with Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular disease and decreased longevity.

[PMID: 20531185]
The purpose of this review is to provide insights into recent advances in mechanisms linking apolipoprotein (apo) E isoforms to cardiovascular and neurological diseases. Human apoE has three common isoforms (apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4) with different structural and biophysical properties and different effects on lipid and neuronal homeostasis. ApoE is a protein constituent of different plasma lipoproteins and serves as a high-affinity ligand for several receptors. By interacting with its receptors, apoE mediates the clearance of different lipoproteins from the circulation. Absence or structural mutations of apoE cause significant disorders in lipid metabolism and cardiovascular disease. ApoE also has significant roles in neurobiology. ApoE4 is the major known genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. It increases the occurrence and lowers the age of onset of Alzheimer's disease. ApoE4 carriers account for 65-80% of all Alzheimer's disease cases, highlighting the importance of apoE4 in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. ApoE4 has both amyloid beta-dependent and amyloid beta-independent roles in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. Emerging data suggest that apoE isoforms, with their multiple cellular origins and multiple structural and biophysical properties, contribute to cardiovascular and neurological diseases by interacting with different factors through various pathways.

[PMID: 8367470]
Apolipoprotein E (apoE), a plasma apolipoprotein that plays a central role in lipoprotein metabolism, is localized in the senile plaques, congophilic angiopathy, and neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease. Late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease patients have an increased frequency of one of the three common apoE alleles, epsilon 4, suggesting apoE4 is associated with increased susceptibility to disease. To follow up on this suggestion, we compared the binding of synthetic amyloid beta (beta/A4) peptide to purified apoE4 and apoE3, the most common isoform. Both isoforms bound synthetic beta/A4 peptide, the primary constituent of the plaque and angiopathy, forming a complex that resisted dissociation by boiling in SDS. Oxygen-mediated complex formation was implicated because binding was increased in oxygenated buffer, reduced in nitrogen-purged buffer, and prevented by reduction with dithiothreitol or 2-mercaptoethanol. Binding of beta/A4 peptide was saturable at 10(-4) M peptide and required residues 12-28. Examination of apoE fragments revealed that residues 244-272 are critical for complex formation. Both oxidized apoE4 and apoE3 bound beta/A4 peptide; however, binding to apoE4 was observed in minutes, whereas binding to apoE3 required hours. In addition, apoE4 did not bind beta/A4 peptide at pH < 6.6, whereas apoE3 bound beta/A4 peptide from pH 7.6 to 4.6. Together these results indicate differences in the two isoforms in complexing with the beta/A4 peptide. Binding of beta/A4 peptide by oxidized apoE may determine the sequestration or targeting of either apoE or beta/A4 peptide, and isoform-specific differences in apoE binding or oxidation may be involved in the pathogenesis of the intra- and extracellular lesions of Alzheimer disease.

[PMID: 7891887]
The apolipoprotein E type 4 allele is a susceptibility gene for late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Apolipoprotein E is found in neurons, some of which contain paired helical filaments made of the microtubule-associated protein tau. Previous studies have demonstrated that the apoE3 isoform, but not the apoE4 isoform, binds tau with high avidity. Because the microtubule-associated protein MAP2c also effects microtubule assembly and stability, we examined interactions between apoE isoforms and MAP2c. Similar to the tau-binding results, apoE3, but not apoE4, bound MAP2c. Binding was detectable down to 10(-9) M MAP2c and 10(-8) M apoE3. Isoform-specific interactions of apoE with the microtubule-associated proteins MAP2c and tau might affect intracellular maintenance of microtubules and could contribute to a time-dependent pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 23781009]
To examine the association between the circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) gene rs1554483 G/C polymorphism and susceptibility to Alzheimer's disease in Chinese people. This case-control study determined apolipoprotein E (APOE) and CLOCK rs1554483 G/C genotypes using polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism. Unrelated patients with Alzheimer's disease (n = 130) and healthy controls (n = 188) were analysed for an association between the CLOCK gene rs1554483 G/C polymorphism and susceptibility to Alzheimer's disease. In the whole sample and in APOE ε4 isoform noncarriers, the prevalence of CLOCK gene rs1554483 G allele carriers was significantly higher in patients with Alzheimer's disease than in controls. Among APOE ε4 carriers, the prevalence of CLOCK rs1554483 G allele carriers was not significantly different between patients with Alzheimer's disease and controls. Among APOE ε4 noncarriers, but not APOE ε4 carriers, the CLOCK rs1554483 G allele was associated with increased susceptibility to Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 19033669]
Neurotoxic amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) accumulates in the brains of individuals with Alzheimer disease (AD). The APOE4 allele is a major risk factor for sporadic AD and has been associated with increased brain parenchymal and vascular amyloid burden. How apoE isoforms influence Abeta accumulation in the brain has, however, remained unclear. Here, we have shown that apoE disrupts Abeta clearance across the mouse blood-brain barrier (BBB) in an isoform-specific manner (specifically, apoE4 had a greater disruptive effect than either apoE3 or apoE2). Abeta binding to apoE4 redirected the rapid clearance of free Abeta40/42 from the LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) to the VLDL receptor (VLDLR), which internalized apoE4 and Abeta-apoE4 complexes at the BBB more slowly than LRP1. In contrast, apoE2 and apoE3 as well as Abeta-apoE2 and Abeta-apoE3 complexes were cleared at the BBB via both VLDLR and LRP1 at a substantially faster rate than Abeta-apoE4 complexes. Astrocyte-secreted lipo-apoE2, lipo-apoE3, and lipo-apoE4 as well as their complexes with Abeta were cleared at the BBB by mechanisms similar to those of their respective lipid-poor isoforms but at 2- to 3-fold slower rates. Thus, apoE isoforms differentially regulate Abeta clearance from the brain, and this might contribute to the effects of APOE genotype on the disease process in both individuals with AD and animal models of AD.

[PMID: 19549280]
Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) has central functions in development, tissue maintenance, and repair and has been implicated in major diseases. We discovered that TGF-beta1 contains several amphipathic helices and hydrophobic domains similar to apolipoprotein E (apoE), a protein involved in lipoprotein metabolism. Indeed, TGF-beta1 associates with lipoproteins isolated from human plasma, cultured liver cells, or astrocytes, and its bioactivity was highest in high-density lipoprotein preparations. Importantly, lipoproteins containing the apoE3 isoform had higher TGF-beta levels and bioactivity than those containing apoE4, a major genetic risk factor for atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. Because TGF-beta1 can be protective in these diseases an association with apoE3 may be beneficial. Association of TGF-beta with different types of lipoproteins may facilitate its diffusion, regulate signaling, and offer additional specificity for this important growth factor.