[PMID: 23743763]
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) is associated with 15-20% of familial isolated pituitary adenomas and 50-80% of cases with AIP mutation exhibit a somatotropinoma. Herein we report clinical characteristics of a large family where AIP R304X variants have been identified. AIP mutation analysis was performed on a large (n = 52) Turkish family across six generations. Sella MRIs of 30 family members were obtained. Basal pituitary hormone levels were evaluated in 13 family members harboring an AIP mutation. Thirteen of 52 family members (25%) were found to have a heterozygous nonsense germline R304X mutation in the AIP gene. Seven of the 13 mutation carriers (53.8%) had current or previous history of pituitary adenoma. Of these 7 mutation carriers, all but one had somatotropinoma/somatolactotropinoma (85.7% of the pituitary adenomas). Of the 6 acromegaly patients with AIP mutation (F/M: 3/3) the mean age at diagnosis of acromegaly was 32 ± 10.3 years while the mean age of symptom onset was 24.8 ± 9.9 years. Three of the six (50%) acromegaly cases with AIP mutation within the family presented with a macroadenoma and none presented with gigantism. Biochemical disease control was achieved in 66.6% (4/6) of the mutation carriers with acromegaly after a mean follow-up period of 18.6 ± 17.6 years. Common phenotypic characteristics of familial pituitary adenoma or somatotropinoma due to AIP mutation vary between families or even between individuals within a family.

[PMID: 24078436]
The cause of familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) remains unknown in a high percentage of cases, but the AIP gene plays an important role in the etiology. The aim of the study is to describe a family with FIPA syndrome and the results of genomic studies. A 16-year-old man had a giant prolactinoma resistant tomedical treatment with delayed growth and pubertal development. His mother had been previously diagnosed with a nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma. Transsphenoidal endoscopic resection was performed and a genetic study revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 6: 974G>A (p.Arg325Gln). Because the AIP gene is a tumor suppressor gene, we searched for loss of heterozygosity within the AIP gene by amplifying exon 6 from tumor tissue of the patient. In the electropherogram, only the A allele was amplified (hemizygous state), indicating loss of the normal allele. We report a Spanish family with FIPA in whom a mutation in the AIP gene previously unreported in a familiar context was identified.

[PMID: 24050928]
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene (AIP) is associated with pituitary adenoma (PA). AIP has not been sequenced in East Asian PA populations, so we performed this study in a Han Chinese cohort. Our study included six familial PA pedigrees comprising 16 patients and 27 unaffected relatives, as well as 216 sporadic PA (SPA) patients and 100 unrelated healthy controls. AIP sequencing was carried out on genomic DNA isolated from blood samples. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and microsatellite marker analyses on DNA from the paired tumor tissues were performed for loss of heterozygosity analysis. We identified three common and four rare single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), one intron insertion, one novel synonymous variant, four novel missense variants, and a reported nonsense mutation in three familial isolated PA (FIPA) cases from the same family. Large genetic deletions were not observed in the germline but were seen in the sporadic tumor DNA from three missense variant carriers. The prevalence of AIP pathogenic variants in PA patients here was low (3.88%), but was higher in somatotropinoma patients (9.30%), especially in young adults (≤30 years) and pediatric (≥18 years) paients (17.24% and 25.00% respectively). All AIP variant patients suffered from macroadenomas. However, the AIP mutation rate in FIPA families was low in this cohort (16.67%, 1/6 families). AIP gene mutation may not be frequent in FIPA or SPA from the Han Chinese population. AIP sequencing and long-term follow-up investigations should be performed for young patients with large PAs and their families with PA predisposition.

[PMID: 24423289]
Germline AIP mutations usually cause young-onset acromegaly with low penetrance in a subset of familial isolated pituitary adenoma families. We describe our experience with a large family with R304* AIP mutation and discuss some of the diagnostic dilemmas and management issues. The aim of the study was to identify and screen mutation carriers in the family. Forty-three family members participated in the study. The study was performed in university hospitals. We conducted genetic and endocrine screening of family members. We identified 18 carriers of the R304* mutation, three family members with an AIP-variant A299V, and two family members who harbored both changes. One of the two index cases presented with gigantism and pituitary apoplexy, the other presented with young-onset acromegaly, and both had surgery and radiotherapy. After genetic and clinical screening of the family, two R304* carriers were diagnosed with acromegaly. They underwent transsphenoidal surgery after a short period of somatostatin analog treatment. One of these two patients is in remission; the other achieved successful pregnancy despite suboptimal control of acromegaly. One of the A299V carrier family members was previously diagnosed with a microprolactinoma; we consider this case to be a phenocopy. Height of the unaffected R304* carrier family members is not different compared to noncarrier relatives. Families with AIP mutations present particular problems such as the occurrence of large invasive tumors, poor response to medical treatment, difficulties with fertility and management of pregnancy, and the finding of AIP sequence variants of unknown significance. Because disease mostly develops at a younger age and penetrance is low, the timing and duration of the follow-up of carriers without overt disease requires further study. The psychological and financial impact of prolonged clinical screening must be considered. Excellent relationships between the family, endocrinologists, and geneticists are essential, and ideally these families should be managed in centers with specialist expertise.

[PMID: 22915287]
Germline mutations of aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor interacting protein (AIP) are associated with pituitary adenoma predisposition. They occur in 20 % of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) and in about 3-5 % of sporadic pituitary adenomas, especially in early onset somatotropinomas and prolactinomas. Our aim was to evaluate the clinical and genetic features of a large Italian FIPA family, where an AIP variant was identified. AIP direct sequencing from genomic DNA was carried out in 16 available family members. AIP R16H carriers also underwent magnetic resonance imaging and hormonal assessments. AIP mutations were also searched in 16 patients with sporadic growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma and in 6 unrelated patients in whom pituitary adenoma was excluded. We found an AIP R16H variation in two family members harbouring a pituitary adenoma and in 6 unaffected family members. No AIP mutation was found neither in growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma patients, nor in the unrelated patients without pituitary adenoma. We report a FIPA family harbouring an AIP R16H change, supporting the hypothesis that the latter represents a variant of unknown significance.

[PMID: 17961654]
Pituitary adenomas can occur in a familial context, or they can be isolated cases, sometimes due to a predisposing syndrome. In multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, they often associate with a mutation of the menin gene, a tumor-suppressing gene. A new germinal mutation predisposing to the development of multiple endocrine neoplasias has recently been identified in MENI-negative subjects on the gene CDKN1B encoding for p27(kip1)protein. Carney Complex syndrome--a rare disease--is in more than 60% of the cases linked to the inactivation mutation of a gene located on 17q22-24 that encodes the regulatory subunit 1 of protein kinase A, PRKARIA. Isolated familial pituitary adenomas represent 1.9 to 3.2% of the population of subjects presenting a pituitary adenoma. Low penetrance non-sense mutations, Q14X, IVS3-IG>A and R304X, in 11q12-11q13 region encoding AIP protein, (Aryl hydrocarbon receptor Interacting Protein), have been described by Vierimaa et al, in Finish patients with pituitary adenoma predispositions.

[PMID: 22291433]
Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) occurs in families and is unrelated to multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and Carney complex. Mutations in AIP account only for 15-25% of FIPA families. CDKN1B mutations cause MEN4 in which affected patients can suffer from pituitary adenomas. With this study, we wanted to assess whether mutations in CDKN1B occur among a large cohort of AIP mutation-negative FIPA kindreds. Eighty-eight AIP mutation-negative FIPA families were studied and 124 affected subjects underwent sequencing of CDKN1B. Functional analysis of putative CDKN1B mutations was performed using in silico and in vitro approaches. Germline CDKN1B analysis revealed two nucleotide changes: c.286A>C (p.K96Q) and c.356T>C (p.I119T). In vitro, the K96Q change decreased p27 affinity for Grb2 but did not segregate with pituitary adenoma in the FIPA kindred. The I119T substitution occurred in a female patient with acromegaly. p27(I119T) shows an abnormal migration pattern by SDS-PAGE. Three variants (p.S56T, p.T142T, and c.605+36C>T) are likely nonpathogenic because In vitro effects were not seen. In conclusion, two patients had germline sequence changes in CDKN1B, which led to functional alterations in the encoded p27 proteins in vitro. Such rare CDKN1B variants may contribute to the development of pituitary adenomas, but their low incidence and lack of clear segregation with affected patients make CDKN1B sequencing unlikely to be of use in routine genetic investigation of FIPA kindreds. However, further characterization of the role of CDKN1B in pituitary tumorigenesis in these and other cases could help clarify the clinicopathological profile of MEN4.

[PMID: 17244780]
An association between germline aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene mutations and pituitary adenomas was recently shown. The objective of the study was to assess the frequency of AIP gene mutations in a large cohort of patients with familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA). This was a multicenter, international, collaborative study. The study was conducted in 34 university endocrinology and genetics departments in nine countries. Affected members from each FIPA family were studied. Relatives of patients with AIP mutations underwent AIP sequence analysis. Presence/absence and description of AIP gene mutations were the main outcome measures. There was no intervention. Seventy-three FIPA families were identified, with 156 patients with pituitary adenomas; the FIPA cohort was evenly divided between families with homogeneous and heterogeneous tumor expression. Eleven FIPA families had 10 germline AIP mutations. Nine mutations, R16H, G47_R54del, Q142X, E174frameshift, Q217X, Q239X, K241E, R271W, and Q285frameshift, have not been described previously. Tumors were significantly larger (P = 0.0005) and diagnosed at a younger age (P = 0.0006) in AIP mutation-positive vs. mutation-negative subjects. Somatotropinomas predominated among FIPA families with AIP mutations, but mixed GH/prolactin-secreting tumors, prolactinomas, and nonsecreting adenomas were also noted. Approximately 85% of the FIPA cohort and 50% of those with familial somatotropinomas were negative for AIP mutations. AIP mutations, of which nine new mutations have been described here, occur in approximately 15% of FIPA families. Although pituitary tumors occurring in association with AIP mutations are predominantly somatotropinomas, other tumor types are also seen. Further study of the impact of AIP mutations on protein expression and activity is necessary to elucidate their role in pituitary tumorigenesis in FIPA.

[PMID: 21450940]
Mutations of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene are associated with pituitary adenomas that usually occur as familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA). Detailed pathological and tumor genetic data on AIP mutation-related pituitary adenomas are not sufficient. Non-identical twin females presented as adolescents to the emergency department with severe progressive headache caused by large pituitary macroadenomas require emergency neurosurgery; one patient had incipient pituitary apoplexy. Post-surgically, the patients were found to have silent somatotrope adenomas on pathological examination. Furthermore, the light microscopic, immunohistochemical, and electron microscopic studies demonstrated tumors of virtually identical characteristics. The adenomas were accompanied by multiple areas of pituitary hyperplasia, which stained positively for GH, indicating somatotrope hyperplasia. Genetic analyses of the FIPA kindred revealed a novel E216X mutation of the AIP gene, which was present in both the affected patients and the unaffected father. Molecular analysis of surgical specimens revealed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the adenoma but showed that LOH was not present in the hyperplastic pituitary tissue from either patient. AIP immunostaining confirmed normal staining in the hyperplastic tissue and decreased staining in the adenoma in the tumors from both patients. These results demonstrate that patients with AIP germline mutation can present with silent somatotrope pituitary adenomas. The finding of somatotrope hyperplasia unaccompanied by AIP LOH suggests that LOH at the AIP locus might be a late event in a potential progression from hyperplastic to adenomatous tissue.

[PMID: 23038625]
Most cases of familial isolated pituitary adenomas with mutated aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP:HGNC:358) gene develop somatotropinomas. They are characterised by an aggressive clinical phenotype including early age at diagnosis, large tumours and frequent invasiveness. There is little information on AIP gene mutations' prevalence in isolated somatotropinomas characterised by poor response to somatostatin analogue treatment. The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of AIP mutations in non-familial cases of somatotropinomas with poor response to conventional treatment. Fifty patients with acromegaly (22 males/28 females, age 51±18 years) and 60 controls were included in this study performed at eight University Hospitals in Spain. None had family history of pituitary adenomas or other endocrine tumors. All patients failed to respond to conventional treatment including surgery and somatostatin analogues. Some patients received adjuvant radiotherapy and most cases required pegvisomant (PEG) treatment for normalisation of IGF1. AIP analysis was performed in DNA extracted from peripheral leucocytes, using standardised PCR protocol in which the coding regions of exons 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 were amplified. Possible deletions/duplications were studied using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. SEQUENCE CHANGES OF POTENTIAL DIFFERENT SIGNIFICANCE THAT COULD BE CONSIDERED AS MUTATIONS OR VARIATIONS OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE (VUS) OF THE AIP GENE WERE FOUND IN FOUR PATIENTS (8%). IN TWO CASES, TWO DIFFERENT MUTATIONS PREVIOUSLY DESCRIBED WERE FOUND: p.Arg9Gln and p.Phe269Phe. Two other VUS were also found: c.787+24C>T in intron 5 and c.100-18C>T in intron 1. Age at diagnosis ranged from 21 to 50 years old, and in all patients, the tumor was a macroadenoma depicting IGF1 normalisation under PEG treatment. AIP germline mutations show a low, but non-negligible, prevalence in non-familial acromegaly patients with tumors resistant to treatment with somatostatin analogues.

[PMID: 23652674]
Pituitary adenomas are common tumors of the adenohypophysis which can cause considerable morbidity, due to excessive hormonal secretion or compression and local invasion of surrounding structures. The vast majority of pituitary adenomas occur sporadically. Altered gene expression is commonly detected but somatic mutations, epigenetic changes and abnormal microRNAs have also been described. Occurrence of GNAS mutations at a postzygotic stage lead to McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS), a disease causing endocrine hyperfunction and tumors in several organs, including the pituitary. Familial pituitary adenomas occur as part of a syndrome affecting other organs, such as in MEN1 or Carney complex, or occur with pituitary adenomas only as in familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA). FIPA, an autosomal-dominant disease with variable penetrance, is explained in 20% of patients by germline mutations in the tumor suppressor aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein(AIP), while no gene abnormality has been identified to date in the majority of the FIPA families. AIP mutation-positive patients have a characteristic clinical phenotype with usually young- or childhood-onset growth hormone (GH) and/or prolactin (PRL)-secreting adenomas and can be seen in cases with no apparent family history as well. Understanding the tumorigenic process in AIP-positive and AIP-negative FIPA patients could result in better diagnostic and treatment options for both familial and sporadic cases.

[PMID: 21778740]
The paradox of pituitary tumours is that persistent growth is so atypical. By definition, all pituitary microadenomas regain complete trophic stability after an initial period of deregulated growth. Unlike tumours in many other organ systems, concern about significant growth of macroadenoma remnants after debulking is minimal. Despite reports of a relatively high prevalence of aneuploidy and clonal skewing in these tumours, prolonged efforts to implicate classical proto-oncogene activation and tumour suppressor mutations have been of limited success. No histological or molecular markers reliably predict behaviour. To date, the number of molecular genetic factors unequivocally linked to pituitary tumours can be counted on the fingers of one hand: (1) GNAS1 activation in acromegaly; (2) the MENIN and p27Kip1 (CDKN1B) mutations associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; (3) mutations of PRKA1RA with loss of 17q22-24 in Carney complex, and (4) aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene mutations in 15% of familial isolated pituitary adenomas and 50% of familial isolated acromegaly. Together, these account for only a small proportion (<5%) of sporadic pituitary macroadenomas. In most instances, we still do not know what causes quantitative aberrations in trophic behaviour.

[PMID: 17893250]
Pituitary adenomas occur in a familial setting in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and Carney's complex (CNC), which occur due to mutations in the genes MEN1 and PRKAR1A respectively. Isolated familial somatotropinoma (IFS) is also a well-described clinical syndrome related only to patients with acrogigantism. Pituitary adenomas of all types--not limited to IFS--can occur in a familial setting in the absence of MEN1 and CNC; this phenotype is termed familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA). Over the past 7 years, we have described over 90 FIPA kindreds. In FIPA, both homogeneous and heterogeneous pituitary adenoma phenotypes can occur within families; virtually all FIPA kindreds contain at least one prolactinoma or somatotropinoma. FIPA differs from MEN1 in terms of a lower proportion of prolactinomas and more frequent somatotropinomas in the FIPA cohort. Patients with FIPA are significantly younger at diagnosis and have significantly larger pituitary adenomas than matched sporadic pituitary adenoma counterparts. A minority of FIPA families overall (15%) exhibit mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene; AIP mutations are present in only half of IFS kindreds occurring as part of the FIPA cohort. In families with AIP mutations, pituitary adenomas have a penetrance of over 50%. AIP mutations are extremely rare in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas. This review deals with pituitary adenomas that occur in a familial setting, describes in detail the clinical, pathological, and genetic features of FIPA, and addresses aspects of the clinical approach to FIPA families with and without AIP mutations.

[PMID: 19883897]
Clinically relevant pituitary adenomas occur 3-5 times more frequently than previously thought. The majority are isolated cases, but their presentation can be familial in the setting of known syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)-1 and Carney complex. When 2 or more cases of pituitary adenomas occur in the same family in the absence of the above-mentioned syndromes, a diagnosis of FIPA (familial isolated pituitary adenomas) is made, which accounts for 1-2% of all pituitary adenomas. Mutations of the gene AIP (aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein) may account for 15% of FIPA families (50% of familial acromegaly), and as such the genetic causes continue to be studied. Also mutations in AIP can be detected in sporadic adenomas among young populations (< 30 years of age). We describe the characteristics of FIPA, detailing the study of a spanish family, in this case AIP mutation negative. Also, the reported findings in sporadic adenomas in the young population are detailed, accompanied by the description of a 19- year old patient with an intronic AIP mutation. Multicenter studies have provided understanding of aspects such as mutations in AIP; however, further studies are necessary to identify other genes involved in FIPA and sporadic pituitary adenomas occurring at a young age.

[PMID: 21454441]
Germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene (AIP) predispose to young-onset pituitary tumours, most often to GH- or prolactin-secreting adenomas, and most of these patients belong to familial isolated pituitary adenoma families. The molecular pathway initiated by the loss-of-function AIP mutations leading to pituitary tumour formation is unknown. AIP, a co-chaperone of heat-shock protein 90 and various nuclear receptors, belongs to the family of tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)-containing proteins. It has three antiparallel α-helix motifs (TPR domains) that mediate the interaction of AIP with most of its partners. In this review, we summarise the known interactions of AIP described so far. The identification of AIP partners and the understanding of how AIP interacts with these proteins might help to explain the specific phenotype of the families with heterozygous AIP mutations, to gain deeper insight into the pathological process of pituitary tumour formation and to identify novel drug targets.

[PMID: 24996936]
Acromegaly usually occurs as a sporadic disease, but it may be a part of familial pituitary tumor syndromes in rare cases. Germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene have been associated with a predisposition to familial isolated pituitary adenoma. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the AIP gene in a patient with gigantism and in her relatives. Direct sequencing of AIP gene was performed in fourteen members of the family, spanning among three generations. The index case was an 18-year-old woman with gigantism due to an invasive GH-secreting pituitary adenoma and a concomitant tall-cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. A novel germline mutation in the AIP gene (c.685C>T, p.Q229X) was identified in the proband and in two members of her family, who did not present clinical features of acromegaly or other pituitary disorders. Eleven subjects had no mutation in the AIP gene. Two members of the family with clinical features of acromegaly refused either the genetic or the biochemical evaluation. The Q229X mutation was predicted to generate a truncated AIP protein, lacking the last two tetratricopeptide repeat domains and the final C-terminal α-7 helix. We identified a new AIP germline mutation predicted to produce a truncated AIP protein, lacking its biological properties due to the disruption of the C-terminus binding sites for both the chaperones and the client proteins of AIP.

[PMID: 20570174]
Familial pituitary adenomas can occur in MEN1 and Carney complex, as well as in the recently characterized familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) syndrome. FIPA is an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance, characterized by early-onset disease, often aggressive tumor growth and a predominance of somatotroph and lactotroph adenomas. In 20% of FIPA families, heterozygous mutations have been described in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting (AIP) gene, whereas in other families the causative gene(s) are unknown. It has been suggested that AIP is a tumor suppressor gene and although experimental data support this hypothesis, the exact molecular mechanism by which its disruption leads to tumorigenesis is unclear. Here we discuss the clinical, genetic and molecular features of patients with FIPA.

[PMID: 20457215]
Familial pituitary adenomas occurr in the classical syndromes of MEN1 and Carney Complex as well as in Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenomas (FIPA), an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance. In some families and also rarely in sporadic tumours germline mutations of a gene located on chromosome 11q13 known as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein have been found. This article discusses the AIP mutations in these groups and the different molecular interactions of AIP that may play a role in pituitary tumour formation.

[PMID: 23371967]
Pituitary adenomas are one of the most frequent intracranial tumors and occur with a prevalence of approximately 1:1000 in the developed world. Pituitary adenomas have a serious disease burden, and their management involves neurosurgery, biological therapies, and radiotherapy. Early diagnosis of pituitary tumors while they are smaller may help increase cure rates. Few genetic predictors of pituitary adenoma development exist. Recent years have seen two separate, complimentary advances in inherited pituitary tumor research. The clinical condition of familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) has been described, which encompasses the familial occurrence of isolated pituitary adenomas outside of the setting of syndromic conditions like multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and Carney complex. FIPA families comprise approximately 2% of pituitary adenomas and represent a clinical entity with homogeneous or heterogeneous pituitary adenoma types occurring within the same kindred. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene has been identified as causing a pituitary adenoma predisposition of variable penetrance that accounts for 20% of FIPA families. Germline AIP mutations have been shown to associate with the occurrence of large pituitary adenomas that occur at a young age, predominantly in children/adolescents and young adults. AIP mutations are usually associated with somatotropinomas, but prolactinomas, nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas, Cushing disease, and other infrequent clinical adenoma types can also occur. Gigantism is a particular feature of AIP mutations and occurs in more than one third of affected somatotropinoma patients. Study of pituitary adenoma patients with AIP mutations has demonstrated that these cases raise clinical challenges to successful treatment. Extensive research on the biology of AIP and new advances in mouse Aip knockout models demonstrate multiple pathways by which AIP may contribute to tumorigenesis. This review assesses the current clinical and therapeutic characteristics of more than 200 FIPA families and addresses research findings among AIP mutation-bearing patients in different populations with pituitary adenomas.

[PMID: 22584704]
Pituitary adenomas represent a group of functionally diverse neoplasms with relatively high prevalence in the general population. Most occur sporadically, but inherited genetic predisposing factors are increasingly recognized. Familial isolated pituitary adenoma is a recently defined clinical entity, and is characterized by hereditary presentation of pituitary adenomas in the absence of clinical and genetic features of syndromic disease such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and Carney complex. Familial isolated pituitary adenoma is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and accounted for approximately 2-3% of pituitary tumors in some series. Germline mutations in the aryl-hydrocarbon interacting protein gene are identified in around 25% of familial isolated pituitary adenoma kindreds. Pituitary adenomas with mutations of the aryl-hydrocarbon interacting protein gene are predominantly somatotropinomas and prolactinomas, but non-functioning adenomas, Cushing disease, and thyrotropinoma may also occur. These tumors may present as macroadenomas in young patients and are often relatively difficult to control. Furthermore, recent evidence indicates that aryl-hydrocarbon interacting protein gene mutations occur in >10% of patients with sporadic macroadenomas that occur before 30 years of age, and in >20% of children with macroadenomas. Genetic screening for aryl-hydrocarbon interacting protein gene mutations is warranted in selected high-risk patients who may benefit from early recognition and follow-up.

[PMID: 21498161]
Familial pituitary adenomas occur in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, Carney complex, as well as in familial isolated pituitary adenoma syndrome. Familial isolated pituitary adenoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease with incomplete penetrance. Pituitary adenomas occur in familial setting but without any other specific tumors. In 20-40% of families with this syndrome, mutations have been identified in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene while in the rest of the families the causative gene or genes have not been identified. Families carrying aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene mutations have a distinct phenotype with younger age at diagnosis and a predominance of somatotroph and lactotroph adenomas. Germline mutations of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene can be occasionally identified in usually young-onset seemingly sporadic cases. Genetic and clinical testing of relatives of patients with aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene mutations can lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment at an earlier stage of the pituitary tumor.

[PMID: 20669561]
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and type 2 (MEN2) are major genetic disorders carrying a high risk of endocrine tumor development. The mutated genes were identified in 1993 (MEN2-RET) and 1997 (MEN1), enabling genetic testing and functional studies. Genetic analysis has led to new clinical and therapeutic strategies for MEN1/2 patients, and has improved our understanding of the pathways underlying the development of such tumors, which occur in an autosomal dominant manner and with high penetrance. The MEN1 gene encodes menin, a protein involved in many cell functions, such as transcription, genome stability, cell cycling and apoptosis. The MEN1 gene has 10 exons, and its exhaustive analysis in MEN1 patients helps guide their management. MEN2 is related to activating missense mutations in the RET protooncogene, which encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor (TKR). RET activation occurs upon autodimerization induced by the binding of specific ligands belonging to glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor-like family (GFL) proteins, regulated by coreceptors. The position of missense mutations--in the extracellular or intracellular TK domains--influences the aggressiveness of the most frequent malignancy, medullary thyroid carcinoma, establishing a genotype-phenotype correlation. We also briefly describe the genetic basis of three other inherited states predisposing individuals to endocrine tumors, namely Carney's syndrome, hyperparathyroidism type 2 (HRPT2) and familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA), which are related to inactivating mutations in the PRKAR1-alpha, HRPT2 and AIP genes, respectively.

[PMID: 20616502]
Familial acromegaly may occur as a component of syndromes of multiple endocrine neoplasia or as isolated familial somatotropinoma (IFS), which is included in the spectrum of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA). We review the pathogenesis of IFS, from the detection of loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 11q13 and establishment of linkage to this chromosome region to the description of germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene. Approximately 40% of IFS families harbor an AIP mutation. In addition, we summarize the clinical features of IFS families with AIP mutations: The adenomas are diagnosed at a young age and are larger than in IFS patients without AIP mutations or in sporadic somatotropinomas, indicating more aggressive disease.

[PMID: 22527616]
Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA), defined as the occurrence of at least two cases of pituitary adenoma in a family that does not exhibit features of syndromic diseases, such as Carney complex or Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 or 4, is a rare autosomal dominant disease with low penetrance. About 20 % of the families with FIPA harbor inactivating mutation in aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene (AIP) associated with loss of heterozygosity of the same genetic locus (11q13) in the tumor. Rarely different types of extra-pituitary tumors have been described in the setting of AIP mutation-positive FIPA. We present the case of a patient who was diagnosed with acromegaly due to the AIP mutation c.241C>T (p.R81X) at the age of 34 years, and treated by transsphenoidal surgery. At the age of 43 years she was diagnosed with a meningioma, and at age 46 had recurrence of the somatotropinoma. Genetic studies demonstrated loss of the normal allele (by sequencing and microsatellite analysis) in DNA from the pituitary adenoma but not from the meningioma, suggesting a selective involvement of AIP mutation in the pathogenesis of the pituitary adenoma, and a casual association with the meningioma. Further investigations are required to define the exact role of AIP in non-pituitary tumorigenesis.

[PMID: 24366639]
Pituitary adenomas are monoclonal neoplasms that may secrete excessive quantities of their endogenous hormones, or may not be associated with any obvious syndrome, in which case they are known as non-functioning pituitary adenomas. Around 2 % have been said to occur in a familial setting, in the absence of any other tumor, now described as familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA). Some 15-30 % of such families harbor inactivating germ-line mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene, along with 20 % of pediatric seemingly sporadic cases. AIP mutants are referred to as having pituitary adenoma predisposition, and present with early onset, aggressive macroadenomas, most of which secrete somatotropin. Evidence from transfection studies implies that AIP acts as a tumor suppressor; although whether this is mediated through an interaction with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, phosphodiesterases, or with cell cycle regulators such as survivin or RET remains controversial. However, at present an interaction with the cyclic AMP pathway seems most plausible. Recently, evidence has shown that AIP may act at the cell surface, causing changes in integrin function. The presence of AIP mutations in a significant proportion of FIPA families as well as in apparently sporadic cases, particularly in young patients, suggests a need to screen such patients for AIP mutations to enable better clinical management. However, the absence of AIP mutations in over half of such cases highlights the need to search for further gene mutations.

[PMID: 20616498]
The identification of mutations in the Aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene in a subset of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) cases has recently expanded our understanding of the pathophysiology of inherited pituitary adenoma disorders. However, a genetic cause of has not yet been determined in the majority (85%) of FIPA families and half of the families with isolated familial somatotropinoma. Several studies and reviews have assessed the genetic and clinical features of AIP-mutated FIPA patients, which range from a complete lack of symptoms in adult/elderly individuals to large, aggressive early-onset pituitary tumors. In this study, we aimed to briefly revise the data available for the 11q13 locus and other additional loci that have been implicated in genetic susceptibility to FIPA: 2p16-12; 3q28; 4q32.3-4q33; chr 5, 8q12.1, chr 14, 19q13.4 and 21q22.1. These candidate regions may contain unidentified gene(s) that can be potentially disrupted in AIP-negative FIPA families. A better knowledge of these susceptibility loci may disclose modifier genes that are likely to play exacerbating or protective roles in the phenotypic diversity of AIP-mutated families.

[PMID: 20833337]
Pituitary adenomas are one of the most frequent intracranial tumors with a prevalence of clinically-apparent tumors close to 1:1000 of the general population. They are clinically significant because of hormone overproduction and/or tumor mass effects in addition to the need for neurosurgery, medical therapies and radiotherapy. The majority of pituitary adenomas have a sporadic origin with recognized genetic mutations seldom being found; somatotropinomas are an exception, presenting frequent somatic GNAS mutations. In this and other phenotypes, tumorigenesis could possibly be explained by altered function of genes implicated in cell cycle regulation, growth factors or their receptors, cell-signaling pathways, specific hormonal factors or other molecules with still unclear mechanisms of action. Genetic changes, such as allelic loss or gene amplification, and epigenetic changes, usually by promoter methylation, have been implicated in abnormal gene expression, but alternative mechanisms may be present. Familial cases of pituitary adenomas represent 5% of all pituitary tumors. MEN1 mutations cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1), while the Carney complex (CNC) is characterized by mutations in the protein kinase A regulatory subunit-1alpha (PRKAR1A) gene or changes in a locus at 2p16. Recently, a MEN1-like condition, MEN4, was found to be related to mutations in the CDKN1B gene. The clinical entity of familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) is characterized by genetic defects in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene in about 15% of all kindreds and 50% of homogenous somatotropinoma families. Identification of familial cases of pituitary adenomas is important as these tumors may be more aggressive than their sporadic counterparts.

[PMID: 23310926]
Familial pituitary tumors are increasingly recognized. While some of these cases are related to wellknown syndromic conditions such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) or Carney complex, others belong to the familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) patient group. The discovery of heterozygous, loss-of-function germline mutations in the gene encoding the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) in 2006 has subsequently enabled the identification of a mutation in this gene in 20% of FIPA families and 20% of childhood-onset simplex soma- totroph adenomas. The exact mechanism by which the lack of AIP leads to pituitary adenomas is not clear. AIP mutations cause a low penetrance autosomal dominant disease with often a distinct phenotype characterized by young-onset, aggressive, large GH, mixed GH and PRL or PRL-secreting adenomas. This review aims to summarize currently available clinical data on AIP mutation-positive and negative FIPA patients.

[PMID: 24789813]
Although the cause of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) remains unknown in many cases, germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene were identified in approximately 20 % of families with FIPA. We investigated the AIP gene mutation by a standard sequencing method in 12 members of a Japanese two-generation FIPA family, which includes 3 patients with early-onset acromegaly. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis in a tumor sample was attempted to examine the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the locus. The effect of the detected mutation on cell proliferation was investigated. A germline mutation of c.943C > T (p.Q315X) generating an AIP protein with the C-terminal end deleted was found in the FIPA family. Biallelic inactivation of AIP by a combination of the germline mutation and LOH at 11q13 was confirmed in the tumor. The nonsense mutation disrupted the ability to inhibit cell proliferation. We conclude that p.Q315X mutation in the AIP gene is a pathogenic variant and the C-terminal region of AIP plays an important role in the predisposition to pituitary adenomas.

[PMID: 23633209]
The molecular pathogenesis of primary hyperparathyroidism is still largely unknown. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene has a major role in the pathogenesis of familial isolated pituitary adenoma. We evaluated the involvement of the AIP gene in sporadic parathyroid adenomas. We performed direct sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analyses of the AIP gene in a large series of sporadic parathyroid adenomas. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the AIP locus was studied, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein immunostaining was also performed. In addition, alterations in the MEN1 gene were studied. A somatic AIP mutation, substitution of arginine with glutamine at codon 304 (R304Q), was identified in 2 of 132 tumors. The mutation was germline in both cases despite the nonfamilial presentation. Heterozygous AIP large deletions were detected in 29 cases including 1 of the 2 mutated tumors, confirming a biallelic inactivation of the AIP gene. The AIP-mutated tumor with LOH showed decreased AIP immunostaining compared with normal parathyroid. LOH at the MEN1 locus, which often shared LOH at the AIP locus, was found in one third of tumors. Somatic MEN1 mutations were found in the 1 of the 2 AIP-mutated tumors and in 22 parathyroid adenomas. In addition, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis revealed 1 large deletion of the MEN1 gene in 1 patient. The AIP gene is rarely involved in parathyroid adenomas, but the germline nature of the mutations suggests that it might predispose to primary hyperparathyroidism. MEN1 gene alterations occur in a substantial proportion of sporadic parathyroid adenomas.

[PMID: 23286415]
Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) is an autosomal dominant disease, characterized by low penetrance, early-onset disease, more invasive tumor growth, as well as somatotroph and lactotroph adenomas in most cases. It has been indicated that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene is a tumor suppressor gene. Many heterozygous mutations have been discovered in AIP in about 20% of FIPA families. However, the exact molecular mechanism by which its disfunction promotes tumorigenesis of pituitary is unclear.

[PMID: 17993773]
Familial pituitary adenoma is a rare syndrome which may present either as isolated lesions, or in association with other endocrine tumors, for example in the frame of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN-1) or Carney complex (CNC). The most frequently described forms of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) are familial somatotropinomas or prolactinomas. Recently, some cases of familial isolated somatotropinoma have been associated with germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene. The present report shows heterogeneous FIPA with 3 subtypes of tumor in 3 individuals of the same family: somatotropinoma in the proband, giant prolactinoma in a brother, and gonadotroph cell macroadenoma in the father. A prospective survey also suggested the occurrence of a silent microadenoma in the proband's sister. Clinical screening was performed in the 3 affected members, the 4th suspected case, and 9 additional, asymptomatic relatives. They had no clinical evidence of associated endocrine lesion suggesting MEN-1 or CNC. Genetic screening for germline mutation of the MEN-1, the gene encoding the protein kinase A (PKA) type 1 alpha regulatory subunit (R1 alpha) (PRKAR1alpha) and AIP gene was negative in 2 affected members. In conclusion, these data suggest that familial pituitary adenomas can occur with a heterogeneous functional pattern that is distinguished from MEN-1 or CNC. The absence of mutation of the recently described AIP gene suggests the implication of other predisposing gene(s). Collaborative, multicentric studies are needed to further define the location of gene(s) involved in heterogeneous FIPA.

[PMID: 20506337]
Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) is an autosomal dominant condition with variable genetic background and incomplete penetrance. Germline mutations of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene have been reported in 15-40% of FIPA patients. Limited data are available on the functional consequences of the mutations or regarding the regulation of the AIP gene. We describe a large cohort of FIPA families and characterize missense and silent mutations using minigene constructs, luciferase and beta-galactosidase assays, as well as in silico predictions. Patients with AIP mutations had a lower mean age at diagnosis (23.6+/-11.2 years) than AIP mutation-negative patients (40.4+/-14.5 years). A promoter mutation showed reduced in vitro activity corresponding to lower mRNA expression in patient samples. Stimulation of the protein kinase A-pathway positively regulates the AIP promoter. Silent mutations led to abnormal splicing resulting in truncated protein or reduced AIP expression. A two-hybrid assay of protein-protein interaction of all missense variants showed variable disruption of AIP-phosphodiesterase-4A5 binding. In summary, exonic, promoter, splice-site, and large deletion mutations in AIP are implicated in 31% of families in our FIPA cohort. Functional characterization of AIP changes is important to identify the functional impact of gene sequence variants.