[PMID: 25579226]
Cellular mechanisms involved in multiple neurodegenerative diseases converge on mitochondria to induce overproduction of reactive oxygen species, damage to mitochondria, and subsequent cytochrome c release. Little is currently known regarding the contribution mitochondrial dynamics play in cytochrome c release following oxidative stress in neurodegenerative disease. Here we induced oxidative stress in the HT22 cell line with glutamate and investigated key mediators of mitochondrial dynamics to determine the role this process may play in oxidative stress induced neuronal death. We report that glutamate treatment in HT22 cells induces increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS), release of the mitochondrial fusion protein Opa1 into the cytosol, with concomitant release of cytochrome c. Furthermore, following the glutamate treatment alterations in cell signaling coincide with mitochondrial fragmentation which culminates in significant cell death in HT22 cells. Finally, we report that treatment with the antioxidant tocopherol attenuates glutamate induced-ROS increase, release of mitochondrial Opa1 and cytochrome c, and prevents cell death.

[PMID: 19168126]
Carboxyl-terminal modulator protein (CTMP) is a tumor suppressor-like binding partner of Protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) that negative regulates this kinase. In the course of our recent work, we identified that CTMP is consistently associated with leucine zipper/EF-hand-containing transmembrane-1 (LETM1). Here, we report that adenovirus-LETM1 increased the sensitivity of HeLa cells to apoptosis, induced by either staurosporine or actinomycin D. As shown previously, LETM1 localized to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electron-microscopy analysis of adenovirus-LETM1 transduced cells revealed that mitochondrial cristae were swollen in these cells, a phenotype similar to that observed in optic atrophy type-1 (OPA1)-ablated cells. OPA1 cleavage was increased in LETM1-overexpressing cells, and this phenotype was reversed by overexpression of OPA1 variant-7, a cleavage resistant form of OPA1. Taken together, these data suggest that LETM1 is a novel binding partner for CTMP that may play an important role in mitochondrial fragmentation via OPA1-cleavage.

[PMID: 17709430]
The dynamin-related protein Opa1 is localized to the mitochondrial intermembrane space, where it facilitates fusion between mitochondria. Apoptosis causes Opa1 release into the cytosol and causes mitochondria to fragment. Loss of mitochondrial membrane potential also causes mitochondrial fragmentation but not Opa1 release into the cytosol. Both conditions induce the proteolytic cleavage of Opa1, suggesting that mitochondrial fragmentation is triggered by Opa1 inactivation. The opposite effect was observed with knockdown of the mitochondrial intermembrane space protease Yme1. Knockdown of Yme1 prevents the constitutive cleavage of a subset of Opa1 splice variants but does not affect carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone or apoptosis-induced cleavage. Knockdown of Yme1 also increases mitochondrial connectivity, but this effect is independent of Opa1 because it also occurs in Opa1 knockdown cells. We conclude that Yme1 constitutively regulates a subset of Opa1 isoforms and an unknown mitochondrial morphology protein, whereas the loss of membrane potential induces the further proteolysis of Opa1.

[PMID: 22406748]
The optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) protein is an essential protein involved in the fusion of the mitochondrial inner membrane. Despite its high level of expression, the role of OPA1 in the heart is largely unknown. We investigated the role of this protein in Opa1(+/-) mice, having a 50% reduction in OPA1 protein expression in cardiac tissue. In mutant mice, cardiac function assessed by echocardiography was not significantly different from that of the Opa1(+/+). Electron and fluorescence microscopy revealed altered morphology of the Opa1(+/-) mice mitochondrial network; unexpectedly, mitochondria were larger with the presence of clusters of fused mitochondria and altered cristae. In permeabilized mutant ventricular fibres, mitochondrial functional properties were maintained, but direct energy channelling between mitochondria and myofilaments was weakened. Importantly, the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) opening in isolated permeabilized cardiomyocytes and in isolated mitochondria was significantly less sensitive to mitochondrial calcium accumulation. Finally, 6 weeks after transversal aortic constriction, Opa1(+/-) hearts demonstrated hypertrophy almost two-fold higher (P< 0.01) than in wild-type mice with altered ejection fraction (decrease in 43 vs. 22% in Opa1(+/+) mice, P< 0.05). These results suggest that, in adult cardiomyocytes, OPA1 plays an important role in mitochondrial morphology and PTP functioning. These properties may be critical for cardiac function under conditions of chronic pressure overload.

[PMID: 18281461]
Prohibitins comprise an evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitously expressed family of membrane proteins with poorly described functions. Large assemblies of PHB1 and PHB2 subunits are localized in the inner membrane of mitochondria, but various roles in other cellular compartments have also been proposed for both proteins. Here, we used conditional gene targeting of murine Phb2 to define cellular activities of prohibitins. Our experiments restrict the function of prohibitins to mitochondria and identify the processing of the dynamin-like GTPase OPA1, an essential component of the mitochondrial fusion machinery, as the central cellular process controlled by prohibitins. Deletion of Phb2 leads to the selective loss of long isoforms of OPA1. This results in an aberrant cristae morphogenesis and an impaired cellular proliferation and resistance toward apoptosis. Expression of a long OPA1 isoform in PHB2-deficient cells suppresses these defects, identifying impaired OPA1 processing as the primary cellular defect in the absence of prohibitins. Our results therefore assign an essential function for the formation of mitochondrial cristae to prohibitins and suggest a coupling of cell proliferation to mitochondrial morphogenesis.

[PMID: 22579715]
The mitochondria-shaping protein optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) has genetically distinguishable roles in mitochondrial morphology and apoptosis. The latter depends on the presenilin associated rhomboid like (PARL) protease, essential for the accumulation of a soluble intermembrane space form of OPA1 (IMS-OPA1). Here we show that OPA1 and PARL participate in the heat shock response, a stereotypical cellular process of adaptation to thermal stress. Upon heat shock, long forms of OPA1 are lost and mitochondria fragment. However, mitochondrial fusion is dispensable to maintain viability, whereas IMS-OPA1 is required. Upon conditioning-a process of mild heat shock and recovery-IMS-OPA1 accumulates, OPA1 oligomers increase and mitochondria release less cytochrome c, ultimately resulting in cellular resistance to subsequent apoptotic inducers. In Parl(-/-) cells accumulation of IMS-OPA1 is blunted and conditioning fails to protect from cytochrome c release and apoptosis. Thus, the OPA1/PARL dependent pathway of cristae remodeling is implicated in heat shock. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: 17th European Bioenergetics Conference (EBEC 2012).

[PMID: 21983901]
Adrenergic stimulation of adipocytes yields a cAMP signal that activates protein kinase A (PKA). PKA phosphorylates perilipin, a protein localized on the surface of lipid droplets that serves as a gatekeeper to regulate access of lipases converting stored triglycerides to free fatty acids and glycerol in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Here, we report a new function for optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), a protein known to regulate mitochondrial dynamics, as a dual-specificity A-kinase anchoring protein associated with lipid droplets. By a variety of protein interaction assays, immunoprecipitation and immunolocalization experiments, we show that OPA1 organizes a supramolecular complex containing both PKA and perilipin. Furthermore, by a combination of siRNA-mediated knockdown, reconstitution experiments using full-length OPA1 with or without the ability to bind PKA or truncated OPA1 fused to a lipid droplet targeting domain and cellular delivery of PKA anchoring disruptor peptides, we demonstrate that OPA1 targeting of PKA to lipid droplets is necessary for hormonal control of perilipin phosphorylation and lipolysis.

[PMID: 16413305]
Opa1, also known as Mgm1 in yeast, is a mitochondrial member of the dynamin family. Unlike other dynamin family members, Opa1 has an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence, suggesting that this protein is imported into mitochondria. Here, we describe biochemical techniques, such as mitochondrial isolation, digitonin extraction, a protease protection assay, and carbonate extraction, that were used to determine that mammalian Opa1 resides in the intermembrane space where it is tightly bound to the inner membrane. In addition, we describe bacterial expression of the Opa1 GTPase domain, methods for purification, and an in vitro assay for GTP hydrolysis.

[PMID: 17545159]
The number and morphology of mitochondria within a cell are precisely regulated by the mitochondrial fission and fusion machinery. The human protein, hFis1, participates in mitochondrial fission by recruiting the Drp1 into the mitochondria. Using short hairpin RNA, we reduced the expression levels of hFis1 in mammalian cells. Cells lacking hFis1 showed sustained elongation of mitochondria and underwent significant cellular morphological changes, including enlargement, flattening, and increased cellular granularity. In these cells, staining for acidic senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity was elevated, and the rate of cell proliferation was greatly reduced, indicating that cells lacking hFis1 undergo senescence-associated phenotypic changes. Reintroduction of the hFis1 gene into hFis1-depleted cells restored mitochondrial fragmentation and suppressed senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity. Moreover, depletion of both hFis1 and OPA1, a critical component of mitochondrial fusion, resulted in extensive mitochondrial fragmentation and markedly rescued cells from senescence-associated phenotypic changes. Intriguingly, sustained elongation of mitochondria was associated with decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, increased reactive oxygen species production, and DNA damage. The data indicate that sustained mitochondrial elongation induces senescence-associated phenotypic changes that can be neutralized by mitochondrial fragmentation. Thus, one of the key functions of mitochondrial fission might be prevention of the sustained extensive mitochondrial elongation that triggers cellular senescence.

[PMID: 11847212]
A new member of the dynamin GTPase family (OPA1) was recently identified in humans and shown to be mutated in patients with dominant optic atrophy. To understand better the function of mammalian OPA1, we isolated a mouse ortholog (mOPA1) from brain and raised a specific antibody against its C terminus. The subcellular distribution of mOPA1 overexpressed in COS-7 cells largely overlapped that of endogenous cytochrome c, a well known mitochondrial marker, and dramatically affected mitochondrial morphology, altering it from tubular to vesicular. Mitochondrial targeting was mediated by the N-terminal region of mOPA1 as follows: deletion of the 124 N-terminal amino acids eliminated mitochondrial targeting, although fusion of the N-terminal 60 or 90 amino acids of mOPA1 with green fluorescent protein resulted in its mitochondrial targeting. mOPA1 was expressed widely in the mouse brain, especially in neurons of olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, piriform cortex, hypothalamus, hippocampus, red nucleus, cochlear nucleus, motor trigeminal nucleus, facial nucleus, cerebellar nucleus, and Purkinje cells. Within dissociated cerebellar cells, mOPA1 protein was clearly observed in the dendrites and somas of neuronal cells, as well as in astrocytes and meningeal cells. In each case, it was distributed in the vesicular pattern seen in other cell types.

[PMID: 24282027]
Mutations in LRRK2 cause autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 encodes a multi-domain protein containing GTPase and kinase domains, and putative protein-protein interaction domains. Familial PD mutations alter the GTPase and kinase activity of LRRK2 in vitro. LRRK2 is suggested to regulate a number of cellular pathways although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. To explore such mechanisms, it has proved informative to identify LRRK2-interacting proteins, some of which serve as LRRK2 kinase substrates. Here, we identify common interactions of LRRK2 with members of the dynamin GTPase superfamily. LRRK2 interacts with dynamin 1-3 that mediate membrane scission in clathrin-mediated endocytosis and with dynamin-related proteins that mediate mitochondrial fission (Drp1) and fusion (mitofusins and OPA1). LRRK2 partially co-localizes with endosomal dynamin-1 or with mitofusins and OPA1 at mitochondrial membranes. The subcellular distribution and oligomeric complexes of dynamin GTPases are not altered by modulating LRRK2 in mouse brain, whereas mature OPA1 levels are reduced in G2019S PD brains. LRRK2 enhances mitofusin-1 GTP binding, whereas dynamin-1 and OPA1 serve as modest substrates of LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation in vitro. While dynamin GTPase orthologs are not required for LRRK2-induced toxicity in yeast, LRRK2 functionally interacts with dynamin-1 and mitofusin-1 in cultured neurons. LRRK2 attenuates neurite shortening induced by dynamin-1 by reducing its levels, whereas LRRK2 rescues impaired neurite outgrowth induced by mitofusin-1 potentially by reversing excessive mitochondrial fusion. Our study elucidates novel functional interactions of LRRK2 with dynamin-superfamily GTPases that implicate LRRK2 in the regulation of membrane dynamics important for endocytosis and mitochondrial morphology.

[PMID: 20045077]
Mitochondrial morphology varies according to cell type and cellular context from an interconnected filamentous network to isolated dots. This morphological plasticity depends on mitochondrial dynamics, a balance between antagonistic forces of fission and fusion. DRP1 and FIS1 control mitochondrial outer membrane fission and Mitofusins its fusion. This review focuses on OPA1, one of the few known actors of inner membrane dynamics, whose mutations provoke an optic neuropathy. Since its first identification in 2000 the characterization of the functions of OPA1 has made rapid progress thus providing numerous clues to unravel the pathogenetic mechanisms of ADOA-1.

[PMID: 23663851]
During cancer cell invasion, faster moving cancer cells play a dominant role by invading further and metastasizing earlier. Despite the importance of these outlier cells, the source of heterogeneity in their migratory behavior remains poorly understood. Here, we show that anterior localization of mitochondria, in between the nucleus and the leading edge of migrating epithelial cancer cells, correlates with faster migration velocities and increased directional persistence. The asymmetry of mitochondrial localization along the axis of migration is absent during spontaneous cell migration on two-dimensional surfaces and only occurs in the presence of chemical attractant cues or in conditions of mechanical confinement. Moreover, perturbing the asymmetric distribution of mitochondria within migrating cells by interfering with mitochondrial fusion (opa-1) or fission (drp-1) proteins, significantly reduces the number of cells with anterior localization of mitochondria and significantly decreases the velocity and directional persistence of the fastest moving cells. We also observed similar changes after perturbing the linkage between mitochondria and microtubules by the knockdown of mitochondrial rhoGTPase-1 (miro-1). Taken together, the changes in migration velocity and directional persistence in cells with anterior-localized mitochondria could account for an order of magnitude differences in invasive abilities between cells from otherwise homogenous cell populations.

[PMID: 20079867]
Mitochondria in mammalian cells are visualized as a network or as filaments that undergo continuous changes in shape and in localization within the cells. These changes are a consequence of the activity of different processes such as mitochondrial fusion and fission, and mitochondrial remodelling. In all, these processes are referred to as mitochondrial dynamics, and relevant questions, still unexplained, are why cells require such an active dynamics, or why mitochondria move to specific cellular regions. In this review we will summarize some of the biological functions assigned to the proteins identified as participating in mitochondrial fusion, namely mitofusin 1, mitofusin 2 and OPA1. In addition to the capacity of these proteins to promote fusion, mitofusin 2 or OPA1 regulate mitochondrial metabolism and loss-of-function reduces oxygen consumption and the capacity to oxidize substrates. We propose that mitochondrial fusion proteins operate as integrators of signals so they regulate both mitochondrial fusion and metabolism.

[PMID: 21980395]
The dynamin-related GTPase protein OPA1, localized in the intermembrane space and tethered to the inner membrane of mitochondria, participates in the fusion of these organelles. Its mutation is the most prevalent cause of Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy. OPA1 controls the diameter of the junctions between the boundary part of the inner membrane and the membrane of cristae and reduces the diffusibility of cytochrome c through these junctions. We postulated that if significant Ca²⁺ uptake into the matrix occurs from the lumen of the cristae, reduced expression of OPA1 would increase the access of Ca²⁺ to the transporters in the crista membrane and thus would enhance Ca²⁺ uptake. In intact H295R adrenocortical and HeLa cells cytosolic Ca²⁺ signals evoked with K⁺ and histamine, respectively, were transferred into the mitochondria. The rate and amplitude of mitochondrial [Ca²⁺] rise (followed with confocal laser scanning microscopy and FRET measurements with fluorescent wide-field microscopy) were increased after knockdown of OPA1, as compared with cells transfected with control RNA or mitofusin1 siRNA. Ca²⁺ uptake was enhanced despite reduced mitochondrial membrane potential. In permeabilized cells the rate of Ca²⁺ uptake by depolarized mitochondria was also increased in OPA1-silenced cells. The participation of Na⁺/Ca²⁺ and Ca²⁺/H⁺ antiporters in this transport process is indicated by pharmacological data. Altogether, our observations reveal the significance of OPA1 in the control of mitochondrial Ca²⁺ metabolism.

[PMID: 12504110]
OPA1 is a cause gene for autosomal dominant optic atrophy and possesses eight alternative splicing variants. Here, we identified two isoforms of OPA1 proteins in HeLa cells and examined their submitochondrial localization and complex formations. RT-PCR shows that HeLa cells mainly express isoforms 7 and 1 of OPA1. Since the third cleavage site is mainly utilized in HeLa cells, the predicted molecular masses of their processed proteins are consistent with the 93- and 88-kDa proteins. Biochemical examinations indicate that both of the OPA1 isoforms are present in the intermembrane space. Submitochondrial fractionation by sucrose density-gradient centrifugation shows that the 88-kDa protein predominantly associates with the mitochondrial outer membrane, on the contrary, the 93-kDa protein associates with the inner membrane. Gel filtration analysis indicates that they compose the different molecular mass complexes in mitochondria. These differences between two isoforms of OPA1 would suggest their crucial role involved in the mitochondrial membrane formation.

[PMID: 16737747]
The mitochondria are dynamic organelles that constantly fuse and divide. An equilibrium between fusion and fission controls the morphology of the mitochondria, which appear as dots or elongated tubules depending the prevailing force. Characterization of the components of the fission and fusion machineries has progressed considerably, and the emerging question now is what role mitochondrial dynamics play in mitochondrial and cellular functions. Its importance has been highlighted by the discovery that two human diseases are caused by mutations in the two mitochondrial pro-fusion genes, MFN2 and OPA1. This review will focus on data concerning the function of OPA1, mutations in which cause optic atrophy, with respect to the underlying pathophysiological processes.

[PMID: 25112877]
Mitochondria are highly dynamic organelles, and mitochondrial fission is a crucial step of apoptosis. Although Oma1 is believed to be responsible for long form Opa1 (L-Opa1) processing during mitochondrial fragmentation, whether and how Oma1 is involved in L-Opa1 processing and participates in the regulation of chemoresistance is unknown. Chemosensitive and chemoresistant ovarian (OVCA) and cervical (CECA) cancer cells were treated with cisplatin (CDDP). Mitochondrial dynamics and protein contents were assessed by immunofluorescence and Western blot, respectively. The requirements of Oma1 and p53 for CDDP-induced L-Opa1 processing, mitochondrial fragmentation, and apoptosis were examined by siRNA or cDNA. CDDP induces L-Opa1 processing and mitochondrial fragmentation in chemosensitive but not in chemoresistant cells. CDDP induced Oma1 40-kDa form increases in OV2008 cells, not in C13* cells. Oma1 knockdown inhibited L-Opa1 processing, mitochondrial fragmentation, and apoptosis. Silencing p53 expression attenuated the effects of CDDP in Oma1 (40 kDa) increase, L-Opa1 processing, mitochondrial fragmentation, and apoptosis in chemosensitive OVCA cells, whereas reconstitution of p53 in p53 mutant or null chemoresistant OVCA cells induced Oma1 (40 kDa) increase, L-Opa1 processing, mitochondrial fragmentation, and apoptosis irrespective of the presence of CDDP. Prohibitin 1 (Phb1) dissociates from Opa1-Phb1 complex and binds phosphorylated p53 (serine 15) in response to CDDP in chemosensitive but not chemoresistant CECA cells. These findings demonstrate that (a) p53 and Oma1 mediate L-Opa1 processing, (b) mitochondrial fragmentation is involved in CDDP-induced apoptosis in OVCA and CECA cells, and (c) dysregulated mitochondrial dynamics may in part be involved in the pathophysiology of CDDP resistance.

[PMID: 14970223]
Mgm1 is a member of the dynamin family of GTP-binding proteins. Mgm1 was first identified in yeast, where it affects mitochondrial morphology. The human homologue of Mgm1 is called OPA1. Mutations in the OPA1 gene are the prevailing cause of dominant optic atrophy, a hereditary disease in which progressive degeneration of the optic nerve can lead to blindness. Here we investigate the properties of the Mgm1/OPA1 protein in mammalian cells. We find that Mgm1/OPA1 is localized to the mitochondrial intermembrane space, where it is tightly bound to the outer surface of the inner membrane. Overexpression of wild type or mutant forms of the Mgm1/OPA1 protein cause mitochondria to fragment and, in some cases, cluster near the nucleus, whereas the loss of protein caused by small interfering RNA (siRNA) leads to dispersal of mitochondrial fragments throughout the cytosol. The cristae of these fragmented mitochondria are disorganized. At early time points after transfection with Mgm1/OPA1 siRNA, the mitochondria are not yet fragmented. Instead, the mitochondria swell and stretch, after which they form localized constrictions similar to the mitochondrial abnormalities observed during the early stages of apoptosis. These abnormalities might be the earliest effects of losing Mgm1/OPA1 protein.

[PMID: 12123827]
Mutations in the OPA1 gene are associated with autosomal dominant optic atrophy. OPA1 encodes a dynamin-related protein orthologous to Msp1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Mgm1p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, both involved in mitochondrial morphology and genome maintenance. We present immuno-fluorescence and biochemical evidences showing that OPA1 resides in the mitochondria where it is imported through its highly basic amino-terminal extension. Proteolysis experiments indicate that OPA1 is present in the inter-membrane space and electron microscopy further localizes it close to the cristae. The strong association of OPA1 with membranes suggests its anchoring to the inner membrane.

[PMID: 24632637]
Mitochondria are dynamic organelles that undergo fusion and fission processes. These events are regulated by mitochondria-shaping proteins. Changes in the expression and/or localization of these proteins lead to a mitochondrial dynamics impairment and may promote apoptosis. Increasing evidence correlates the mitochondrial dynamics disruption with the occurrence of neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, we focused on this topic in Manganese (Mn)-induced Parkinsonism, a disorder associated with Mn accumulation preferentially in the basal ganglia where mitochondria from astrocytes represent an early target. Using MitoTracker Red staining we observed increased mitochondrial network fission in Mn-exposed rat astrocytoma C6 cells. Moreover, Mn induced a marked decrease in fusion protein Opa-1 levels as well as a dramatic increase in the expression of fission protein Drp-1. Additionally, Mn provoked a significant release of high MW Opa-1 isoforms from the mitochondria to the cytosol as well as an increased Drp-1 translocation to the mitochondria. Both Mdivi-1, a pharmacological Drp-1 inhibitor, and rat Drp-1 siRNA reduced the number of apoptotic nuclei, preserved the mitochondrial network integrity and prevented cell death. CsA, an MPTP opening inhibitor, prevented mitochondrial Δψm disruption, Opa-1 processing and Drp-1 translocation to the mitochondria therefore protecting Mn-exposed cells from mitochondrial disruption and apoptosis. The histological analysis and Hoechst 33258 staining of brain sections of Mn-injected rats in the striatum showed a decrease in cellular mass paralleled with an increase in the occurrence of apoptotic nuclei. Opa-1 and Drp-1 expression levels were also changed by Mn-treatment. Our results demonstrate for the first time that abnormal mitochondrial dynamics is implicated in both in vitro and in vivo Mn toxicity. In addition we show that the imbalance in fusion/fission equilibrium might be involved in Mn-induced apoptosis. This knowledge may provide new therapeutic tools for the treatment of Manganism and other neurodegenerative diseases.

[PMID: 18074630]
Mitochondria are complex organelles whose internal structure and cytosolic organization is controlled by a growing number of 'mitochondria-shaping' proteins. These include mitochondrial proteins such as the large dynamin-related GTPases Mitofusin (Mfn) 1 and 2, Optic Atrophy 1 (Opa1); as well as the cytosolic dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) and its receptor on the outer mitochondrial membrane Fis1. These proteins influence not only the shape of mitochondria, but also the function of the organelle and eventually integrated cellular signalling cascades, including apoptosis. We undertook a genetic approach to elucidate the function and regulation of these proteins. Opa1 is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial fusion, by co-operating with Mfn1. Moreover, Opa1 independently from mitochondrial fusion regulates the crista remodelling pathway of apoptosis. Oligomers of a membrane bound and a soluble form of Opa1, produced by Parl, an inner membrane rhomboid protease, are disrupted early during apoptosis, leading to remodelling of the mitochondrial cristae and redistribution of the mitochondrial cytochrome c. The importance of this pathway is substantiated by the phenotype of the Parl-/- mouse, which displays excess apoptosis in multiple tissues. Cells lacking Parl are more susceptible to apoptotic stimuli and the reintroduction of a soluble form of Opa1 rescues their phenotype.

[PMID: 25582749]
Mitochondrial dysfunction, especially a defect in mitochondrial biogenesis, is an early and prominent feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Previous studies demonstrated that the number of mitochondria is significantly reduced in susceptible hippocampal neurons from AD patients. Neural stem cell (NSC) transplantation in AD-like mice can compensate for the neuronal loss resulting from amyloid-beta protein deposition. The effects of NSC transplantation on mitochondrial biogenesis and cognitive function in AD-like mice, however, are poorly understood. In this study, we injected NSCs or vehicle into 12-month-old amyloid precursor protein (APP)/PS1 transgenic mice, a mouse model of AD-like pathology. The effects of NSC transplantation on cognitive function, the amount of mitochondrial DNA, the expression of mitochondrial biogenesis factors and mitochondria-related proteins, and mitochondrial morphology were investigated. Our results show that in NSC-injected APP/PS1 (Tg-NSC) mice, the cognitive function, number of mitochondria, and expression of mitochondria-related proteins, specifically the mitochondrial fission factors (dynamin-related protein 1 [Drp1] and fission 1 [Fis1]) and the mitochondrial fusion factor optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), were significantly increased compared with those in age-matched vehicle-injected APP/PS1 (Tg-Veh) mice, whereas the expression of mitochondrial fusion factors mitofusion 1 (Mfn1) and Mfn2 was significantly decreased. These data indicate that NSC transplantation may enhance mitochondria biogenesis and further rescue cognitive deficits in AD-like mice.

[PMID: 25847151]
Peripheral nerves have peculiar energetic requirements because of considerable length of axons and therefore correct mitochondria functioning and distribution along nerves is fundamental. Mitochondrial dynamics refers to the continuous change in size, shape, and position of mitochondria within cells. Abnormalities of mitochondrial dynamics produced by mutations in proteins involved in mitochondrial fusion (mitofusin-2, MFN2), fission (ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein-1, GDAP1), and mitochondrial axonal transport usually present with a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) phenotype. MFN2 mutations cause CMT type 2A by altering mitochondrial fusion and trafficking along the axonal microtubule system. CMT2A is an axonal autosomal dominant CMT type which in most cases is characterized by early onset and rather severe course. GDAP1 mutations also alter fission, fusion and transport of mitochondria and are associated either with recessive demyelinating (CMT4A) and axonal CMT (AR-CMT2K) and, less commonly, with dominant, milder, axonal CMT (CMT2K). OPA1 (Optic Atrophy-1) is involved in fusion of mitochondrial inner membrane, and its heterozygous mutations lead to early-onset and progressive dominant optic atrophy which may be complicated by other neurological symptoms including peripheral neuropathy. Mutations in several proteins fundamental for the axonal transport or forming the axonal cytoskeleton result in peripheral neuropathy, i.e., CMT, distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN) or hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (HSAN), as well as in hereditary spastic paraplegia. Indeed, mitochondrial transport involves directly or indirectly components of the kinesin superfamily (KIF5A, KIF1A, KIF1B), responsible of anterograde transport, and of the dynein complex and related proteins (DYNC1H1, dynactin, dynamin-2), implicated in retrograde flow. Microtubules, neurofilaments, and chaperones such as heat shock proteins (HSPs) also have a fundamental role in mitochondrial transport and mutations in some of related encoding genes cause peripheral neuropathy (TUBB3, NEFL, HSPB1, HSPB8, HSPB3, DNAJB2). In this review, we address the abnormalities in mitochondrial dynamics and their role in determining CMT disease and related neuropathies.

[PMID: 20678484]
We showed earlier that 15 deoxy Delta(12,14) prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) inactivates Drp1 and induces mitochondrial fusion [1]. However, prolonged incubation of cells with 15d-PGJ2 resulted in remodeling of fused mitochondria into large swollen mitochondria with irregular cristae structure. While initial fusion of mitochondria by 15d-PGJ2 required the presence of both outer (Mfn1 and Mfn2) and inner (OPA1) mitochondrial membrane fusion proteins, later mitochondrial changes involved increased degradation of the fusion protein OPA1 and ubiquitination of newly synthesized OPA1 along with decreased expression of Mfn1 and Mfn2, which likely contributed to the loss of tubular rigidity, disorganization of cristae, and formation of large swollen degenerated dysfunctional mitochondria. Similar to inhibition of Drp1 by 15d-PGJ2, decreased expression of fission protein Drp1 by siRNA also resulted in the loss of fusion proteins. Prevention of 15d-PGJ2 induced mitochondrial elongation by thiol antioxidants prevented not only loss of OPA1 isoforms but also its ubiquitination. These findings provide novel insights into unforeseen complexity of molecular events that modulate mitochondrial plasticity.

[PMID: 23906536]
We have previously described that silencing of the mitochondrial protein OPA1 enhances mitochondrial Ca(2+) signaling and aldosterone production in H295R adrenocortical cells. Since extramitochondrial OPA1 (emOPA1) was reported to facilitate cAMP-induced lipolysis, we hypothesized that emOPA1, via the enhanced hydrolysis of cholesterol esters, augments aldosterone production in H295R cells. A few OPA1 immunopositive spots were detected in ∼40% of the cells. In cell fractionation studies OPA1/COX IV (mitochondrial marker) ratio in the post-mitochondrial fractions was an order of magnitude higher than that in the mitochondrial fraction. The ratio of long to short OPA1 isoforms was lower in post-mitochondrial than in mitochondrial fractions. Knockdown of OPA1 failed to reduce db-cAMP-induced phosphorylation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL), Ca(2+) signaling and aldosterone secretion. In conclusion, OPA1 could be detected in the post-mitochondrial fractions, nevertheless, OPA1 did not interfere with the cAMP - PKA - HSL mediated activation of aldosterone secretion.

[PMID: 24633199]
Exercise training is a neuroprotective strategy in cerebral ischemic injury, but the underlying mechanisms are not yet clear. In the present study, we investigated the effects of treadmill exercise pretreatment on the expression of mitochondrial dynamic proteins. We examined the expression of OPA1/DLP1/MFF/Mfn1/Mfn2, which regulates mitochondrial fusion and fission, and cytochrome C oxidase subunits (COX subunits), which regulate mitochondrial functions, after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in rats. T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was evaluated as indices of brain edema after ischemia as well. Treadmill training pretreatment increased the expression levels of OPA1 and COXII/III/IV and alleviated brain edema, indicating that exercise pretreatment provided neuroprotection in cerebral ischemic injury via the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics and functions.

[PMID: 25744979]
Mutations in the optic atrophy 1 gene (OPA1) have been reported in patients with autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA). OPA1 plays important roles in mitochondrial dynamics and cell apoptosis. The link between OPA1 mutations and changes in bioenergetics is still not fully resolved. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of OPA1 mutations on the mitochondrial tubular network and bioenergetics. We established lymphoblastoid cell lines from four ADOA families harboring different OPA1 mutations, unaffected relatives (internal control cell lines), and unrelated normal controls (normal control cell lines). OPA1 splice variants and mRNA were analyzed by reverse transcription-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR. Protein isoforms were examined by Western blotting. The mitochondrial network was visualized by confocal microscopy. Mitochondrial bioenergetics were assessed using a Seahorse XF24 flux analyzer. Mitochondrial membrane potential and oxidative damage were analyzed by flow cytometry. OPA1 mutant cell lines showed significant decreases in OPA1 mRNA and protein expression, mitochondrial membrane potential, and ATP synthesis. A marked deficiency of the long isoform of OPA1 was observed in cells with OPA1 mutations in the middle domain and GTPase effector domain. Confocal microscopy revealed increased mitochondrial fragmentation in OPA1 mutant cells. OPA1 mutant cells also displayed reduced oxygen consumption and underwent glycolysis to produce ATP. Moreover, OPA1 mutations caused the accumulation of oxidative damage. Our experiments demonstrated that OPA1 mutations induced mitochondrial fragmentation, uncoupled mitochondrial respiration, and elicited dysfunctional bioenergetics. However, there were no significant differences among the various OPA1 mutations.

[PMID: 25298396]
Cristae, the organized invaginations of the mitochondrial inner membrane, respond structurally to the energetic demands of the cell. The mechanism by which these dynamic changes are regulated and the consequences thereof are largely unknown. Optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) is the mitochondrial GTPase responsible for inner membrane fusion and maintenance of cristae structure. Here, we report that OPA1 responds dynamically to changes in energetic conditions to regulate cristae structure. This cristae regulation is independent of OPA1's role in mitochondrial fusion, since an OPA1 mutant that can still oligomerize but has no fusion activity was able to maintain cristae structure. Importantly, OPA1 was required for resistance to starvation-induced cell death, for mitochondrial respiration, for growth in galactose media and for maintenance of ATP synthase assembly, independently of its fusion activity. We identified mitochondrial solute carriers (SLC25A) as OPA1 interactors and show that their pharmacological and genetic blockade inhibited OPA1 oligomerization and function. Thus, we propose a novel way in which OPA1 senses energy substrate availability, which modulates its function in the regulation of mitochondrial architecture in a SLC25A protein-dependent manner.

[PMID: 21459773]
The purpose of our study was to better understand the relationship between mitochondrial structural proteins, particularly dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) and amyloid beta (Aβ) in the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Using qRT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses, we measured mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial structural genes in the frontal cortex of patients with early, definite and severe AD and in control subjects. We also characterized monomeric and oligomeric forms of Aβ in these patients. Using immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting analysis, we investigated the interaction between Aβ and Drp1. Using immunofluorescence analysis, we determined the localization of Drp1 and intraneuronal and oligomeric Aβ in the AD brains and primary hippocampal neurons from Aβ precursor protein (AβPP) transgenic mice. We found increased expression of the mitochondrial fission genes Drp1 and Fis1 (fission 1) and decreased expression of the mitochondrial fusion genes Mfn1 (mitofusin 1), Mfn2 (mitofusin 2), Opa1 (optic atrophy 1) and Tomm40. The matrix gene CypD was up-regulated in AD patients. Results from our qRT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses suggest that abnormal mitochondrial dynamics increase as AD progresses. Immunofluorescence analysis of the Drp1 antibody and the Aβ antibodies 6E10 and A11 revealed the colocalization of Drp1 and Aβ. Drp1 immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting analysis of Aβ antibodies 6E10 and A11 revealed that Drp1 interacts with Aβ monomers and oligomers in AD patients, and these abnormal interactions are increased with disease progression. Primary neurons that were found with accumulated oligomeric Aβ had lost branches and were degenerated, indicating that oligomeric Aβ may cause neuronal degeneration. These findings suggest that in patients with AD, increased production of Aβ and the interaction of Aβ with Drp1 are crucial factors in mitochondrial fragmentation, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic damage. Inhibiting, these abnormal interactions may be a therapeutic strategy to reduce mitochondrial fragmentation, neuronal and synaptic damage and cognitive decline in patients with AD.

[PMID: 11017079]
Optic atrophy type 1 (OPA1, MIM 165500) is a dominantly inherited optic neuropathy occurring in 1 in 50,000 individuals that features progressive loss in visual acuity leading, in many cases, to legal blindness. Phenotypic variations and loss of retinal ganglion cells, as found in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), have suggested possible mitochondrial impairment. The OPA1 gene has been localized to 3q28-q29 (refs 13-19). We describe here a nuclear gene, OPA1, that maps within the candidate region and encodes a dynamin-related protein localized to mitochondria. We found four different OPA1 mutations, including frameshift and missense mutations, to segregate with the disease, demonstrating a role for mitochondria in retinal ganglion cell pathophysiology.

[PMID: 20652258]
Mitochondria are dynamic cellular organelles that balance fission and fusion to regulate organelle morphology, distribution, and activity, and Opa1 is one of three GTPases known to regulate mitochondrial fusion. In humans, loss of a single Opa1 allele causes dominant optic atrophy, a degenerative condition that leads to loss of vision. Here we demonstrate that the lilR3 mutant mouse phenotype is due to a point mutation in the Opa1 gene resulting in mislocalized Opa1 protein from the mitochondria to the cytosol. Importantly, the mutation is in the middle domain of the Opa1 protein, for which no function had been described. Lack of mitochondrial retention of Opa1 is sufficient to cause the cellular Opa1 loss-of-function phenotype as the mitochondria are fragmented, indicating an inability to fuse. Despite the normally ubiquitous expression of Opa1 and the essential nature of mitochondria, embryos with aberrant Opa1 survived through midgestation and died at E11.5. These mutants displayed growth retardation, exencephaly, and abnormal patterning along the anterior-posterior axis, although the A-P axis itself was intact. The complex relationship between mitochondrial dynamics and cell death is emphasized by apoptosis in specific cell populations of lilR3 embryos. Our results define, for the first time, a function of the middle domain of the Opa1 protein and demonstrate that mitochondrial retention of Opa1 protein is essential for normal embryogenesis.

[PMID: 21397211]
Mitochondria have been suggested to be involved in the pathology of bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia. However, the mechanism underlying mitochondrial dysfunction is unclear. Mitochondrial network dynamics, which reflects cellular metabolic state, is important for embryonic development, synapse formation, and neurodegeneration. This study aimed to investigate mitochondrial network dynamics and its plausible association with abnormal cellular oxygen consumption in schizophrenia. Viable Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphocytes (lymphoblastoids) from DSM-IV diagnosed patients with schizophrenia (n = 17), BD (n = 15), and healthy control subjects (n = 15) were assessed for mitochondrial respiration, mitochondrial dynamics, and relevant protein levels by oxygraph, confocal microscopy, and immunoblotting, respectively. Respiration of schizophrenia-derived lymphoblastoids was significantly lower compared with control subjects, and was twice as sensitive to dopamine (DA)-induced inhibition. Unlike DA, haloperidol inhibited complex I-driven respiration to a similar extent in both schizophrenia and the control cells. Both drugs interact with complex I but at different sites. At the site of DA interaction, we found alterations in protein levels of three subunits of complex I in schizophrenia. In addition, we observed structural and connectivity perturbations in the mitochondrial network, associated with alterations in the profusion protein OPA1, which was similarly reduced in schizophrenia prefrontal cortex specimens. None of these alterations were observed in the BD cells, which were similar to control cells. We show impaired mitochondrial network dynamics associated with reduced cellular respiration and complex I abnormalities in schizophrenia but not in BD. If these findings represent disease-specific alterations, they may become an endophenotype biomarker for schizophrenia.