[PMID: 18230650]
Rho GTPases and their downstream effectors regulate changes in the actin cytoskeleton that underlie cell motility and adhesion. They also participate, with RhoA, in the regulation of gene transcription by activating serum response factor (SRF)-mediated transcription from the serum response element (SRE). SRF-mediated transcription is also promoted by several proteins that regulate the polymerization or stability of actin. We have previously identified a family of PP2C phosphatases, POPXs, which can dephosphorylate the CDC42/RAC-activated kinase PAK and downregulate its enzymatic and actin cytoskeletal activity. We now report that POPX2 interacts with the formin protein mDia1 (DIAPH1). This interaction is enhanced when mDia1 is activated by RhoA. The binding of POPX2 to mDia1 or to an mDia-containing complex greatly decreases the ability of mDia1 to activate transcription from the SRE. We propose that the interaction between mDia1 and POPX2 (PPM1F) serves to regulate both the actin cytoskeleton and SRF-mediated transcription, and to link the CDC42/RAC1 pathways with those of RhoA.

[PMID: 24333164]
The mammalian striatin family consists of three proteins, striatin, S/G2 nuclear autoantigen, and zinedin. Striatin family members have no intrinsic catalytic activity, but rather function as scaffolding proteins. Remarkably, they organize multiple diverse, large signaling complexes that participate in a variety of cellular processes. Moreover, they appear to be regulatory/targeting subunits for the major eukaryotic serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A. In addition, striatin family members associate with germinal center kinase III kinases as well as other novel components, earning these assemblies the name striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complexes. Recently, there has been a great increase in functional and mechanistic studies aimed at identifying and understanding the roles of STRIPAK and STRIPAK-like complexes in cellular processes of multiple organisms. These studies have identified novel STRIPAK and STRIPAK-like complexes and have explored their roles in specific signaling pathways. Together, the results of these studies have sparked increased interest in striatin family complexes because they have revealed roles in signaling, cell cycle control, apoptosis, vesicular trafficking, Golgi assembly, cell polarity, cell migration, neural and vascular development, and cardiac function. Moreover, STRIPAK complexes have been connected to clinical conditions, including cardiac disease, diabetes, autism, and cerebral cavernous malformation. In this review, we discuss the expression, localization, and protein domain structure of striatin family members. Then we consider the diverse complexes these proteins and their homologs form in various organisms, emphasizing what is known regarding function and regulation. Finally, we explore possible roles of striatin family complexes in disease, especially cerebral cavernous malformation.

[PMID: 24025634]
RhoA is one of the more extensively studied members of the Rho family of small GTPase where it is most readily recognized for its contributions to actin-myosin contractility and stress fiber formation. Accordingly, RhoA function during cell migration has been relegated to the rear of the cell where it mediates retraction of the trailing edge. However, RhoA can also mediate membrane ruffling, lamellae formation and membrane blebbing, thus suggesting an active role in membrane protrusions at the leading edge. With the advent of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based Rho activity reporters, RhoA has been shown to be active at the leading edge of migrating cells where it precedes Rac and Cdc42 activation. These observations demonstrate a remarkable versatility to RhoA signaling, but how RhoA function can switch between contraction and protrusion has remained an enigma. This review highlights recent advances regarding how the cooperation of Rho effector Rhotekin and S100A4 suppresses stress fiber generation to permit RhoA-mediated lamellae formation.

[PMID: 16487696]
The Rho GTPases have been thought to influence cell morphogenesis through remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. Consistently, downstream targets such as the mDia family of formins and the WASP family proteins induce actin nucleation and polymerization, and another set of downstream effectors, the ROCK family protein kinases, are involved in regulation of actomyosin contractility. However, evidence has now accumulated that Rho GTPases also regulate local dynamics of microtubules. The mDia family proteins, for example, function downstream of Rho to stabilize and align microtubules in interphase cells. Concomitantly, the role of Rho GTPases in animal cell division, once thought to be limited to cytokinesis, has now been shown to extend to mitosis. Recent work indicates that they may function during both spindle orientation and chromosome congression. However, their involvement is cell-type-specific, raising arguments for and against a mitotic role for Rho GTPases.

[PMID: 23721065]
GTPases are the family of hydrolases that bind and hydrolyze guanosine triphosphate. The large Immunity-related GTPases and the small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor-6 in host cells are known to accumulate on the parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM) of Toxoplasma gondii and play critical roles in this parasite infection, but these GTPases cannot explain the full extent of infection. In this research, RhoA and Rac1 GTPases from the host cell were found to accumulate on the PVM regardless of the virulence of the T. gondii strains after T. gondii invasion, and this accumulation was dependent on their GTPase activity. The real-time micrography of T. gondii tachyzoites invading COS-7 cells overexpressing CFP-RhoA showed that this GTPase was recruited to the PVM at the very beginning of the invasion through the host cell membrane or from the cytosol. Host cell RhoA and Rac1 were also activated after T. gondii tachyzoites invasion, which was needed for host cell cytoskeleton reorganization to facilitate intracellular pathogens invasion. The decisive domains for the RhoA accumulation on the PVM included the GTP/Mg2+ binding site, the mDia effector interaction site, the G1 box, the G2 box and the G5 box, respectively, which were related to the binding of GTP for enzymatic activity and mDia for the regulation of microtubules. The recruited CFP-RhoA on the PVM could not be activated by epithelial growth factor (EGF) and no translocation was observed, unlike the unassociated RhoA in the host cell cytosol that migrated to the cell membrane towards the EGF activation spot. This result supported the hypothesis that the recruited RhoA or Rac1 on the PVM were in the GTP-bound active form. Wild-type RhoA or Rac1 overexpressed cells had almost the same infection rates by T. gondii as the mock-treated cells, while RhoA-N19 or Rac1-N17 transfected cells and RhoA, Rac1 or RhoA + Rac1 siRNA-treated cells showed significantly diminished infection rates compared to mock cells. The accumulation of the RhoA and Rac1 on the PVM and the requisite of their normal GTPase activity for efficient invasion implied their involvement and function in T. gondii invasion.

[PMID: 24563699]
The apical surface of secretory tubular epithelia is a dynamic cellular domain where massive membrane turnover takes place during exocytosis and its subsequent compensatory endocytosis. This extensive membrane flow poses a difficulty in targeting secretory vesicles efficiently to a narrow apical domain. We have studied how actin filaments mediate the secretory process in the murine exocrine pancreas, which produces and secretes digestive enzymes that are deposited into the intestine. We show that cargo-filled secretory vesicles move over bundles of linear actin cables from their storage areas to the apical membrane of pancreatic acinar cells. mDia1, a linear actin nucleator of the Formin family, was identified as the generator of these structures. The active form of mDia1 localizes to the apical surface, and the microfilament bundles it forms emanate from the apical surface and extend into the cytoplasm, generating polarized secretion tracks. These bundles ensure orderly progression of exocytosis, since the apical targeting of pancreatic vesicles is compromised in their absence, and vesicles fuse with each other to generate compound, membrane-associated secretory structures.

[PMID: 19160018]
The Rho subgroup of the Rho GTPases consisting of RhoA, RhoB and RhoC induces a specific type of actin cytoskeleton and carry out a variety of functions in the cell. mDia and ROCK are downstream effectors of Rho mediating Rho action on the actin cytoskeleton; mDia produces actin filaments by nucleation and polymerization and ROCK activate myosin to cross-link them for induction of actomyosin bundles and contractility. mDia is potentially linked to Rac activation and membrane ruffle formation through c-Src-induced phosphorylation of focal adhesion proteins, and ROCK antagonizes this mDia action. Thus, cell morphogenesis, adhesion, and motility can be determined by the balance between mDia and ROCK activities. Though they are not oncogenes by themselves, overexpression of RhoA and RhoC are often found in clinical cancers, and RhoC has been repeatedly identified as a gene associated with metastasis. The Rho-ROCK pathway is implicated in Ras-mediated transformation, the amoeboid movement of tumor cells in the three-dimensional matrix, and transmigration of tumor cells through the mesothelial monolayer. On the other hand, the Rho-mDia1 pathway is implicated in Src-mediated remodeling of focal adhesions and migration of tumor cells. There is also an indication that the Rho pathway other than ROCK is involved in Src-mediated induction of podosome and regulation of matrix metalloproteases. Thus, Rho mediates various phenotypes of malignant transformation by Ras and Src through its effectors, ROCK and mDia.

[PMID: 11509578]
The formin homology protein mDia is a Rho GTPase effector protein that participates in stress fiber formation, cytokinesis, and transcriptional activation of the serum response factor. Although the function of another effector of Rho, Rho-associated kinase, is well established, relatively little is known about the functional mechanism and the downstream targets of mDia. Our recent report of a Rho-mDia-Src-tyrosine kinase pathway suggested an important role for mDia in cell adhesion turnover. We identified a new mDia-interacting protein which is expressed ubiquitously. The new protein mainly binds to the proline-rich region of mDia through its Src homology 3 domain and also binds to Grb2 through its proline-rich domain. The protein is localized at the cell periphery and membrane ruffles and co-localizes with mDia. Co-expression of vSrc and the mDia-interacting protein induces significant morphological changes at focal contacts and activation of vSrc. Furthermore, we found that the mDia-interacting protein plays an important role in stress fiber formation induced by active mDia1. Our results suggest that this new protein regulates actin polymerization and cell adhesion turnover in the downstream portion of the Rho-mDia pathway by interacting with Grb2 and Src.

[PMID: 21930699]
The single-celled human parasite Entamoeba histolytica possesses a dynamic actin cytoskeleton vital for its intestinal and systemic pathogenicity. The E. histolytica genome encodes several Rho family GTPases known to regulate cytoskeletal dynamics. EhRho1, the first family member identified, was reported to be insensitive to the Rho GTPase-specific Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme, raising the possibility that it may be a misclassified Ras family member. Here, we report the crystal structures of EhRho1 in both active and inactive states. EhRho1 is activated by a conserved switch mechanism, but diverges from mammalian Rho GTPases in lacking a signature Rho insert helix. EhRho1 engages a homolog of mDia, EhFormin1, suggesting a role in mediating serum-stimulated actin reorganization and microtubule formation during mitosis. EhRho1, but not a constitutively active mutant, interacts with a newly identified EhRhoGDI in a prenylation-dependent manner. Furthermore, constitutively active EhRho1 induces actin stress fiber formation in mammalian fibroblasts, thereby identifying it as a functional Rho family GTPase. EhRho1 exhibits a fast rate of nucleotide exchange relative to mammalian Rho GTPases due to a distinctive switch one isoleucine residue reminiscent of the constitutively active F28L mutation in human Cdc42, which for the latter protein, is sufficient for cellular transformation. Nonconserved, nucleotide-interacting residues within EhRho1, revealed by the crystal structure models, were observed to contribute a moderating influence on fast spontaneous nucleotide exchange. Collectively, these observations indicate that EhRho1 is a bona fide member of the Rho GTPase family, albeit with unique structural and functional aspects compared with mammalian Rho GTPases.

[PMID: 24242070]
Although the cancer cell cytoskeleton is a clinically validated target, few new strategies have emerged for selectively targeting cell division by modulating the cytoskeletal structure, particularly ways that could avoid the cardiotoxic and neurotoxic effects of current agents such as taxanes. We address this gap by describing a novel class of small-molecule agonists of the mammalian Diaphanous (mDia)-related formins, which act downstream of Rho GTPases to assemble actin filaments, and their organization with microfilaments to establish and maintain cell polarity during migration and asymmetric division. GTP-bound Rho activates mDia family members by disrupting the interaction between the DID and DAD autoregulatory domains, which releases the FH2 domain to modulate actin and microtubule dynamics. In screening for DID-DAD disruptors that activate mDia, we identified two molecules called intramimics (IMM-01 and -02) that were sufficient to trigger actin assembly and microtubule stabilization, serum response factor-mediated gene expression, cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis. In vivo analysis of IMM-01 and -02 established their ability to slow tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model of colon cancer. Taken together, our work establishes the use of intramimics and mDia-related formins as a new general strategy for therapeutic targeting of the cytoskeletal remodeling machinery of cancer cells.

[PMID: 18362183]
We examined the role of the actin nucleation promoters neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP) and WAVE2 in cell protrusion in response to epidermal growth factor (EGF), a key regulator in carcinoma cell invasion. We found that WAVE2 knockdown (KD) suppresses lamellipod formation and increases filopod formation, whereas N-WASP KD has no effect. However, simultaneous KD of both proteins results in the formation of large jagged protrusions with lamellar properties and increased filopod formation. This suggests that another actin nucleation activity is at work in carcinoma cells in response to EGF. A mammalian Diaphanous-related formin, mDia1, localizes at the jagged protrusions in double KD cells. Constitutively active mDia1 recapitulated the phenotype, whereas inhibition of mDia1 blocked the formation of these protrusions. Increased RhoA activity, which stimulates mDia1 nucleation, was observed in the N-WASP/WAVE2 KD cells and was shown to be required for the N-WASP/WAVE2 KD phenotype. These data show that coordinate regulation between the WASP family and mDia proteins controls the balance between lamellar and lamellipodial protrusion activity.

[PMID: 14765113]
Cell movement is driven by the coordinated regulation of cytoskeletal reorganization through Rho GTPases downstream of integrin and growth-factor receptor signaling. We have reported that mDia, a target protein of Rho, interacts with Src and DIP. Here we show that DIP binds to p190RhoGAP and Vav2, and that DIP is phosphorylated by Src and mediates the phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP and Vav2 upon EGF stimulation. When endogenous DIP was inhibited by expressing dominant-negative mutants of DIP or siRNA, phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP and Vav2 upon EGF stimulation was diminished, and EGF-induced actin organization, distribution of p190RhoGAP and Vav2, and cell movement were affected. Therefore, DIP seems to transfer the complex of the three proteins from cytosol to beneath the membrane, and the three proteins, in turn, can be phosphorylated by Src. DIP inactivated Rho and activated Rac following EGF stimulation in the membrane fraction. Thus, DIP acts as a regulatory molecule causing Src kinase-dependent feedback modulation of Rho GTPases downstream of Rho-mDia upon EGF stimulation, and plays an important role in cell motility.

[PMID: 16303559]
Macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils use phagocytosis to capture and clear off invading pathogens. The process is triggered by the interaction of ligands on the pathogens' surface with specific phagocytic receptors, including immunoglobulin (FcR) and complement C3bi (CR3) receptors (integrin alpha(M)beta2, Mac1) . Localized actin-filament assembly that acts as the driving force for particle engulfment is controlled by Rho-family small GTPases . RhoA regulates CR3-mediated phagocytosis through a mechanism that is still unclear . Mammalian Diaphanous-related (mDia) formins participate in the generation of a diverse set of actin-remodeling events downstream of RhoA , and mDia1 is recruited around fibronectin-coated beads in a RhoA-dependent manner in fibroblasts . Here, we set out to examine whether mDia proteins are involved in CR3-mediated phagocytosis in macrophages. We show that the RhoA effector mDia1 is recruited early during CR3-mediated phagocytosis and colocalizes with polymerized actin in the phagocytic cup. Interfering with mDia activity inhibits CR3-mediated phagocytosis while having no effect on FcR-mediated phagocytosis. These results indicate a new function for mDia proteins in the regulation of actin polymerization during CR3-mediated phagocytosis.

[PMID: 11591323]
In migrating adherent cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells, the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) reorients toward the leading edge [1-3]. MTOC reorientation repositions the Golgi toward the front of the cell [1] and contributes to directional migration [4]. The mechanism of MTOC reorientation and its relation to the formation of stabilized microtubules (MTs) in the leading edge, which occurs concomitantly with MTOC reorientation [3], is unknown. We show that serum and the serum lipid, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), increased Cdc42 GTP levels and triggered MTOC reorientation in serum-starved wounded monolayers of 3T3 fibroblasts. Cdc42, but not Rho or Rac, was both sufficient and necessary for LPA-stimulated MTOC reorientation. MTOC reorientation was independent of Cdc42-induced changes in actin and was not blocked by cytochalasin D. Inhibition of dynein or dynactin blocked LPA- and Cdc42-stimulated MTOC reorientation. LPA also stimulates a Rho/mDia pathway that selectively stabilizes MTs in the leading edge [5, 6]; however, activators and inhibitors of MTOC reorientation and MT stabilization showed that each response was regulated independently. These results establish an LPA/Cdc42 signaling pathway that regulates MTOC reorientation in a dynein-dependent manner. MTOC reorientation and MT stabilization both act to polarize the MT array in migrating cells, yet these processes act independently and are regulated by separate Rho family GTPase-signaling pathways.

[PMID: 16361707]
Mammalian diaphanous-related (mDia) formins act as Rho GTPase effectors during cytoskeletal remodeling. Rho binding to mDia amino-terminal GTPase-binding domains (GBDs) causes the adjacent Dia-inhibitory domain (DID) to release the carboxyl-terminal Dia-autoregulatory (DAD) domain that flanks the formin homology-2 (FH2) domain. The release of DAD allows the FH2 domain to then nucleate and elongate nonbranched actin filaments. DAD, initially discovered as a region of homology shared between a phylogenetically divergent set of formin proteins, is comprised of a core motif, MDXLLXL, and an adjacent region is comprised of numerous basic residues, typically RRKR in the mDia family. Here, we show that these specific amino acids within the basic region of DAD contribute to the binding of DID and therefore the maintenance of the mDia autoregulatory mechanism. In addition, expression of full-length versions of mDia2 containing amino acid substitutions in either the DAD core or basic regions causes profound changes in the F-actin architecture, including the formation of filopodia-like structures that rapidly elongate from the cell edge. These studies further refine our understanding of the molecular contribution of DAD to mDia control and the role of mDia2 in the assembly of membrane protrusions.

[PMID: 14519394]
Polarised cell migration is a tightly regulated process that occurs in tissue development, chemotaxis and wound healing. Rho-family GTPases, including Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoA, play a central role in establishing cell polarisation, which requires asymmetric and ordered distribution of the signalling molecules and the cytoskeleton. Recent advances reveal that Rho GTPases, together with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, contribute to asymmetric phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate distribution via a positive-feedback loop. Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate thereby activates the signalling cascades to the cytoskeleton as a second messenger. Rho GTPases also capture and stabilise microtubules through their effectors (e.g. IQGAP1, mDia and Par6) near the cell cortex, leading to polarised cell morphology and directional cell migration. Thus, elucidation of the signal transduction cascades from receptors to Rho GTPases and, subsequently, from Rho GTPases to microtubules has begun.

[PMID: 8144827]
To compare communication in triadic (three-person) and dyadic (two-person) older patient medical interviews and to determine the influence of the presence of a third person on the physician-older patient relationship. Matched sample of dyadic and triadic audiotaped outpatient medical visits. Audiotapes were coded with the Multi-dimensional Interaction Analysis (MDIA) system. Hospital-based medical primary care group practice in a major urban teaching institution. Patients 60 years and older who were making their first visit to study physicians. In a sample of 96 audiotaped initial medical visits, 15 encounters involved three persons. These 15 cases were matched with 15 dyadic interviews for gender and race of the patient and for gender and race of the physician. Content, interactional processes, and specific language and communication behaviors of older patients, physicians, and third persons in the medical encounter, as measured by the MDIA system. The specific content and the quality of interactional processes of physicians were not affected by the presence of a third person. However, older patients raised fewer topics in all content areas (medical, personal habits, psychosocial, and physician-patient relationship) in triads than in dyads. Overall, patients were less responsive (ie, the quality of their questioning, informing, and supportiveness was poorer) on patient-raised topics in triads than in dyads. Patients were rated as less assertive and expressive, and there was less joint decision-making and shared laughter in triads than in dyads. Patients were frequently excluded from conversations in visits in which a third person was present. The presence of a third person in the medical encounter changes the interactional dynamics of older patient medical interviews and may influence the development of a trusting and effective physician-older patient relationship.

[PMID: 17682067]
Trafficking of immune cells is controlled by directed migration of relevant cells toward chemotactic signals. Actin cytoskeleton undergoes continuous remodeling and serves as machinery for cell migration. The mDia family of formins and the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP)-Arp2/3 system are two major actin nucleating-polymerizing systems in mammalian cells, with the former producing long straight actin filaments and the latter producing branched actin meshwork. Although much is known about the latter, the physiological functions of mDia proteins are unclear. We generated mice deficient in one mDia isoform, mDia1. Although mDia1(-/-) mice were born and developed without apparent abnormality, mDia1(-/-) T lymphocytes exhibited impaired trafficking to secondary lymphoid organs in vivo and showed reduced chemotaxis, little actin filament formation, and impaired polarity in response to chemotactic stimuli in vitro. Similarly, mDia1(-/-) thymocytes showed reduced chemotaxis and impaired egression from the thymus. These results suggest that mDia1 plays a distinct role in chemotaxis in T lymphocyte trafficking.

[PMID: 18239683]
Formin-family proteins, in the active state, form actin-based structures such as stress fibres. Their activation mechanisms, however, are largely unknown except that mDia and its closely related formins can be activated by direct binding of the small GTPase Rho or Cdc42. Here we show that the Rho-dependent protein kinase ROCK phosphorylates the C-terminal residues Ser1131, Ser1137, and Thr1141 of formin homology domain protein 1 (FHOD1), a major endothelial formin that is normally autoinhibited by intramolecular interaction between the N- and C-terminal regions. Phosphorylation of FHOD1 at the three residues fully disrupts the autoinhibitory interaction, which culminates in formation of stress fibres. We also demonstrate that, in vascular endothelial cells, thrombin, a vasoactive substance leading to Rho activation, elicits both FHOD1 phosphorylation and stress fibre formation in a ROCK-dependent manner, and that FHOD1 depletion by RNA interference impairs thrombin-induced stress fibre formation. Based on these findings we propose a novel mechanism for activation of formin-family proteins: ROCK, activated by G protein-coupled receptor ligands such as thrombin, directly phosphorylates FHOD1 at the C-terminal region, which renders this formin in the active form, leading to stress fibre formation.

[PMID: 16361249]
Diaphanous related formins (DRFs) are cytoskeleton remodeling proteins that mediate specific upstream GTPase signals to regulate cellular processes such as cytokinesis, cell polarity, and organelle motility. Previous work on the Rho-interacting DRF mDia has established that the biological activity of DRFs is regulated by an autoinhibitory interaction of a C-terminal diaphanous autoregulatory domain (DAD) with the DRF N terminus. This autoinhibition is released upon competitive binding of an activated GTPase to the N terminus of the DRF. Analyzing autoregulation of the Rac1-interacting DRF FHOD1, we utilized in vitro binding studies to identify a 60-amino acid DAD at the protein C terminus that recognizes an N-terminal formin homology (FH) 3 domain. Importantly, the FH3 domain of FHOD1 does not overlap with the proposed Rac1-binding domain. The FHOD1 DAD was found to contain one functional hydrophobic autoregulatory motif, while a previously uncharacterized basic cluster that is conserved in all DRF family DADs also contributed to the FH3-DAD interaction. Simultaneous mutation of both motifs efficiently released autoinhibition of FHOD1 in NIH3T3 cells resulting in the formation of actin stress fibers and increased serum response element transcription. A second putative hydrophobic autoregulatory motif N-terminal of the DAD belongs to a unique FHOD subdomain of yet undefined function. NMR structural analysis and size exclusion chromatography experiments revealed that the FHOD1 DAD is intrinsically unstructured with a tendency for a helical conformation in the hydrophobic autoregulation motif. Together, these data suggest that in FHOD1, DAD acts as signal sequence for binding to the well folded and monomeric FH3 domain and imply an activation mechanism that differs from competitive binding of Rac1 and DAD to one interaction site.

[PMID: 22179776]
Filopodia are dynamic actin-rich cell surface protrusions involved in cell migration, axon guidance, and wound healing. The RhoGTPase Cdc42 generates filopodia via IRSp53, a multidomain protein that links the processes of plasma membrane deformation and actin dynamics required for their formation in mammalian cells. The Src homology 3 domain of IRSp53 binds to the actin regulators Mena, Eps8, WAVE1, WAVE2, mDia1, and mDia2. We show that mDia1 and WAVE2 synergize with IRSp53 to form filopodia. IRSp53 also interacts directly with these two proteins within filopodia, as observed in acceptor photobleaching FRET studies. Measurement of filopodium formation by time-lapse imaging of live cells also revealed that depleting neuronal cells of either mDia1 or WAVE2 protein decreases the ability of IRSp53 to induce filopodia. In contrast, IRSp53 does not appear to partner WAVE1 or mDia2 to give rise to these structures. In addition, although all three isoforms of mDia are capable of inducing filopodia, IRSp53 requires only mDia1 to do so. These findings suggest that mDia1 and WAVE2 are important Src homology 3 domain partners of IRSp53 in forming filopodia.

[PMID: 23060957]
mDia proteins are members of the formin family of actin nucleating proteins that polymerize linear actin filaments. Such filaments form the core of thin, tubular, membrane-bound cell surface protrusions known as filopodia, which are a major feature of mammalian cell morphology. Filopodia are dynamic structures that help cells sense environmental cues, and play a role in cell migration, axon guidance, angiogenesis and other processes. RhoGTPases bind to and control the activity of mDia proteins, and several other binding partners of the three mDia1 isoforms-mDia1, mDia2 and mDia3-have been documented. Two independent pathways controlling mammalian filopodium formation have emerged, with one driven by the RhoGTPase Cdc42, and the other by Rif. While mDia2 has been the main formin implicated in forming filopodia, mDia1 has recently surfaced as the key formin utilized by both the Cdc42 and Rif pathways to drive filopodial protrusion.

[PMID: 12673949]
Rho is a member of the Ras-related family of small molecular weight GTP-binding proteins, and Rho works as a molecular switch by shuttling between the GDP-bound inactive form and the GTP-bound active form. Rho is involved in cell motility, cell adhesion, and cytokinesis through the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. In addition to this, Rho also regulates Ras-induced transformation, transcriptional activation and cell cycle progression. These actions through the Rho signaling are mediated by downstream Rho effectors. Several putative Rho effectors including ROCK and mDia have been isolated on the basis of their selective binding to the GTP-bound form of Rho. Among them, the ROCK family of Rho-associated serine/threonine protein kinases inactivates myosin phosphatase and actin depolymerizing factor (cofilin/Destrin) to induce stabilization of filamentous actin and increase in the actomyosin-based contractility. mDia binds profilin likely to promote actin polymerization. Thus, these effectors are supposed to work in organization of the actin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, analyses using a ROCK specific inhibitor Y-27632 have suggested that the Rho-ROCK pathway works in contractions of vascular smooth muscles and is involved in malignant cell transformation and tumor invasion and metastasis.

[PMID: 23740402]
Filopodia are dynamic, actin-rich finger-like structures that protrude from the cell membrane and play important roles in cell migration and neurite initiation and outgrowth. The insulin receptor substrate protein of 53 kDa (IRSp53) and the mammalian Diaphanous members of the formin family of proteins (mDia) are two key players in the formation of filopodia and neurites. IRSp53 is an adaptor protein that acts at the membrane:actin interface, coupling membrane deformation with F-actin polymerization. mDia formin proteins, instead, can nucleate and polymerize linear actin filaments. Emerging genetic and biochemical evidence indicate that there are multiple and independent pathways leading to filopodium and neurite formation, but the precise molecular components of these pathways remain ill-defined. We recently identified the PDZ domain-containing protein LIN7 as a novel regulator of IRSp53. We further showed that the association between these two proteins is required to promote the formation of filopodia and neurites independently from mDia formin proteins, highlighting novel mechanisms of filopodia and neurite formation.

[PMID: 20869367]
Mouse Diaphanous-related formins (mDias) are members of the formin protein family that nucleate actin polymerization and subsequently promote filamentous actin (F-actin) elongation by monomer addition to fast-growing barbed ends. It has been suggested that mDias preferentially recruit actin complexed to profilin due to their proline-rich FH1 domains. During filament elongation, dimeric mDias remain attached to the barbed ends by their FH2 domains, which form an anti-parallel ring-like structure enclosing the filament barbed ends. Dimer formation of mDia-FH2 domains is dependent on their N-terminal lasso and linker subdomains (connector). Here, we investigated the effect of isolated FH2 domains on actin polymerization using mDia1-FH2 domain plus connector, as well as core mDia1, mDia2, and mDia3 missing the connector, by cosedimentation and electron microscopy after negative staining. Analytical ultracentrifugation showed that core FH2 domains of mDia1 and mDia2 exhibited a low degree of dimer formation, whereas mDia3-FH2 minus connector and mDia1-FH2 plus connector readily dimerized. Only core mDia3-FH2 was able to nucleate actin polymerization. However, all tested core FH2 domains decorated and bundled F-actin, as demonstrated by electron microscopy after negative staining. Bundling activity was highest for mDia3-FH2, decreased for mDia2-FH2, and further decreased for mDia1-FH2. The mDia1-FH2 domain plus connector induced actin polymerization also in the absence of profilin, but failed to induce F-actin deformation and bundling. We also tested whether mDia1-FH2 was able to repolymerize actin in complex with different proteins that stabilize globular actin. The data obtained demonstrated that mDia1-FH2 induced actin repolymerization only from the actin/cofilin-1 complex, but not when complexed to actin depolymerizing factor, gelsolin segment 1, vitamin D binding protein, or deoxyribonuclease I.

[PMID: 19768111]
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis and hyperplastic bone marrow. Complete loss or interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 5 occur frequently in MDS. One candidate tumor suppressor on 5q is the mammalian Diaphanous (mDia)-related formin mDia1, encoded by DIAPH1 (5q31.3). mDia-family formins act as effectors for Rho-family small GTP-binding proteins including RhoB, which has also been shown to possess tumor suppressor activity. Mice lacking the Drf1 gene that encodes mDia1 develop age-dependent myelodysplastic features. We crossed mDia1 and RhoB knockout mice to test whether the additional loss of RhoB expression would compound the myelodysplastic phenotype. Drf1(-/-)RhoB(-/-) mice are fertile and develop normally. Relative to age-matched Drf1(-/-)RhoB(+/-) mice, the age of myelodysplasia onset was earlier in Drf1(-/-)RhoB(-/-) animals--including abnormally shaped erythrocytes, splenomegaly, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. In addition, we observed a statistically significant increase in the number of activated monocytes/macrophages in both the spleen and bone marrow of Drf1(-/-)RhoB(-/-) mice relative to Drf1(-/-)RhoB(+/-) mice. These data suggest a role for RhoB-regulated mDia1 in the regulation of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

[PMID: 10436006]
Rho, a member of the Rho small G protein family, regulates the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions in various types of cultured cells. We investigated here the actions of ROCK and mDia, both of which have been identified to be putative downstream target molecules of Rho, in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. The dominant active mutant of RhoA induced the formation of parallel stress fibers and focal adhesions, whereas the dominant active mutant of ROCK induced the formation of stellate stress fibers and focal adhesions, and the dominant active mutant of mDia induced the weak formation of parallel stress fibers without affecting the formation of focal adhesions. In the presence of C3 ADP-ribosyltransferase for Rho, the dominant active mutant of ROCK induced the formation of stellate stress fibers and focal adhesions, whereas the dominant active mutant of mDia induced only the diffuse localization of actin filaments. These results indicate that ROCK and mDia show distinct actions in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. The dominant negative mutant of either ROCK or mDia inhibited the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions, indicating that both ROCK and mDia are necessary for the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions. Moreover, inactivation and reactivation of both ROCK and mDia were necessary for the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced disassembly and reassembly, respectively, of stress fibers and focal adhesions. The morphologies of stress fibers and focal adhesions in the cells expressing both the dominant active mutants of ROCK and mDia were not identical to those induced by the dominant active mutant of Rho. These results indicate that at least ROCK and mDia cooperatively act as downstream target molecules of Rho in the Rho-induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.

[PMID: 15371418]
Formin proteins regulate the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons and also control the activity of the SRF transcription factor through depletion of the G-actin pool. Although the conserved formin homology 2 (FH2) domains of the mDia1 and Bni1 formins can nucleate actin polymerization in vitro, the activity of other FH2 domains and the relationship between actin polymerization and microtubule reorganization have been controversial. We show that, similar to the mDia1 FH2 domain, the FH2 domains of mDia2 and ld are sufficient for SRF activation in vivo. We demonstrate that an mDia1 mutant defective for microtubule rearrangement in vivo is also defective in SRF activation in vivo as well as actin polymerization in vitro and that the mDia2 FH2 domain promotes actin polymerization in vitro. Using co-immunoprecipitation, we show that mDia1 is oligomeric in its inactive autoinhibited state in vivo, that the active mDia1 and mDia2 FH2 domains form homo- but not hetero-oligomers in vivo, and that oligomerization is abolished by inactivating FH2 deletion and point mutations. Nevertheless, inactive mDia1 FH2 domain mutants retain the ability to interfere with cellular mDia activity. Our results show that self-oligomerization is essential for SRF activation in vivo and F-actin assembly in vitro and provide strong support for recent structural models of the FH2 domain.

[PMID: 18287523]
mDia proteins are mammalian homologues of Drosophila diaphanous and belong to the formin family proteins that catalyze actin nucleation and polymerization. Although formin family proteins of nonmammalian species such as Drosophila diaphanous are essential in cytokinesis, whether and how mDia proteins function in cytokinesis remain unknown. Here we depleted each of the three mDia isoforms in NIH 3T3 cells by RNA interference and examined this issue. Depletion of mDia2 selectively increased the number of binucleate cells, which was corrected by coexpression of RNAi-resistant full-length mDia2. mDia2 accumulates in the cleavage furrow during anaphase to telophase, and concentrates in the midbody at the end of cytokinesis. Depletion of mDia2 induced contraction at aberrant sites of dividing cells, where contractile ring components such as RhoA, myosin, anillin, and phosphorylated ERM accumulated. Treatment with blebbistatin suppressed abnormal contraction, corrected localization of the above components, and revealed that the amount of F-actin at the equatorial region during anaphase/telophase was significantly decreased with mDia2 RNAi. These results demonstrate that mDia2 is essential in mammalian cell cytokinesis and that mDia2-induced F-actin forms a scaffold for the contractile ring and maintains its position in the middle of a dividing cell.

[PMID: 12857739]
Diaphanous related formins (DRFs) are part of the formin protein family that control morphogenesis, embryonic differentiation, cytokinesis, and cell polarity. DRFs organize the cytoskeleton in eukaryotic cells via the interaction with specific members of the Rho family of small GTPases including Rho, Rac, and Cdc42. This is best understood for Rho, which transmits signals to the actin cytoskeleton through the cooperation of its DRF effector mDia with ROCK (Rho-associated kinase). Here, we show that a constitutive active form of the Rac-interacting DRF FHOD1 (formin homology 2 domain containing 1) associates with F-actin in NIH3T3 cells, resulting in the formation of thick actin fibers. Cytoskeletal changes induced by FHOD1 correlated with the induction of serum response element transcription and were mediated by formin homology domains 1 and 2 of FHOD1. FHOD1-induced effects required the activity of the Rho-ROCK cascade that is targeted at a level downstream of Rho by the DRF. However, when the functional interaction of FHOD1 with individual GTPases was addressed, Rac but not Rho or Cdc42 bound to FHOD1 in cells and induced its recruitment to actin filaments and lamellipodia/membrane ruffles. Furthermore, activated FHOD1 interfered with lamellipodia formation. These results indicate that FHOD1 acts as an effector of Rac in actin rearrangements and transcriptional regulation and may provide a link for the Rac-dependent activation of the Rho cascade.

[PMID: 15096506]
Cell shape-dependent control of cell-cycle progression underlies the spatial differentials of growth that drive tissue morphogenesis, yet little is known about how cell distortion impacts the biochemical signaling machinery that is responsible for growth control. Here we show that the Rho family GTPase, RhoA, conveys the "cell shape signal" to the cell-cycle machinery in human capillary endothelial cells. Cells accumulating p27(kip1) and arrested in mid G(1) phase when spreading were inhibited by restricted extracellular matrix adhesion, whereas constitutively active RhoA increased expression of the F-box protein Skp2 required for ubiquitination-dependent degradation of p27(kip1) and restored G(1) progression in these cells. Studies with dominant-negative and constitutively active forms of mDia1, a downstream effector of RhoA, and with a pharmacological inhibitor of ROCK, another RhoA target, revealed that RhoA promoted G(1) progression by altering the balance of activities between these two downstream effectors. These data indicate that signaling proteins such as mDia1 and ROCK, which are thought to be involved primarily in cytoskeletal remodeling, also mediate cell growth regulation by coupling cell shape to the cell-cycle machinery at the level of signal transduction.

[PMID: 17198702]
Rho GTPases and the dynamic assembly and disassembly of actin filaments have been shown to have critical roles in both the internalization and trafficking of growth factor receptors. While all three mammalian Diaphanous-related (mDia1/2/3) formin GTPase effector proteins have been localized on endosomes, a role for their actin nucleation, filament elongation, and/or bundling remains poorly understood in the context of intracellular trafficking. In a study of a functional relationship between RhoB, a GTPase known to associate with both early- and late-endosomes, and the formin mDia2, we show that 1) RhoB and mDia2 interact on endosomes; 2) GTPase activity-the ability to hydrolyze GTP to GDP-is required for the ability of RhoB to govern endosome dynamics; and 3) the actin dynamics controlled by RhoB and mDia2 is necessary for vesicle trafficking. These studies further suggest that Rho GTPases significantly influence the activity of mDia family formins in driving cellular membrane remodeling through the regulation of actin dynamics.

[PMID: 21278336]
Inverted formin 2 (INF2) encodes a member of the diaphanous subfamily of formin proteins. Mutations in INF2 cause human kidney disease characterized by focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis. Disease-causing mutations occur only in the diaphanous inhibitory domain (DID), suggesting specific roles for this domain in the pathogenesis of disease. In a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified the diaphanous autoregulatory domains (DADs) of the mammalian diaphanous-related formins (mDias) mDia1, mDia2, and mDia 3 as INF2_DID-interacting partners. The mDias are Rho family effectors that regulate actin dynamics. We confirmed in vitro INF2_DID/mDia_DAD binding by biochemical assays, confirmed the in vivo interaction of these protein domains by coimmunoprecipitation, and observed colocalization of INF2 and mDias in glomerular podocytes. We investigated the influence of this INF2_DID/mDia_DAD interaction on mDia mediated actin polymerization and on serum response factor (SRF) activation. We find that the interaction of INF2_DID with mDia_DAD inhibited mDia-mediated, Rho-activated actin polymerization, as well as SRF-responsive gene transcriptional changes. Similar assays using the disease-causing E184K and R218Q mutations in INF2_DID showed a decreased effect on SRF activation and gene transcription. The binding of INF2_DID to mDia_DAD may serve as a negative regulatory mechanism for mDias' function in actin-dependent cell processes. The effects of disease-causing INF2 mutations suggest an important role for this protein and its interaction with other formins in modulating glomerular podocyte phenotype and function.

[PMID: 10629846]
Rho is a member of the Ras-related family of small molecular weight GTP-binding proteins, and works as a molecular switch by shuttling between the GDP-bound inactive form and the GTP-bound active form. Cellular functions of Rho have been studied by two ways; one is to express or microinject constitutively active Rho mutants in cells to identify the active phenotype of Rho, and the other is to use botulinum C3 exoenzyme that specifically ADP-ribosylates and inactivates Rho in cells to find out phenotypes of Rho inactivation. These analyses have revealed that Rho is involved in cell to substratum adhesion and motility, cell contraction and cytokinesis through the reorganization of the actincytoskeleton and modulation of its activity. These actions of Rho are mediated by downstream Rho effectors. Several putative Rho effectors have been isolated on the basis of their selective binding to the GTP-bound form of Rho. Among them, the ROCK family of Rho-associated serine/threonine protein kinases inactivates cofilin and myosin phosphatase to induce stabilization of filamentous actin and increase in the actomyosin-based contractility. mDia binds profilin likely to promote actin polymerization. Thus, these effectors in combination are supposed to work in organization of various forms of the actin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, analyses using a ROCK specific inhibitor Y-27632 have suggested that the Rho-ROCK pathway works in contractions of vascular and bronchial smooth muscles under various pathological conditions and is involved in malignant cell transformation and tumor invasion and metastasis.