[PMID: 25118508]
Craniosynostosis (a premature fusion of the cranial sutures) occurs with a frequency of 1 in 2100-2500 births and in over 40% cases is caused by known genetic factors--either single gene mutations or chromosomal rearrangements. Cases caused by complex chromosomal abnormalities are uncommon and likely associated with compound phenotype. Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) [#101400] is caused by TWIST1 gene haploinsufficiency. Its phenotype includes uni- or bicoronal synostosis, short stature, facial dysmorphism and variable anomalies of the hands and feet. Due to its poor sonographic manifestation a prenatal diagnosis of SCS is challenging. We report a case of a prenatally detected craniosynostosis (compound Saethre-Chotzen syndrome phenotype) caused by a de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement (1; 4; 7) with a microdeletion of 7p21.3-7p15.3, including TWIST1 gene.

[PMID: 8988166]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders of craniosynostosis in humans and is characterized by craniofacial and limb anomalies. The locus for Saethre-Chotzen syndrome maps to chromosome 7p21-p22. We have evaluated TWIST, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, as a candidate gene for this condition because its expression pattern and mutant phenotypes in Drosophila and mouse are consistent with the Saethre-Chotzen phenotype. We mapped TWIST to human chromosome 7p21-p22 and mutational analysis reveals nonsense, missense, insertion and deletion mutations in patients. These mutations occur within the basic DNA binding, helix I and loop domains, or result in premature termination of the protein. Studies in Drosophila indicate that twist may affect the transcription of fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), another gene family implicated in human craniosynostosis. The emerging cascade of molecular components involved in craniofacial and limb development now includes TWIST, which may function as an upstream regulator of FGFRs.

[PMID: 8988167]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (acrocephalo-syndactyly type III, ACS III) is an autosomal dominant craniosynostosis with brachydactyly, soft tissue syndactyly and facial dysmorphism including ptosis, facial asymmetry and prominent ear crura. ACS III has been mapped to chromosome 7p21-22. Of interest, TWIST, the human counterpart of the murine Twist gene, has been localized on chromosome 7p21 as well. The Twist gene product is a transcription factor containing a basic helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) domain, required in head mesenchyme for cranial neural tube morphogenesis in mice. The co-localisation of ACS III and TWIST prompted us to screen ACS III patients for TWIST gene mutations especially as mice heterozygous for Twist null mutations displayed skull defects and duplication of hind leg digits. Here, we report 21-bp insertions and nonsense mutations of the TWIST gene (S127X, E130X) in seven ACS III probands and describe impairment of head mesenchyme induction by TWIST as a novel pathophysiological mechanism in human craniosynostoses.

[PMID: 15923834]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a craniosynostosis syndrome further characterized by distinctive facial and limb abnormalities. It shows complete penetrance and variable expressivity and has been linked to the TWIST gene on chromosome 7p21; more than 80 different intragenic mutations and, recently, large deletions have been detected in Saethre-Chotzen patients. The aim of this study was to genetically and phenotypically characterize patients with a clinical diagnosis of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Patients with a clinical diagnosis as well as those with a genetic diagnosis of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (n = 34) were included in the study. The study showed that the important features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome are brachycephaly (occurring in 74 percent of patients), a broad, depressed nasal bridge (65 percent), a high forehead (56 percent), ptosis (53 percent), and prominent auricular crura (56 percent). Furthermore, using different molecular techniques, pathogenic mutations in the TWIST gene were identified in 71 percent of patients. Patients with deletions of the TWIST gene did not differ from those with intragenic TWIST mutations in frequency or severity of craniofacial abnormalities. However, they did distinguish themselves by the presence of many additional anomalies and diseases and--most importantly--the high frequency of mental retardation, which was borderline significant. The authors conclude that when using stringent inclusion criteria for studies of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, patients who have a pathogenic mutation of the TWIST gene should be excluded.

[PMID: 10094188]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (ACS III) is an autosomal dominant craniosynostosis syndrome recently ascribed to mutations in the TWIST gene, a basic helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) transcription factor regulating head mesenchyme cell development during cranial neural tube formation in mouse. Studying a series of 22 unrelated ACS III patients, we have found TWIST mutations in 16/22 cases. Interestingly, these mutations consistently involved the b-HLH domain of the protein. Indeed, mutant genotypes included frameshift deletions/insertions, nonsense and missense mutations, either truncating or disrupting the b-HLH motif of the protein. This observation gives additional support to the view that most ACS III cases result from loss-of-function mutations at the TWIST locus. The P250R recurrent FGFR 3 mutation was found in 2/22 cases presenting mild clinical manifestations of the disease but 4/22 cases failed to harbour TWIST or FGFR 3 mutations. Clinical re-examination of patients carrying TWIST mutations failed to reveal correlations between the mutant genotype and severity of the phenotype. Finally, since no TWIST mutations were detected in 40 cases of isolated coronal craniosynostosis, the present study suggests that TWIST mutations are specific to Saethre-Chotzen syndrome.

[PMID: 11314068]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is an autosomal acrocephalosyndactyly syndrome whose gene has been assigned to chromosome 7p (TWIST). A case of a 13-year-old girl with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (ACS III) is described. The features of the syndrome include: turriplagiocephaly with a cranial circumference of 52 cm, facial asymmetry, low hairline, proptosis, antimongoloid slanting of palpebral fissures, nasal deviation with high bridge, angled ears, scoliosis and torticollis, clinodactyly of the fourth and fifth toes, large halluxes, and neurosensorial hypoacusia. For correction of the deformity, a cranioorbital remodeling was performed. The craniofacial approach with remodeling of the frontal bar and reduction of the turricephaly resulted in a satisfactory morphological and functional outcome, with complete three-dimensional reshaping and remodeling of the frontonasoorbital area.

[PMID: 10649491]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a relatively common craniosynostosis disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in the TWIST gene have been identified in patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. The TWIST gene product is a transcription factor with DNA binding and helix-loop-helix domains. Numerous missense and nonsense mutations cluster in the functional domains, without any apparent mutational hot spot. Two novel point mutations and one novel polymorphism are included in this review. Large deletions including the TWIST gene have been identified in some patients with learning disabilities or mental retardation, which are not typically part of the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Comprehensive studies in patients with the clinical diagnosis of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have demonstrated a TWIST gene abnormality in about 80%, up to 37% of which may be large deletions [Johnson et al., 1998]. The gene deletions and numerous nonsense mutations are suggestive of haploinsufficiency as the disease-causing mechanism. No genotype phenotype correlation was apparent.

[PMID: 9215678]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, a common autosomal dominant craniosynostosis in humans, is characterized by brachydactyly, soft tissue syndactyly and facial dysmorphism including ptosis, facial asymmetry, and prominent ear crura. Previously, we identified a yeast artificial chromosome that encompassed the breakpoint of an apparently balanced t(6;7) (q16.2;p15.3) translocation associated with a mild form of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. We now describe, at the DNA sequence level, the region on chromosome 7 affected by this translocation event. The rearrangement occurred approximately 5 kb 3' of the human TWIST locus and deleted 518 bp of chromosome 7. The TWIST gene codes for a transcription factor containing a basic helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) motif and has recently been described as a candidate gene for Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, based on the detection of mutations within the coding region. Potential exon sequences flanking the chromosome 7 translocation breakpoint did not hit known genes in database searches. The chromosome rearrangement downstream of TWIST is compatible with the notion that this is a Saethre-Chotzen syndrome gene and implies loss of function of one allele by a positional effect as a possible mechanism of mutation to evoke the syndrome.

[PMID: 17868088]
Twist1 is the mouse ortholog of TWIST1, the human gene mutated in Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Previously, a Twist1 null allele was generated by gene targeting in mouse embryonic stem cells. Twist1 heterozygous mice develop polydactyly and a craniofacial phenotype similar to Saethre-Chotzen patients. Mice homozygous for the Twist1 null allele die around embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5) with cranial neural tube closure and vascular defects, hindering in vivo studies of Twist1 function at later stages of development. Here, we report the generation of a Twist1 conditional null allele in mice that functions like a wild-type allele but can be converted to a null allele upon Cre-mediated recombination.

[PMID: 16502419]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is associated with haploinsufficiency of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TWIST1 and is characterized by premature closure of the cranial sutures, termed craniosynostosis; however, the mechanisms underlying this defect are unclear. Twist1 has been shown to play both positive and negative roles in mesenchymal specification and differentiation, and here we show that the activity of Twist1 is dependent on its dimer partner. Twist1 forms both homodimers (T/T) and heterodimers with E2A E proteins (T/E) and the relative level of Twist1 to the HLH inhibitor Id proteins determines which dimer forms. On the basis of the expression patterns of Twist1 and Id1 within the cranial sutures, we hypothesized that Twist1 forms homodimers in the osteogenic fronts and T/E heterodimers in the mid-sutures. In support of this hypothesis, we have found that genes regulated by T/T homodimers, such as FGFR2 and periostin, are expressed in the osteogenic fronts, whereas genes regulated by T/E heterodimers, such as thrombospondin-1, are expressed in the mid-sutures. The ratio between these dimers is altered in the sutures of Twist1+/- mice, favoring an increase in homodimers and an expansion of the osteogenic fronts. Of interest, the T/T to T/E ratio is greater in the coronal versus the sagittal suture, and this finding may contribute to making the coronal suture more susceptible to fusion due to TWIST haploinsufficiency. Importantly, we were able to inhibit suture fusion in Twist1+/- mice by modulating the balance between these dimers toward T/E formation, by either increasing the expression of E2A E12 or by decreasing Id expression. Therefore, we have identified dimer partner selection as an important mediator of Twist1 function and provide a mechanistic understanding of craniosynostosis due to TWIST haploinsufficiency.

[PMID: 15735646]
Autosomal dominant mutations in the gene encoding the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Twist1 are associated with limb and craniofacial defects in humans with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. The molecular mechanism underlying these phenotypes is poorly understood. We show that ectopic expression of the related basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand2 phenocopies Twist1 loss of function in the limb and that the two factors have a gene dosage-dependent antagonistic interaction. Dimerization partner choice by Twist1 and Hand2 can be modulated by protein kinase A- and protein phosphatase 2A-regulated phosphorylation of conserved helix I residues. Notably, multiple Twist1 mutations associated with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome alter protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of Twist1, suggesting that misregulation of Twist1 dimerization through either stoichiometric or post-translational mechanisms underlies phenotypes of individuals with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome.

[PMID: 28521820]
The bHLH transcription factor TWIST1 plays a key role in the embryonic development and in tumorigenesis. Some loss-of-function mutations of the TWIST1 gene have been shown to cause an autosomal dominant craniosynostosis, known as the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS). Although the functional impacts of many TWIST1 mutations have been experimentally reported, little is known on the molecular mechanisms underlying their loss-of-function. In a previous study, we highlighted the predictive value of in silico molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in deciphering the molecular function of TWIST1 residues. Here, since the substitution of the arginine 154 amino acid by a glycine residue (R154G) is responsible for the SCS phenotype and the substitution of arginine 154 by a proline experimentally decreases the dimerizing ability of TWIST1, we investigated the molecular impact of this point mutation using MD approaches. Consistently, MD simulations highlighted a clear decrease in the stability of the α-helix during the dimerization of the mutated R154P TWIST1/E12 dimer compared to the wild-type TE complex, which was further confirmed in vitro using immunoassays. Our study demonstrates that MD simulations provide a structural explanation for the loss-of-function associated with the SCS TWIST1 mutation and provides a proof of concept of the predictive value of these MD simulations. This in silico methodology could be used to determine reliable pharmacophore sites, leading to the application of docking approaches in order to identify specific inhibitors of TWIST1 complexes.

[PMID: 9259286]
The TWIST gene maps to 7p21 and mutations in the gene have been reported in the Saethre-Chotzen form of craniosynostosis. The position of the Saethre-Chotzen gene has previously been refined by FISH analysis of four patients carrying balanced translocations involving 7p21 which suggested that it was located between D7S488 and D7S503. We report here that the breakpoints in four translocation patients do not interrupt the coding sequence of the TWIST gene and thus most likely act through a positional effect. Twelve Saethre-Chotzen cases were found to have TWIST mutations. Four of these families had been used as part of the linkage study of the Saethre-Chotzen locus. The mutations detected included missense and nonsense mutations and three cases of a 21 bp duplication. Although phenotypically diagnosed as having Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, three families were found to have a pro250arg mutation of FGFR3.

[PMID: 12221714]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a common autosomal dominant form of craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of the sutures of the calvarial bones of the skull. Most Saethre-Chotzen syndrome cases are caused by haploinsufficiency for the TWIST gene. Mice heterozygous for a null mutation of the Twist gene replicate certain features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, but have not been reported to exhibit craniosynostosis. We demonstrate that Twist heterozygous mice exhibit fusions of the coronal suture and other cranial suture abnormalities, indicating that Twist heterozygous mice constitute a better animal model for Saethre-Chotzen syndrome than was previously appreciated.

[PMID: 19483581]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a syndromic craniosynostosis defined by a genetic mutation affecting the TWIST1 gene on chromosome 7p21. It is typically associated with unicoronal or bicoronal synostosis, eyelid ptosis, dysmorphic external ears, and other variable facial and limb abnormalities. Surgical management of the craniosynostosis addresses the calvarial deformity and may relieve or reduce the risk of intracranial hypertension. The aim of this study was to assess surgical intervention, with particular consideration of the reoperation rate for intracranial hypertension, in Saethre-Chotzen syndrome patients. A retrospective case note analysis was performed on all patients with a confirmed TWIST1 gene abnormality who attended the Oxford Craniofacial Unit over a 15-year period. Each patient's mutation and clinical features were recorded. Surgical intervention and sequelae were examined in greater detail. Thirty-four patients with genetically confirmed Saethre-Chotzen syndrome were identified. All had craniosynostosis (bicoronal, 76 percent; unicoronal, 18 percent; bicoronal and sagittal, 6 percent), and the majority had eyelid ptosis, low frontal hairline, and external ear anomalies. Thirty-one patients had received surgical intervention. Nine of 26 patients (35 percent) with at least 12 months of follow-up after primary intervention and eight of 19 patients (42 percent) with at least 5 years of follow-up developed intracranial hypertension necessitating secondary calvarial surgery. Despite standard surgical intervention, patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have a high rate (35 to 42 percent) of recurrent intracranial hypertension necessitating further surgical expansion. All patients with either bicoronal synostosis or unicoronal synostosis with syndromic features should be screened for TWIST1 mutations, as this confers a greater risk than nonsyndromic synostosis of the same sutures. Regular follow-up throughout the childhood years is essential.

[PMID: 12116251]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a common craniosynostosis syndrome characterized by craniofacial and limb anomalies. Intragenic mutations of the TWIST gene within 7p21 have been identified as a cause of this disorder. There is phenotypic overlap with other craniosynostosis syndromes, and intragenic mutations in FGFR2 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 2) and FGFR3 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) have been demonstrated in the other conditions. Furthermore, complete gene deletions of TWIST have also been found in a significant proportion of patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. We investigated 11 patients clinically identified as having the Saethre-Chotzen phenotype and 4 patients with craniosynostosis but without a clear diagnosis. Of the patients with the Saethre-Chotzen phenotype, four were found to carry the FGFR3 P250R mutation, three were found to be heterozygous for three different novel mutations in the coding region of TWIST, and two were found to have a deletion of one copy of the entire TWIST gene. Developmental delay was a distinguishing feature of the patients with deletions, compared to patients with intragenic mutations of TWIST, in agreement with the results of Johnson et al. [1998: Am J Hum Genet 63:1282-1293]. No mutations were found for the four patients with craniosynostosis without a clear diagnosis. Therefore, 9 of our 11 patients (82%) with the Saethre-Chotzen phenotype had detectable genetic changes in FGFR3 or TWIST. We propose that initial screening for the FGFR3 P250R mutation, followed by sequencing of TWIST and then fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for deletion detection of TWIST, is sufficient to detect mutations in > 80% of patients with the Saethre-Chotzen phenotype.

[PMID: 28220539]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) is an autosomal dominant craniosynostotic disorder characterized by coronal synostosis, facial asymmetry, ptosis, and limb abnormalities. Haploinsufficiency of TWIST1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor is responsible for SCS. Here, we report a 15-month-old male patient with typical clinical features of SCS in addition to developmental delay, which is a rare complication in SCS. He showed a de novo 0.9-Mb microdeletion in 7p21, in which TWIST1, NPMIP13, FERD3L, TWISTNB, and HDAC9 were included. In comparison with previously reported patients, HDAC9 was suggested to contribute to developmental delay in SCS patients with 7p21 mirodeletions.

[PMID: 11772178]
Patients with syndromic craniosynostosis may have associated hearing deficits. A review of hearing loss associated with syndromic craniosynostosis as well as implications of cochlear implantation in the craniosynostosis patients is presented. In the literature, patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have been shown to have conductive or mixed hearing losses. This case report describes a patient with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome caused by a mutation in the TWIST gene who exhibits a severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss.

[PMID: 22628249]
The authors describe on a Brazilian girl with coronal synostosis, facial asymmetry, ptosis, brachydactyly, significant learning difficulties, recurrent scalp infections with marked hair loss, and elevated serum immunoglobulin E. Standard lymphocyte karyotype showed a small additional segment in 7p21[46,XX,add(7)(p21)]. Deletion of the TWIST1 gene, detected by Multiplex Ligation Probe-dependent Amplification (MPLA) and array-CGH, was consistent with phenotype of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Array CGH also showed deletion of four other genes at 7p21.1 (SNX13, PRPS1L1, HD9C9, and FERD3L) and the deletion of six genes (CACNA2D2, C3orf18, HEMK1, CISH, MAPKAPK3, and DOCK3) at 3p21.31. Our case reinforces FERD3L as candidate gene for intellectual disability and suggested that genes located in 3p21.3 can be related to hyper IgE phenotype.

[PMID: 21814570]
The developmental pathways involved in horn development are complex and still poorly understood. Here we report the description of a new dominant inherited syndrome in the bovine Charolais breed that we have named type 2 scurs. Clinical examination revealed that, despite a strong phenotypic variability, all affected individuals show both horn abnormalities similar to classical scurs phenotype and skull interfrontal suture synostosis. Based on a genome-wide linkage analysis using Illumina BovineSNP50 BeadChip genotyping data from 57 half-sib and full-sib progeny, this locus was mapped to a 1.7 Mb interval on bovine chromosome 4. Within this region, the TWIST1 gene encoding a transcription factor was considered as a strong candidate gene since its haploinsufficiency is responsible for the human Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, characterized by skull coronal suture synostosis. Sequencing of the TWIST1 gene identified a c.148_157dup (p.A56RfsX87) frame-shift mutation predicted to completely inactivate this gene. Genotyping 17 scurred and 20 horned founders of our pedigree as well as 48 unrelated horned controls revealed a perfect association between this mutation and the type 2 scurs phenotype. Subsequent genotyping of 32 individuals born from heterozygous parents showed that homozygous mutated progeny are completely absent, which is consistent with the embryonic lethality reported in Drosophila and mouse suffering from TWIST1 complete insufficiency. Finally, data from previous studies on model species and a fine description of type 2 scurs symptoms allowed us to propose different mechanisms to explain the features of this syndrome. In conclusion, this first report on the identification of a potential causal mutation affecting horn development in cattle offers a unique opportunity to better understand horn ontogenesis.

[PMID: 24585549]
Craniosynostosis (CS) is a relatively common birth defect resulting from the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures. Human genetic studies have identified several genes in association with CS. One such gene that has been implicated in both syndromic (Saethre-Chotzen syndrome) and nonsyndromic forms of CS in humans is TWIST1. In this study, a heterozygous Twist1 knock out (Twist1(+/-) ) mouse model was used to study the craniofacial shape changes associated with the partial loss of function. A geometric morphometric approach was used to analyze landmark data derived from microcomputed tomography scans to compare craniofacial shape between 17 Twist1(+/-) mice and 26 of their Twist1(+/+) (wild type) littermate controls at 15 days of age. The results show that despite the purported wide variation in synostotic severity, Twist1(+/-) mice have a consistent pattern of craniofacial dysmorphology affecting all major regions of the skull. Similar to Saethre-Chotzen, the calvarium is acrocephalic and wide with an overall brachycephalic shape. Mutant mice also exhibited a shortened cranial base and a wider and shorted face, consistent with coronal CS associated phenotypes. The results suggest that these differences are at least partially the direct result of the Twist1 haploinsufficiency on the developing craniofacial skeleton. This study provides a quantitative phenotype complement to the developmental and molecular genetic research previously done on Twist1. These results can be used to generate further hypotheses about the effect of Twist1 and premature suture fusion on the entire craniofacial skeleton.

[PMID: 16251895]
The Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) is an autosomal dominant craniosynostosis syndrome with uni- or bilateral coronal synostosis and mild limb deformities. It is caused by loss-of-function mutations of the TWIST 1 gene. In an attempt to delineate functional features separating SCS from Muenke's syndrome, we screened patients presenting with coronal suture synostosis for mutations in the TWIST 1 gene, and for the Pro250Arg mutation in FGFR3. Within a total of 124 independent pedigrees, 39 (71 patients) were identified to carry 25 different mutations of TWIST 1 including 14 novel mutations, to which six whole gene deletions were added. The 71 patients were compared with 42 subjects from 24 pedigrees carrying the Pro250Arg mutation in FGFR3 and 65 subjects from 61 pedigrees without a detectable mutation. Classical SCS associated with a TWIST 1 mutation could be separated phenotypically from the Muenke phenotype on the basis of the following features: low-set frontal hairline, gross ptosis of eyelids, subnormal ear length, dilated parietal foramina, interdigital webbing, and hallux valgus or broad great toe with bifid distal phalanx. Functional differences were even more important: intracranial hypertension as a consequence of early progressive multisutural fusion was a significant problem in SCS only, while mental delay and sensorineural hearing loss were associated with the Muenke's syndrome. Contrary to previous reports, SCS patients with complete loss of one TWIST allele showed normal mental development.

[PMID: 11248247]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is an autosomal dominant skull disorder resulting from premature fusion of coronal sutures (craniosynostosis). It is caused by mutations in the TWIST gene encoding a basic Helix-Loop-Helix transcription factor. Here we report on the identification of a novel mutation affecting a highly conserved residue of the basic domain. Unlike nonsense and missense mutations lying within helices, this mutation does not affect protein stability or heterodimerisation of TWIST with its partner E12. However, it does abolish TWIST binding capacity to a target E-box as efficiently as two missense mutations in the loop-helix II junction. By contrast, elongation of the loop through a 7 amino acid insertion appears not to hamper binding to the DNA target. We conclude that loss of TWIST protein function in Saethre-Chotzen patients can occur at three different levels, namely protein stability, dimerisation, and DNA binding and that the loop-helix II junction is essential for effective protein-DNA interaction.

[PMID: 19952666]
Patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have a heterogeneous phenotype. The purpose of this study was to use the genotypic diagnosis of the authors' series of patients with TWIST1-confirmed Saethre-Chotzen syndrome to describe their natural history and long-term surgical outcomes. A retrospective chart review was performed on patients treated at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia with TWIST1-confirmed Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (n = 22) over 23 years (1985 to 2008). Their phenotype, need for primary cranial vault remodeling surgery, and subsequent need for reoperation were recorded. Genetic records were reviewed to identify each patient's TWIST1 mutation. There were nine female patients and 13 male patients. Ten had bicoronal (45 percent), six had unicoronal (27 percent), and four had multisuture (18 percent) craniosynostosis. One had metopic and another had sagittal craniosynostosis. Average follow-up was 7.6 years (range, birth to 19.6 years). Seventeen (77 percent) underwent initial cranial vault remodeling and 10 (59 percent) required repeat intracranial vault remodeling (Whitaker class IV). One patient required major reoperation with bone grafting (Whitaker class III). Three patients needed minor revision procedures (Whitaker class II). Three patients needed no further intervention (Whitaker class I). The locations of the TWIST1 gene mutations in this study did not correlate to a specific surgical outcome. TWIST1-confirmed Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is heterogeneous and manifests as either mild or severe craniofacial deformities. Our patients with TWIST1-confirmed Saethre-Chotzen syndrome had a reoperation rate of 65 percent for Whitaker class III and IV surgical outcome, and 59 percent required a secondary intracranial procedure for recurrent supraorbital retrusion.

[PMID: 17437280]
The Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is an autosomal, dominantly inherited craniosynostosis caused by mutations in the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor gene TWIST1. This syndrome has hitherto not been associated with an increased risk of cancer. However, recent studies, using a murine breast tumor model, have shown that Twist may act as a key regulator of metastasis and that the gene is overexpressed in subsets of sporadic human breast cancers. Here, we report a novel association between the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome and breast cancer. In 15 Swedish Saethre-Chotzen families, 15 of 29 (52%) women carriers over the age of 25 had developed breast cancer. At least four patients developed breast cancer before 40 years of age, and five between 40 and 50 years of age. The observed cases with breast cancer (n = 15) are significantly higher than expected (n = 0.89), which gives a standardized incidence ratio (SIR) of 16.80 (95% CI 1.54-32.06). Our finding of a high frequency of breast cancer in women with the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome identifies breast cancer as an important and previously unrecognized symptom characteristic of this syndrome. The results strongly suggest that women carriers of this syndrome would benefit from genetic counseling and enrolment in surveillance programs including yearly mammography. Our results also indicate that the TWIST1 gene may be a novel breast cancer susceptibility gene. Additional studies are, however, necessary to reveal the mechanism by which TWIST1 may predispose to early onset breast cancer in Saethre-Chotzen patients.

[PMID: 22569119]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a craniosynostosis syndrome that is rarely diagnosed prenatally. It is caused by cytogenetic deletions or mutations of the TWIST1 gene. We report here a de novo prenatal case with clinically and molecularly well defined Saethre-Chotzen syndrome due to a TWIST1 deletion. This is the first reported case of a deletion encompassing the TWIST1 gene to be diagnosed prenatally. We recommend screening for a deletion of the TWIST1 gene if signs of coronal craniosynostosis with no clear etiology are observed on ultrasound examination.

[PMID: 15880747]
The basic helix-loop-helix protein Twist, a transcriptional repressor, is essential for embryogenesis in both invertebrates and vertebrates. Haploinsufficiency of the human TWIST1 gene, which causes the craniosynostosis disorder Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), is related to failure to repress transcription of CDKN1A (which encodes p21/WAF1/CIP1), promoting osteoblast differentiation. We have examined the functional significance of natural TWIST1 variants present in craniosynostosis patients and in their healthy relatives. Both deletion and duplication variants of the glycine-rich tract Gly5AlaGly5 inhibited E2A (E12/E47)-dependent transcription of CDKN1A to a similar degree as wild-type protein, indicating that the length of this glycine tract is not critical for efficient transcriptional repression. We also evaluated a newly identified heterozygous TWIST1 variant (c.115C>G, encoding p.Arg39Gly), located within a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS), that was present in a child with mild SCS and her clinically unaffected father and grandmother. Unlike wild-type protein, this mutant required cotransfected E12 to localize to the nucleus, indicating that the NLS, including amino acid 39, is essential for nuclear localization; inhibition of E2A-dependent transcription of CDKN1A occurred normally. This analysis further dissects the structure-function relationships of TWIST and corroborates with phenotypic observations of disease expressivity.

[PMID: 14513358]
The majority of patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have mutations in the TWIST gene, which codes for a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor. Of the genetic alterations identified in TWIST, nonsense mutations, frameshifts secondary to small deletions or insertions, and large deletions implicate haploinsufficiency as the pathogenic mechanism. We identified three novel intragenic mutations and six deletions in our patients by using a new strategy to screen for TWIST mutations. We used polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification with subsequent sequencing to identify point mutations and small insertions or deletions in the coding region, and real-time PCR-based gene dosage analysis to identify large deletions encompassing the gene, with confirmation by microsatellite and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses. The size of the deletions can also be analyzed by using the gene dosage assay with "PCR walking" across the critical region. In 55 patients with features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, 11% were detected to have deletions by real-time gene dosage analysis. Two patients had a translocation or inversion at least 260 kb 3' of the gene, suggesting they had position-effect mutations. Of the 37 patients with classic features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, the overall detection rate for TWIST mutations was 68%. The risk for developmental delay in patients with deletions involving the TWIST gene is approximately 90% or eight times more common than in patients with intragenic mutations.

[PMID: 30040876]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), one of the most common forms of syndromic craniosynostosis (premature fusion of the cranial sutures), results from haploinsufficiency of TWIST1, caused by deletions of the entire gene or loss-of-function variants within the coding region. To determine whether non-coding variants also contribute to SCS, we screened 14 genetically undiagnosed SCS patients using targeted capture sequencing, and identified novel single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of TWIST1 in two unrelated SCS cases. We show experimentally that these variants, which create translation start sites in the TWIST1 leader sequence, reduce translation from the main open reading frame (mORF). This is the first demonstration that non-coding SNVs of TWIST1 can cause SCS, and highlights the importance of screening the 5' UTR in clinically diagnosed SCS patients without a coding mutation. Similar 5' UTR variants, particularly of haploinsufficient genes, may represent an under-ascertained cause of monogenic disease.

[PMID: 21811467]
Craniosynostosis, the premature closure of cranial suture, is a pathologic condition that affects 1/2000 live births. Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by craniosynostosis. The Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, which is defined by loss-of-function mutations in the TWIST gene, is the second most prevalent craniosynostosis. Although much of the genetics and phenotypes in craniosynostosis syndromes is understood, less is known about the underlying ossification mechanism during suture closure. We have previously demonstrated that physiological closure of the posterior frontal suture occurs through endochondral ossification. Moreover, we revealed that antagonizing canonical Wnt-signaling in the sagittal suture leads to endochondral ossification of the suture mesenchyme and sagittal synostosis, presumably by inhibiting Twist1. Classic Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is characterized by coronal synostosis, and the haploinsufficient Twist1(+/-) mice represents a suitable model for studying this syndrome. Thus, we seeked to understand the underlying ossification process in coronal craniosynostosis in Twist1(+/-) mice. Our data indicate that coronal suture closure in Twist1(+/-) mice occurs between postnatal day 9 and 13 by endochondral ossification, as shown by histology, gene expression analysis, and immunohistochemistry. In conclusion, this study reveals that coronal craniosynostosis in Twist1(+/-) mice occurs through endochondral ossification. Moreover, it suggests that haploinsufficiency of Twist1 gene, a target of canonical Wnt-signaling, and inhibitor of chondrogenesis, mimics conditions of inactive canonical Wnt-signaling leading to craniosynostosis.

[PMID: 19860490]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly type III) is a craniosynostosis syndrome inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Although similar to the other craniosynostosis syndromes in its clinical presentation, this syndrome is caused by a mutation in the TWIST1 gene. The TWIST1 gene product is a transcription factor containing a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain important in the development of the head and limbs. Clinical features of this syndrome include unilateral or bilateral coronal synostosis, ptosis, low-set ears, hearing loss, hypertelorism, maxillary hypoplasia, deviated nasal septum, broad great toes, clinodactyly, and syndactyly. We report a young girl with clinical features of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome who has a previously undescribed sequence variant in the TWIST1 gene, corresponding to p.R191M. The location of the altered amino acid in the Twist-box of TWIST1, the high conservation of this amino acid between different species, and the phenotype of the child all support a pathogenic role for this novel TWIST1 sequence alteration.

[PMID: 29663378]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), associated with TWIST-1 mutations, is characterized by premature fusion of cranial sutures. TWIST-1 haploinsufficiency, leads to alterations in suture mesenchyme cellular gene expression patterns, resulting in aberrant osteogenesis and craniosynostosis. We analyzed the expression of the TWIST-1 target, Tyrosine kinase receptor c-ros-oncogene 1 (C-ROS-1) in TWIST-1 haploinsufficient calvarial cells derived from SCS patients and calvaria of Twist-1<sup>del/+</sup> mutant mice and found it to be highly expressed when compared to TWIST-1 wild-type controls. Knock-down of C-ROS-1 expression in TWIST-1 haploinsufficient calvarial cells derived from SCS patients was associated with decreased capacity for osteogenic differentiation in vitro. Furthermore, treatment of human SCS calvarial cells with the tyrosine kinase chemical inhibitor, Crizotinib, resulted in reduced C-ROS-1 activity and the osteogenic potential of human SCS calvarial cells with minor effects on cell viability or proliferation. Cultured human SCS calvarial cells treated with Crizotinib exhibited a dose-dependent decrease in alkaline phosphatase activity and mineral deposition, with an associated decrease in expression levels of Runt-related transcription factor 2 and OSTEOPONTIN, with reduced PI3K/Akt signalling in vitro. Furthermore, Crizotinib treatment resulted in reduced BMP-2 mediated bone formation potential of whole Twist-1<sup>del/+</sup> mutant mouse calvaria organotypic cultures. Collectively, these results suggest that C-ROS-1 promotes osteogenic differentiation of TWIST-1 haploinsufficient calvarial osteogenic progenitor cells. Furthermore, the aberrant osteogenic potential of these cells is inhibited by the reduction of C-ROS-1. Therefore, targeting C-ROS-1 with a pharmacological agent, such as Crizotinib, may serve as a novel therapeutic strategy to alleviate craniosynostosis associated with aberrant TWIST-1 function.

[PMID: 20125191]
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterised by facial dysmorphisms, growth and psychomotor development delay, and skeletal defects. The known genetic causes are point mutations or deletions of the CREBBP (50-60%) and EP300 (5%) genes. To detect chromosomal rearrangements indicating novel positional candidate RSTS genes, we used a-CGH to study 26 patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for RSTS who were negative at fluorescence in situ hybridisation analyses of the CREBBP and EP300 regions, and direct sequencing analyses of the CREBBP gene. We found seven imbalances (27%): four de novo and three inherited rearrangements not reported among the copy number variants. A de novo 7p21.1 deletion of 500 kb included the TWIST1 gene, a suggested candidate for RSTS that is responsible for the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, an entity that enters in differential diagnosis with RSTS. A similar issue of differential diagnosis was raised by a large 4.3 Mb 2q22.3q23.1 deletion encompassing ZEB2, the gene responsible for the Mowat-Wilson syndrome, whose signs may overlap with RSTS. Positional candidate genes could not be sought in the remaining pathogenetic imbalances, because of the size of the involved region (a 9 Mb 2q24.3q31.1 deletion) and/or the relative paucity of suitable genes (a 5 Mb 3p13p12.3 duplication). One of the inherited rearrangements, the 17q11.2 379Kb duplication, represents the reciprocal event of the deletion underlying an overgrowth syndrome, both being mediated by the NF1-REP-P1 and REP-P2 sub-duplicons. The contribution of this and the other detected CNVs to the clinical RSTS phenotype is difficult to assess.

[PMID: 19863427]
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is one of the most common craniosynostosis syndromes. It is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder with variable expression that is caused by germline mutations in the TWIST1 gene or more rarely in the FGFR2 or FGFR3 genes. We have previously reported that patients with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome have an increased risk of developing breast cancer. Here we have analysed a cohort of 26 women with BRCA1/2-negative hereditary breast cancer to study whether a proportion of these families might have mutations in Saethre-Chotzen-associated genes. DNA sequence analysis of TWIST1 showed no pathogenic mutations in the coding sequence in any of the 26 patients. MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification)-analysis also showed no alterations in copy numbers in any of the craniofacial disorder genes MSX2, ALX4, RUNX2, EFNB1, TWIST1, FGFR1, FGFR2,FGFR3, or FGFR4. Taken together, our findings indicate that mutations in Saethre-Chotzen-associated genes are uncommon or absent in BRCA1/2-negative patients with hereditary breast cancer.