[PMID: 15929462]
The annual incidence of sudden cardiac death in young athletes is approximately 1 in 200,000. The most common causes include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy. These genetic disorders typically manifest in the second decade of life and have the potential for sudden death as the first symptom. Medical care providers must be aware of these disease entities when evaluating patients with seizures, syncope, and/or palpitations. The purpose of this article is to describe their genetics, clinical presentation, and diagnosis.

[PMID: 21858983]
Cardiovascular diseases are the cause of death in up to 90% of athletes. The most frequent cause of death in young athletes is a sudden cardiac death (SCD). Causes of SCD among athletes are strongly correlated with age. In young athletes (< 35 years), the leading causes are congenital cardiac diseases, particularly hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and congenital coronary artery anomalies. By contrast, most of deaths in older athletes (< 35 years) are due to coronary artery disease. Although there is no possibility to decrease the risk of SCD to "zero", especially in sport competitions, clear recommendations, if available, for cardiovascular evaluation before athletic participation and side effects of sports activities, would minimize the frequency of SCD. If a specific condition of the cardiovascular system is diagnosed, it is necessary to establish the risk of SCD associated with a continual involvement in physical activities and competitive sports, and to define clearly disqualification criteria for each individual athlete.

[PMID: 11886323]
Throughout the past 40 years, a vast and sometimes contradictory literature has accumulated regarding hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a genetic cardiac disease caused by a variety of mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins and characterized by a broad and expanding clinical spectrum. To clarify and summarize the relevant clinical issues and to profile rapidly evolving concepts regarding HCM. Systematic analysis of the relevant HCM literature, accessed through MEDLINE (1966-2000), bibliographies, and interactions with investigators. Diverse information was assimilated into a rigorous and objective contemporary description of HCM, affording greatest weight to prospective, controlled, and evidence-based studies. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a relatively common genetic cardiac disease (1:500 in the general population) that is heterogeneous with respect to disease-causing mutations, presentation, prognosis, and treatment strategies. Visibility attached to HCM relates largely to its recognition as the most common cause of sudden death in the young (including competitive athletes). Clinical diagnosis is by 2-dimensional echocardiographic identification of otherwise unexplained left ventricular wall thickening in the presence of a nondilated cavity. Overall, HCM confers an annual mortality rate of about 1% and in most patients is compatible with little or no disability and normal life expectancy. Subsets with higher mortality or morbidity are linked to the complications of sudden death, progressive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation with embolic stroke. Treatment strategies depend on appropriate patient selection, including drug treatment for exertional dyspnea (beta-blockers, verapamil, disopyramide) and the septal myotomy-myectomy operation, which is the standard of care for severe refractory symptoms associated with marked outflow obstruction; alcohol septal ablation and pacing are alternatives to surgery for selected patients. High-risk patients may be treated effectively for sudden death prevention with the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. Substantial understanding has evolved regarding the epidemiology and clinical course of HCM, as well as novel treatment strategies that may alter its natural history. An appreciation that HCM, although an important cause of death and disability at all ages, does not invariably convey ominous prognosis and is compatible with normal longevity should dictate a large measure of reassurance for many patients.

[PMID: 12793636]
Sudden cardiac deaths in athletes are usually due to underlying cardiovascular disease. The final pathway is usually ventricular fibrillation following hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and coronary artery anomalies in young persons below the age of 30 years. Sudden cardiac death in young is rare but remains as a source of concern. A postmortem study was conducted to ascertain the cardiac causes of sudden death in persons below the age group 30 years following exercise in games or otherwise. Out of 15 cases in autopsy finding, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (n=7) was the commonest cause followed by coronary artery anomalies (n=4). Sudden unexpected death is a source of concern and careful screening of history and physical examination for potential athletes should identify majority of people at risk.

[PMID: 12651044]
The goal of this study was to determine the impact of race on identification of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Sudden death in young competitive athletes is due to a variety of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and, most commonly, HCM. These catastrophes have become an important issue for African Americans, although HCM has been previously regarded as rare in this segment of the U.S. population. We studied the relationship of race to the prevalence of CVDs causing sudden death in our national athlete registry, and compared these findings with a representative multicenter hospital-based cohort of patients with HCM. Of 584 athlete deaths, 286 were documented to be due to CVD at ages 17 +/- 3 years; 156 (55%) were white, and 120 (42%) were African American. Most were male (90%), and 67% participated in basketball and football. Among the 286 cardiovascular deaths, most were due to HCM (n = 102; 36%) or anomalous coronary artery of wrong sinus origin (n = 37; 13%). Of the athletes who died of HCM, 42 (41%) were white, but 56 (55%) were African American. In contrast, of 1,986 clinically identified HCM patients, only 158 (8%) were African American (p < 0.001). In this autopsy series, HCM represented a common cause of sudden death in young and previously undiagnosed African American male athletes, in sharp contrast with the infrequent clinical identification of HCM in a hospital-based population (i.e., by seven-fold). This discrepancy suggests that many HCM cases go unrecognized in the African American community, underscoring the need for enhanced clinical recognition of HCM to create the opportunity for preventive measures to be employed in high-risk patients with this complex disease.

[PMID: 21234187]
Sudden death in the young is rare. About 25% of cases occur during sports. Most young people with sudden cardiac death (SCD) have underlying heart disease, with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and coronary artery anomalies being commonest in most series. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia and long QT syndrome are the most common primary arrhythmic causes of SCD. It is estimated that early cardiopulmonary resuscitation and widespread availability of automatic external defibrillators could prevent about a quarter of pediatric sudden deaths.

[PMID: 6686529]
The causes of sudden, unexpected death in highly-conditioned competitive athletes are summarized. In the vast majority of young athletes (less than 35 years of age) sudden death is due to underlying structural cardiovascular disease. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy appears to be the most common cause of such deaths and may account for about one-half of the sudden deaths in a youthful athletic population. Cardiovascular abnormalities that appear to be less frequent important causes of sudden death include anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the anterior sinus of Valsalva, ruptured aorta (due to cystic medial necrosis), idiopathic concentric left ventricular hypertrophy and coronary artery atherosclerosis. Other diseases which are probably particularly uncommon causes of sudden death in the young athlete include mitral valve prolapse, aortic valvular stenosis, acute myocarditis, QT interval prolongation syndromes, hypoplasia of the coronary arteries or sarcoidosis. Cardiovascular disease in young athletes is usually unsuspected during life. In only about 25% of those competitive athletes who die suddenly is underlying disease identified prior to participation and rarely is the correct clinical diagnosis made. In contrast, when sudden death occurs in older competitive or recreational athletes (over 35 years of age) it is usually due to coronary artery disease.

[PMID: 20962423]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young people, including trained athletes. It is now 30 years since the introduction of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) to clinical cardiovascular practice and coronary artery disease, and now device therapy represents the most significant therapeutic innovation and the only definitive strategy for prolonging the life of HCM patients. ICDs have proved effective in preventing SCD in young HCM patients with appropriate intervention rates of 11% for secondary and 4% for primary prevention, despite massive left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, LV outflow obstruction, diastolic dysfunction or microvascular ischemia. Targeting candidates for prophylactic ICD therapy can be complex, compounded by the unpredictability of the arrhythmogenic substrate, the absence of a dominant risk factor, and difficulty in assembling randomized trials. However, a single major risk factor is often sufficient to justify an ICD, although additional markers and other disease features can resolve ambiguous decision-making. Nevertheless, the absence of all risk factors does not convey absolute immunity to SCD. The current risk factor algorithm, when combined with a measure of individual physician judgment (and patient autonomy considerations), is an effective guide to identifying high-risk HCM patients. ICDs have altered the natural history of HCM for many patients and provided an opportunity to achieve many decades of productive life, and the potential for normal or near-normal longevity. Indeed, prevention of SCD has now become a new paradigm in the management of HCM.

[PMID: 7788945]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause of death in the young, particularly in young competitive athletes. Death often occurs suddenly in asymptomatic, apparently healthy individuals. Several clinical parameters as well as genetic factors have been characterized that can identify those HCM patients who are at high risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD). The clinical parameters that have some predictive values for SCD in HCM patients are the following: a prior history of SCD, a family history of SCD, history of syncope, symptomatic ventricular tachycardia on Holter monitoring, inducible ventricular tachycardia during electrophysiologic studies, and myocardial ischemia in children with HCM. Recent identification of mutations in the beta myosin heavy chain gene and genotype-phenotype correlation in HCM patients have shown that the beta myosin heavy chain mutations are also prognosticators in HCM families. Several mutations such as Arg403Gln and Arg719Gln are associated with a high incidence of SCD, while Leu908Val mutation is associated with a benign course and a low incidence of SCD in HCM families. Additional genetic factors such as a polymorphism in angiotensin-converting enzyme I gene may also contribute to a high incidence of SCD in HCM families. Identification and characterization of HCM patients at high risk for SCD provide the opportunity to render prophylactic therapeutic interventions, such as implantation of defibrillators, in these individuals.

[PMID: 17157688]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is one of the most common inherited primary cardiac disorders and the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young athletes. With advances in technology, it is now recognized that HCM affects individuals of all ages. Many patients with HCM will have a benign course with few symptoms. Some patients, however, possess risk factors that greatly increase the likelihood of sudden death if their disease remains undiagnosed. Therefore, it is imperative that emergency physicians be familiar with the symptoms and typical electrocardiogram manifestations of HCM. Three illustrative cases are presented with a review of the disease.

[PMID: 18384577]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young people, including trained athletes. The implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), although initially designed as a treatment for older patients with coronary artery disease, has more recently proved to be a safe and effective therapeutic intervention in young patients with HCM, both for primary or secondary prevention of sudden death. The largest such report of >500 patients showed that the ICD intervened appropriately to abort ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation (VT/VF) in 20% of patients over an average follow-up period of only 3.7 years, at a rate of about 4% per year in those patients implanted prophylactically, and often with considerable delays of up to 10 years. Extensive experience with high-risk HCM patients showed that appropriate device discharges for VT/VF occur with similar frequency in patients with 1, 2, or > or = 3 noninvasive risk markers. Despite the extreme morphology characteristic of HCM, often with massive degrees of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and/or LV outflow tract obstruction, ICDs performed in a highly effective fashion, with failure to convert life-threatening arrhythmias extraordinarily rare. In conclusion, in a large high-risk HCM cohort, ICD interventions for life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias were frequent and highly effective in restoring normal rhythm. An important proportion of ICD discharges occurred in primary prevention patients with only one risk factor. Therefore, a single marker of high risk may represent sufficient evidence to justify the recommendation for a prophylactic ICD in selected patients with HCM.

[PMID: 18325444]
This study sought to determine the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in elite athletes. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is considered to be the most common cause of exercise-related sudden death in young athletes. The prevalence of HCM in elite athletes has never been reported but has important implications with regard to pre-participation screening for the disorder. Between 1996 and 2006, 3,500 asymptomatic elite athletes (75% male) with a mean age of 20.5 +/- 5.8 years (range 14 to 35 years) underwent 12-lead electrocardiography and 2-dimensional echocardiography. None had a known family history of HCM. Of the 3,500 athletes, 53 (1.5%) had left ventricular hypertrophy (mean 13.6 +/- 0.9, range 13 to 16), and of these 50 had a dilated left ventricular cavity with normal diastolic function to indicate physiological left ventricular hypertrophy. Three (0.08%) athletes with left ventricular hypertrophy had a nondilated left ventricular cavity and associated deep T-wave inversion that could have been consistent with HCM. However, none of the 3 athletes had any other phenotypic features of HCM on further noninvasive testing and none had first-degree relatives with features of HCM. One of the 3 athletes agreed to detrain for 12 weeks, which showed resolution of electrocardiography and echocardiographic changes confirming physiologic left ventricular hypertrophy. The prevalence of HCM in highly trained athletes is extremely rare. Structural and functional changes associated with HCM naturally select out most individuals from competitive sports. Screening athletes with echocardiography is not cost effective. However, electrocardiography is useful in selecting out those individuals who may have pathological left ventricular hypertrophy for subsequent echocardiography.

[PMID: 19336382]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is considered a principal cause of sudden unexpected cardiac death in young athletes. However, a number of demographic features observed in these deaths are not consistent with the diagnosis. All of these characteristics instead share in common a propensity for ventricular hypertrophy, implying that these deaths may reflect electrical stability in the extremely rare athlete with exaggerated myocardial hypertrophy in response to sports training. This review provides an evidence-based line of reasoning that supports this concept.

[PMID: 22846097]
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is an uncommon but devastating potential consequence of participation in competitive sport. It is seen in adolescent and young adult athletes. The most common cause of this, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), is a genetic disorder responsible for more than a third of cases and is manageable. Screening is undertaken for HCM, using differing strategies in Europe and North America. Screening and early diagnosis have reduced the mortality rate but has come at a significant economic cost. The evidence and relevant arguments for and against screening are presented together with management strategies as reflected by an illustrative case.

[PMID: 16352133]
The most common cause of sudden cardiac death in individuals aged less than 35 years, including competitive athletes, is the inherited disorder hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Until recently, no therapeutic intervention had been identified to prevent sudden death in HCM. This case report highlights the role of the implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in preventing sudden death in patients with HCM. The report highlights the importance of risk stratification in patients with HCM in order to identify those individuals who would most likely benefit from ICD therapy. The ICD implantation is now the treatment of choice in preventing sudden death in selected (highest risk) populations with HCM. In the future, understanding the molecular basis of sudden death in HCM may identify potential new gene-based therapeutic strategies.

[PMID: 20378375]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is regarded as the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young people (including trained athletes). Introduction of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators to the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patient population represents a new paradigm for clinical practice and perhaps the most significant advance in the management of this disease to date. Implantable defibrillators offer the only proven protection against sudden death by virtue of effectively terminating ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation and, in the process, altering the natural history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and providing the potential opportunity of normal or near-normal longevity for many patients. However, targeting the most appropriate candidates for prophylactic device therapy can be complex, compounded by the unpredictability of the underlying arrhythmogenic substrate, absence of a single dominant and quantitative risk marker in this heterogeneous disease, and the historical difficulty in assembling sufficiently powered prospective and randomized trials in large patient populations. Nevertheless, the current risk factor algorithm, when combined with a measure of individual physician judgment, is an effective strategy for identifying high-risk patients. Indeed, prevention of sudden death has now become an integral, albeit challenging, component of overall hypertrophic cardiomyopathy management.

[PMID: 20559995]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is regarded as the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young people (including trained athletes). However, assessing sudden death (SD) risk and identifying the most appropriate candidates for prophylactic device therapy is a complex process compounded by the unpredictability of the underlying arrhythmogenic substrate, absence of a single dominant and quantitative risk maker for this heterogeneous disease, and also the difficulty encountered in assembling sufficiently powered prospective and randomized trials in large patient populations. Patients with multiple risk factors and most young patients with one strong and unequivocal risk marker can be considered candidates for primary prevention defibrillators. Despite certain limitations, the current risk factor algorithm (when combined with a measure of individual physician judgment) has proved to be an effective strategy for targeting high-risk status. This approach has served the HCM patient population well, as evidenced by the significant appropriate defibrillator intervention rates, although a very small proportion of patients without conventional risk factors may also be at risk for SD. Indeed, the introduction of implantable defibrillators to the HCM patient population represents a new paradigm for clinical practice, offering the only proven protection against SD by virtue of effectively terminating ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation. In the process, implantable defibrillators have altered the natural history of HCM, potentially providing the opportunity of normal or near-normal longevity for many patients. Prevention of SD is now an integral, albeit challenging, component of HCM management.

[PMID: 6446987]
The causes of sudden and unexpected death in 29 highly conditioned, competitive athletes, ages 13-30 years, are summarized. Sudden death occurred during or just after severe exertion on the athletic field in 22 of the 29 athletes. Structural cardiovascular abnormalities were identified at necropsy in 28 of the 29 athletes (97%), and in 22 (76%) were almost certainly the cause of death. The most common cause of death in this series was hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which was present in 14 athletes. Other cardiovascular abnormalities that occurred in more than one athlete were anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the right (anterior) sinus of Valsalva, idiopathic concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, coronary heart disease and ruptured aorta. Cardiac disease was suspected during life in only seven of the 29 patients, and in only two of the seven was the correct diagnosis made clinically. Hence, in this series of young athletes, sudden death was usually due to structural cardiovascular disease, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was a frequent cause of sudden death; atherosclerotic coronary heart disease was relatively uncommon.

[PMID: 1554567]
Sudden death in young athletes is a rare and devastating event. The most frequent causes of sudden death in this group are hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, anomalous coronary artery, and Marfan syndrome. This article describes the physiology of exercise and the pathophysiology associated with the most frequent causes as well as some of the less common causes of sudden death in young athletes. Identification of youth who may be at risk should be a priority for health care practitioners, and suggestions for recognizing and counseling affected athletes are therefore included.

[PMID: 22874472]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a common inherited cardiovascular disease present in one in 500 of the general population. It is caused by more than 1400 mutations in 11 or more genes encoding proteins of the cardiac sarcomere. Although hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most frequent cause of sudden death in young people (including trained athletes), and can lead to functional disability from heart failure and stroke, the majority of affected individuals probably remain undiagnosed and many do not experience greatly reduced life expectancy or substantial symptoms. Clinical diagnosis is based on otherwise unexplained left-ventricular hypertrophy identified by echocardiography or cardiovascular MRI. While presenting with a heterogeneous clinical profile and complex pathophysiology, effective treatment strategies are available, including implantable defibrillators to prevent sudden death, drugs and surgical myectomy (or, alternatively, alcohol septal ablation) for relief of outflow obstruction and symptoms of heart failure, and pharmacological strategies (and possibly radiofrequency ablation) to control atrial fibrillation and prevent embolic stroke. A subgroup of patients with genetic mutations but without left-ventricular hypertrophy has emerged, with unresolved natural history. Now, after more than 50 years, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has been transformed from a rare and largely untreatable disorder to a common genetic disease with management strategies that permit realistic aspirations for restored quality of life and advanced longevity.

[PMID: 8667563]
To develop clinical, demographic, and pathological profiles of young competitive athletes who died suddenly. Systematic evaluation of clinical information and circumstances associated with sudden deaths; interviews with family members, witnesses, and coaches; and analyses of postmortem anatomic, microscopic, and toxicologic data. A total of 158 sudden deaths that occurred in trained athletes throughout the United States from 1985 through 1995 were analyzed. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Characteristics and probable cause of death. Of 158 sudden deaths among athletes, 24 (15%) were explained by noncardiovascular causes. Among the 134 athletes who had cardiovascular causes of sudden death, the median age was 17 years (range, 12-40 years), 120 (90%) were male, 70 (52%) were white, and 59 (44%) were black. The most common competitive sports involved were basketball (47 cases) and football (45 cases), together accounting for 68% of sudden deaths. A total of 121 athletes (90%) collapsed during or immediately after a training session (78 cases) or a formal athletic contest (43 cases), with 80 deaths (63%) occurring between 3 PM and 9 PM. The most common structural cardiovascular diseases identified at autopsy as the primary cause of death were hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (48 athletes [36%]), which was disproportionately prevalent in black athletes compared with white athletes (48% vs 26% of deaths; P = .01), and malformations involving anomalous coronary artery origin (17 athletes [13%]). Of 115 athletes who had a standard preparticipation medical evaluation, only 4 (3%) were suspected of having cardiovascular disease, and the cardiovascular abnormality responsible for sudden death was correctly identified in only 1 athlete (0.9%). Sudden death in young competitive athletes usually is precipitated by physical activity and may be due to a heterogeneous spectrum of cardiovascular disease, most commonly hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Preparticipation screening appeared to be of limited value in identification of underlying cardiovascular abnormalities.

[PMID: 10798028]
Sudden cardiac death in athletes is usually due to underlying cardiovascular disease. In the young less than 30 years of age, the most common abnormality is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, followed by congenital coronary artery anomalies. The final common pathway is usually ventricular fibrillation. Sudden cardiac death in the young is rare but remains a source of concern. A careful screening history and physical examination, especially for potential athletes, should identify the majority of young people at risk.

[PMID: 21160605]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common genetic cardiovascular disease that affects the left ventricle. HCM can appear at any age, with the majority of the patients remaining clinically stable. When patients complain of symptoms, these include: dyspnea, dizziness, syncope and angina. HCM can lead to sudden cardiac death (SCD), mainly due to ventricular tachyarrhythmia or ventricular tachycardia. High-risk patients benefit from implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction is not a rare feature in HCM, especially in symptomatic patients, and procedures that abolish that obstruction provide positive and consistent results that can improve long-term survival. HCM is the most common cause of sudden death in young competitive athletes and preparticipation screening programs have to be implemented to avoid these tragic fatalities. The structure of these programs is a matter of large debate. Worldwide registries are necessary to identify the full extent of HCM-related SCD.

[PMID: 19575162]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the main cause of sudden unexpected death in the young and especially in young athletes with an incidence up to 2.3 per 100,000 athletes and year. Risk stratification models including patient history (syncope, familial risk of sudden death) and findings in noninvasive tests (nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, abnormal blood pressure response during exercise, maximum left ventricular wall thickness > or = 30 mm) have been developed in order to estimate the risk of individual patients. Echocardiographic parameters are helpful in distinguishing HCM from athlete's heart. Definitive diagnosis of HCM implicates disqualification from competitive sports resulting in a significant reduction of sudden cardiac death due to HCM during sports competition. This positive development should lead to a widespread preparticipation screening of athletes including historical, clinical, and electrocardiographic examination. At least in borderline findings and symptomatic athletes, an additional echocardiogram should be performed in order to minimize or better exclude the risk of sudden cardiac death.

[PMID: 9858396]
The athlete projects the ultimate image of well-being in the health status spectrum. Nevertheless, exercise-related sudden cardiac death (SCD) is an uncommon, yet tragic, occurrence. Exercise-related SCD is defined by symptoms that arise within 1 hour of participation in sport. The major mechanisms involved in exercise-related SCD are related to haemodynamic and electrophysiological changes brought about by exercise in the susceptible individual. Fatal arrhythmia seems to be the most common mechanism of death. Between 1 and 5 cases of SCD per 1 million athletes occur annually. In young athletes (<35 years old), the majority of these cases are caused by defined and hereditary cardiovascular disorders. Among other aetiologies, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and coronary artery anomalies are most common in this group. In older athletes (>35 years old), sudden death is usually associated with atherosclerotic cardiac disease. A problem for identifying athletes at risk for SCD is that the athlete's heart undergoes adaptive changes in response to regular physical exercise. Alterations in cardiac function influence the physical examination, the electrocardiogram and the echocardiogram. Because of these characteristic 'abnormalities' of the athlete's heart, it is often difficult to distinguish physiological adaptations from pathophysiological processes. Although studies and observations have helped to clarify the cardiovascular pathology responsible for SCD in young, apparently healthy individuals, effective methods for preventing SCD and identifying and screening athletes at risk remain elusive. Problems with routine comprehensive screening of athletes include the limitations inherent in the predictive value of available diagnostic procedures and the cost of testing large populations. The variation from normal cardiac physiology found within the athletic population and the rarity of SCD in athletes means that elaborate screening to determine individuals at risk is neither practical nor cost effective. A thorough assessment of pertinent family and medical histories, cardiac auscultation of young athletes, evaluation of exercise-induced symptoms and education of older athletes to the symptoms of cardiac ischaemia are all essential to primary prevention of SCD in the athletic population. Until reliable methods can accurately identify those athletes at risk for SCD, broad recommendations are available to help guide the management and participation in sports of athletes with cardiovascular disease.

[PMID: 9636339]
Nontraumatic sudden death in young athletes is always disturbing, as apparently invincible athletes, become, without warning, victims of silent heart disease. Despite public perception to the contrary, sudden death in young athletes is exceedingly rare. It most commonly occurs in male athletes, who have estimated death rates nearly fivefold greater than the rates of female athletes. Congenital cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of non-traumatic sudden athletic death, with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy being the most common cause. Screening athletes for disorders capable of provoking sudden death is a challenge because of the low prevalence of disease, and the cost and limitations of available screening tests. Current recommendations for cardiovascular screening call for a careful history and physical examination performed by a knowledgeable health care provider. Specialized testing is recommended only in cases that warrant further evaluation.

[PMID: 17853713]
Sudden cardiac death in athletes is a growing problem, despite the huge existing knowledge in medicine and sports. In response to vigorous physical activity, the body undergoes profound morphologic and functional changes. These changes are usually healthy, but sometimes may gravitate to some cardiac diseases. But still, most saudden cardiac deaths are due to previous unknown diseases. The most common cause of sudden cardiac death in athletes is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Other reasons are congenital coronary artery anomalies, nivocarditis, dilatative cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy of the right ventricle, sarcoidosis, mitral valve prolapse, aortic valve stenosis, atherosclerosis, long QT syndrome, and blunt impact to the chest. Bearing in mind the above mentioned, more frequent physical examinations of athletes are recommended.

[PMID: 8198037]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HC) is probably the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in youthful athletes, and this diagnosis has represented a contraindication to continued participation in competitive sports. Less well appreciated is the fact that within the clinical spectrum of HC are patients who, despite having this disease, have been able to undertake particularly intensive and often extraordinary levels of training for sports competition over many years without dying suddenly. Fourteen such patients (13 men and 1 woman, aged 30 to 66 years [mean 43]) form the present study group. HC was initially identified at 24 to 57 years of age (mean 34), usually under fortuitous circumstances. Patients most often competed in distance running (including the marathon, 7), but also in swimming, triathalon, basketball, and football. The duration of training ranged from 6 to 22 years (mean 15) and 5 continue to train and compete actively. The magnitude of training, competition, and achievement was considerable in most patients; 12 of the 14 performed either at the national, collegiate or professional level in their sport, completed numerous marathon and triathalon events, or sustained particularly rigorous training regimens of > or = 50 miles/week. Echocardiographic studies demonstrated a left ventricular wall thickness of 18 to 28 mm (mean 20) in most patients (12 of 14) having a relatively localized pattern of ventricular septal hypertrophy. It is possible for some patients with HC to tolerate particularly intense athletic training and competition for many years, and even maintain high levels of achievement without incurring symptoms and disease progression or dying suddenly.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 17322504]
Most cases of sudden cardiac death in young athletes (<35 years) are caused by inherited cardiomyopathies, notably hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 17961794]
Cardiovascular disease is the most frequent cause of death in young athletes, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the single most common condition responsible for these tragedies. Detection of diseases such as HCM can be achieved in general athlete populations through preparticipation screening, and most effectively if testing with electrocardiography or echocardiography is incorporated into the process. Criteria for disqualification and eligibility, based on identified cardiovascular abnormalities, are available in consensus panel guidelines for both United States and European athletes. Removal from intense training and competition is recommended for athletes with HCM, some of whom may ultimately be judged to be at unacceptably high risk for sudden death and eligible for prophylactic defibrillator implantation.

[PMID: 21716109]
This article will review the incidence and most common causes of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in healthy young adults, including competitive athletes, as well as members of the general population. SCD is rare but devastating in a young individual. The incidence of SCD in the young ranges from as low as 0.4 per 100,000 patient-years to as high as 13.4 per 100,000 patient-years. SCD occurs in all populations, not only in athletes. Whether SCD is more common in athletes is the cause of continued debate stemming from conflicting data. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common underlying cause of SCD in young athletes in most series; however, in nonathletic populations, the underlying causes of SCD are more varied.

[PMID: 11043079]
Sudden cardiac death of a young competitive athlete is a rare but tragic event. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and coronary artery anomalies are the most frequent causes. Most cardiovascular abnormalities go unrecognized until the time of death owing to the lack of preceding signs or symptoms suggestive of disease. Physicians responsible for the care of athletes should be familiar with the various causes of sudden cardiac death, the physiologic adaptations seen in so-called athlete's heart, and existing cardiovascular screening guidelines. The preparticipation evaluation, although it has limitations, is the major instrument readily available for prevention of sudden cardiac death. Effort should be made to follow established consensus guidelines.

[PMID: 1450882]
Sudden death in athletes is a rare but tragic occurrence. Congenital cardiovascular abnormalities, usually asymptomatic and often undiagnosed during life, are the main causes in young athletes. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and congenital coronary anomalies are the most commonly occurring disorders. Idiopathic concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (non-physiological), arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia and Marfan's syndrome with aortic rupture have also been implicated. Rarer causes include mitral valve prolapse and myocarditis. Coronary atherosclerosis is the major cause in older, and occasionally in younger athletes. Those involved in the medical care of athletes should be aware of the potential causes of sudden death in these groups. Symptomatic athletes should be fully investigated. Screening programmes are probably not justified on a cost effective basis.

[PMID: 23681420]
The authors hypothesized that prospective, systematic Internet searches could identify occurrences of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in athletes and would be useful for establishing a system of active surveillance. Weekly advanced Google searches of the Internet were conducted for cases of SCD in young athletes during a 12-month period (2007-2008). Athletes ages 11-30 years who collapsed during a game, practice, or within an hour of exercise were included in the study. Individuals with known histories of cardiac issues and events occurring outside the United States were excluded. Verification of SCD was by autopsy reports and death certificates from county coroner offices and vital record agencies. Initially, 71 events were identified. Verification for the cause of death by coroner reports was possible in 45 cases, 43 (96 %) of which were confirmed to be SCDs. A total of 69 individuals 11-30 years of age (mean 17 ± 5 years) died suddenly of cardiovascular causes while participating in 15 different organized sports and a variety of nonorganized physical activities. The most common cause of death was hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (30 %), followed by coronary artery anomalies (9 %), and myocarditis (9 %). The incidence of athlete SCD, the types of sports involved, and the cardiac causes of death in our study were comparable with those of previous reports. Readily available Internet searches have the potential to be a powerful tool for identifying occurrences of athlete SCD. An active surveillance system using Google searches followed by coroner report verification can provide important epidemiologic and clinical information.