[PMID: 30045955]
To investigate the effect of directional current steering and short pulse stimulation in the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus (VIM) on stimulation-induced side effects in patients with essential tremor. We recruited 8 patients with essential tremor in a stable postoperative condition (>3 months after electrode implantation of deep brain stimulation [DBS] electrodes) with segmented contacts implanted in the VIM. Tremor severity on acute stimulation was assessed by the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale. Cerebellar impairment was evaluated with the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale. Patients rated paresthesia intensity with a visual analog scale. In all patients, tremor was reduced to the same extent by VIM stimulation regardless of pulse width using energy dose-equivalent amplitudes. Short pulse stimulation diminished stimulation-induced ataxia of the upper extremities and paresthesia compared with conventional parameters. Directional steering with monopolar stimulation of single segments successfully suppressed tremor but also induced ataxia. No differences in adverse effects were found between single-segment stimulation conditions. These proof-of-principle findings provide evidence that acute short pulse stimulation is superior to directional steering in the subthalamic area to decrease stimulation-induced side effects while preserving tremor suppression effects in patients with tremor. This study provides Class IV evidence that for patients with tremor with thalamic DBS, acute short pulse stimulation reduces adverse effects, while directional steering does not provide a generalizable benefit regarding adverse effects.

[PMID: 16235669]
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the thalamus is used for the treatment of patients with medically refractory essential tremor (ET). The authors evaluated patient outcomes after DBS surgery. Clinical outcomes were evaluated in 19 patients who had undergone DBS surgery by using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin clinical tremor rating scale. All adverse outcomes were also systematically recorded during follow-up outpatient visits. Eighteen DBS systems were implanted. The median follow-up period after surgery was 27 months (range 10-75 months). The preoperative mean Fahn-Tolosa-Marin action tremor score was 3.3 +/- 0.5, and the postoperative mean score with the DBS system activated was 0.8 +/- 0.4. The mean preoperative writing score was 2.8 +/- 0.9, and the postoperative mean writing score with the DBS system activated was 1 +/- 0.6. (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.005). Fourteen patients were treated with bipolar stimulation, and four eventually required monopolar stimulation. Complications included lead breakage (one patient); temporary erythema of the incision through which the pulse generator had been implanted, which required oral antibiotics (one patient); electrode migration, which required surgery (one patient); and mild hand tingling during stimulation (three patients). Twelve of 18 patients with implanted systems experienced no morbid condition. Thalamic DBS is safe and effective for medically refractory ET. Stimulator adjustments can frequently occur in some patients, and tremor may worsen despite a readjustment in the system.

[PMID: 12722174]
We sought to determine whether mirtazapine is safe and well-tolerated as a treatment for essential tremor (ET). We studied mirtazapine in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study of 17 ET patients. Patients were started with 15 mg per day of either mirtazapine or placebo for 1 week and the dose was escalated weekly until the targeted dose of 45 mg per day was achieved. This dose was maintained for 2 weeks. Tremor was assessed at baseline and after 14 days of 45 mg of mirtazapine or placebo. There was a minimum washout period of 14 days between the two arms of the study. Tremor assessments included global improvement, Fahn Tolosa Marin Tremor Rating Scale, Beck Depression Inventory and the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire-39. Patient global improvement ratings indicated that in the placebo condition 12 patients were unchanged and 1 patient was mildly improved. In the mirtazapine condition, 10 patients were unchanged, 2 were moderately improved and 1 was markedly improved. There was no significant improvement with mirtazapine or placebo compared to baseline as measured by the Tremor Rating Scale. Adverse effects were more common in the mirtazapine group and included drowsiness, confusion, dry mouth, weight gain, polyuria, itching, nausea, gait and balance problems, blurred vision, and bad taste. We conclude that the majority of the ET patients do not benefit from mirtazapine. Mirtazapine has significant adverse effects and should be used cautiously in ET patients.

[PMID: 31974808]
Despite previous functional MRI studies on alterations within the cerebello-thalamo-cortical circuit in patients with essential tremor (ET), the specific role of disconnection of the dentate nucleus (DN), the main output cerebellar pathway, still needs clarification. In this study, we evaluated DN functional connectivity (FC) changes and their relationship with motor and non-motor symptoms in ET. We studied 25 ET patients and 26 healthy controls. Tremor severity was assessed using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale (FTM-TRS) and tremor amplitude and frequency were evaluated using kinematic techniques. Cognitive profile was assessed by montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) and frontal assessment battery (FAB). All participants underwent a 3 T MRI protocol including resting-state blood oxygenation level dependent and diffusion tensor sequences. We used a seed-based approach to investigate DN FC and to explore the diffusion properties of cerebellar peduncles. There was significantly decreased DN FC with cortical, subcortical, and cerebellar areas in ET patients compared with healthy controls. Correlation analysis showed that: (1) the DN FC with the supplementary motor area, pre and postcentral gyri, and prefrontal cortex negatively correlated with FTM-TRS score and disease duration; (2) DN FC changes in the thalamus and caudate negatively correlated with peak tremor frequency, changes in the cerebellum positively correlated with tremor amplitude, and changes in the bilateral thalamus negatively correlated with tremor amplitude, and (3) DN FC with the associative prefrontal and parietal cortices, basal ganglia, and thalamus positively correlated with the MoCA score. Diffusion abnormalities were found in the three cerebellar peduncles, which did not correlate with clinical scores.

[PMID: 28665251]
OBJECTIVE Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative disease that can lead to severe intention tremor in some patients. In several case reports, conventional radiotherapy has been reported to possibly exacerbate MS. Radiosurgery dramatically limits normal tissue irradiation to potentially avoid such a problem. Gamma Knife thalamotomy (GKT) has been established as a minimally invasive technique that is effective in treating essential tremor and Parkinson's disease-related tremor. The goal in this study was to analyze the outcomes of GKT in patients suffering from medically refractory MS-related tremor. METHODS The authors retrospectively studied the outcomes of 15 patients (mean age 46.5 years) who had undergone GKT over a 15-year period (1998-2012). Fourteen patients underwent GKT at a median maximum dose of 140 Gy (range 130-150 Gy) using a single 4-mm isocenter. One patient underwent GKT at a dose of 140 Gy delivered via two 4-mm isocenters (3 mm apart). The posteroinferior region of the nucleus ventralis intermedius (VIM) was the target for all GKTs. The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin clinical tremor rating scale was used to evaluate tremor, handwriting, drawing, and drinking. The median time to the last follow-up was 39 months. RESULTS After GKT, 13 patients experienced tremor improvement on the side contralateral to surgery. Four patients noted tremor arrest at a median of 4.5 months post-GKT. Seven patients had excellent tremor improvement and 6 had good tremor improvement. Four patients noted excellent functional improvement, 8 noted good functional improvement, and 1 noted satisfactory functional improvement. Three patients experienced diminished tremor relief at a median of 18 months after radiosurgery. Two patients experienced temporary adverse radiation effects. Another patient developed a large thalamic cyst 60 months after GKT, which was successfully managed with Ommaya reservoir placement. CONCLUSIONS Gamma Knife thalamotomy was found to be a minimally invasive and beneficial procedure for medically refractory MS tremor.

[PMID: 29385927]
OBJECTIVE Transcranial magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound surgery (tcMRgFUS) is one of the emerging noninvasive technologies for the treatment of neurological disorders such as essential tremor (ET), idiopathic asymmetrical tremor-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), and neuropathic pain. In this clinical series the authors present the preliminary results achieved with the world's first tcMRgFUS system integrated with a 1.5-T MRI unit. METHODS The authors describe the results of tcMRgFUS in a sample of patients with ET and with PD who underwent the procedure during the period from January 2015 to September 2017. A monolateral ventralis intermedius nucleus (VIM) thalamic ablation was performed in both ET and PD patients. In all the tcMRgFUS treatments, a 1.5-T MRI scanner was used for both planning and monitoring the procedure. RESULTS During the study period, a total of 26 patients underwent tcMRgFUS thalamic ablation for different movement disorders. Among these patients, 18 were diagnosed with ET and 4 were affected by PD. All patients with PD were treated using tcMRgFUS thalamic ablation and all completed the procedure. Among the 18 patients with ET, 13 successfully underwent tcMRgFUS, 4 aborted the procedure during ultrasound delivery, and 1 did not undergo the tcMRgFUS procedure after stereotactic frame placement. Two patients with ET were not included in the results because of the short follow-up duration at the time of this study. A monolateral VIM thalamic ablation in both ET and PD patients was performed. All the enrolled patients were evaluated before the treatment and 2 days after, with a clinical control of the treatment effectiveness using the graphic items of the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale. A global reevaluation was performed 3 months (17/22 patients) and 6 months (11/22 patients) after the treatment; the reevaluation consisted of clinical questionnaires, neurological tests, and video recordings of the tests. All the ET and PD treated patients who completed the procedure showed an immediate amelioration of tremor severity, with no intra- or posttreatment severe permanent side effects. CONCLUSIONS Although this study reports on a small number of patients with a short follow-up duration, the tcMRgFUS procedure using a 1.5-T MRI unit resulted in a safe and effective treatment option for motor symptoms in patients with ET and PD. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first clinical series in which thalamotomy was performed using tcMRgFUS integrated with a 1.5-T magnet.

[PMID: 28326650]
Ventralis intermedius deep brain stimulation is an established intervention for medication-refractory essential tremor. Newer constant current stimulation technology offers theoretical advantage over the traditional constant voltage systems in terms of delivering a more biologically stable therapy. There are no previous reports on the outcomes of constant current deep brain stimulation in the treatment of essential tremor. This study aimed to evaluate the long-term efficacy of ventralis intermedius constant current deep brain stimulation in patients diagnosed with essential tremor. Essential tremor patients implanted with constant current deep brain stimulation for a minimum of three years were evaluated. Clinical outcomes were assessed using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale at baseline and postoperatively at the time of evaluation. The quality of life in the patients was assessed using the Quality of Life in Essential Tremor questionnaire. Ten patients were evaluated with a median age at evaluation of 74 years (range 66-79) and a mean follow up time of 49.7 (range 36-78) months since starting stimulation. Constant current ventralis intermedius deep brain stimulation was well tolerated and effective in all patients with a mean score improvement from 50.7 ± 5.9 to 17.4 ± 5.7 (p = 0.0020) in the total Fahn-Tolosa-Marin rating scale score (65.6%). Furthermore, the total combined mean Quality of Life in Essential Tremor score was improved from 56.2 ± 4.9 to 16.8 ± 3.5 (p value = 0.0059) (70.1%). This report shows that long-term constant current ventralis intermedius deep brain stimulation is a safe and effective intervention for essential tremor patients.

[PMID: 30363460]
The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Clinical Rating Scale for Tremor (FTM) has been used in large trials for essential tremor (ET), but its anchors for ratings from 0 to 4 of upper limb tremor are probably too low for patients with severe tremor (tremor amplitude >4 cm; grade 4). The Essential Tremor Rating Assessment Scale (TETRAS) is a validated clinical scale designed specifically for the assessment of ET severity. TETRAS has anchors that span a larger range of tremor amplitudes (>20 cm = grade 4), making it more suitable for assessing patients with severe ET. However, there is no direct comparison of these scales in any clinical trial. Upper limb postural and kinetic tremor items from both scales were compared using blinded, video-recorded examinations of patients with moderate-to-severe ET who participated in a trial of focused ultrasound thalamotomy. FTM ratings of postural and kinetic tremor correlated strongly with those of TETRAS. However, FTM exhibited a ceiling effect for severe tremor. Rest tremor, exclusive to FTM, correlated poorly with postural and kinetic tremor and had very poor test-retest reliability. In contrast, wing-beating postural tremor, exclusive to TETRAS, exhibited excellent test-retest reliability and a strong correlation with kinetic and limbs-extended-forward postural tremor. Test-retest reliabilities of the other TETRAS and FTM ratings were excellent, and both scales had good sensitivity to treatment effect. TETRAS has 2 main advantages over FTM in the assessment of tremor severity: (1) the absence of a ceiling effect in patients with severe ET, and (2) the inclusion of wing-beating tremor.

[PMID: 31868685]
Several scales are available for rating the severity of tremor at present. However, the sensitivity to change of these instruments has remained to be clarified. To compare the sensitivity of the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale, the Part III of the Movement Disorder Society-sponsored Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) and the MDS-UPDRS Tremor Scale to the effects of various antitremor treatments. Enrolling subjects with parkinsonism associated with tremor, we analyzed two scenarios: (1) tremor changes associated with acute levodopa challenge (n = 287) and (2) a 12-month outcome of different treatment options (n = 512) including deep brain stimulation (n = 146), levodopa/carbidopa intestinal gel infusion (n = 30), and initiating (n = 63) or adjusting oral antiparkinsonian medication (n = 273). Changes in tremor scales were assessed by effect size values (Cohen's d and eta-square). Part B of the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale was the most sensitive to acute levodopa challenge (Cohen's d = -1.04, η2 = 0.12). However, Part A of the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale showed the highest effect size, which was a small one (Cohen's d = -0.33, η2 = 0.03), for detecting a treatment-related change in the severity of tremor during long-term follow-up. The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale has a better ability to capture changes due to levodopa challenge or antiparkinsonian treatment than MDS-UPDRS Part III or MDS-UPDRS Tremor Scale.

[PMID: 25247107]
The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of the branded and a generic extended-release ropinirole formulation in the treatment of advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). Of 22 enrolled patients 21 completed the study. A rater blinded to treatment evaluated Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale, Nonmotor Symptoms Assessment Scale, and a structured questionnaire on ropinirole side effects. Besides, the patients self-administered EQ-5D, Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS-2), and Beck Depression Inventories. Branded and generic ropinirole treatment achieved similar scores on all tests measuring severity of motor symptoms (primary endpoint, UPDRS-III: 27.0 versus 28.0 points, P = 0.505). Based on patient diaries, the lengths of "good time periods" were comparable (10.5 and 10.0 hours for branded and generic ropinirole, resp., P = 0.670). However, generic ropinirole therapy achieved almost 3.0 hours shorter on time without dyskinesia (6.5 versus. 9.5 hours, P < 0.05) and 2.5 hours longer on time with slight dyskinesia (3.5 versus. 1.0 hours, P < 0.05) than the branded ropinirole did. Except for gastrointestinal problems, nonmotor symptoms were similarly controlled. Patients did not prefer either formulation. Although this study has to be interpreted with limitations, it demonstrated that both generic and branded ropinirole administration can achieve similar control on most symptoms of PD.

[PMID: 29157315]
There is a significant need for a targeted therapy for essential tremor (ET), as medications have not been developed specifically for ET, and the ones prescribed are often not well-tolerated, so that many patients remain untreated. Recent work has shown that, unlike previous experience, kinematically guided individualized botulinum toxin type A (BoNT-A) injections provide benefit along with minimal weakness. Ours is the first long-term (96-week) safety and efficacy study of BoNT-A as monotherapy for ET using kinematically driven injection parameters. Ten ET patients were administered six serial BoNT-A treatments every 16 weeks and were assessed at 6 weeks following treatment. During each study visit, the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin (FTM) scale, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, and the Quality of Life for Essential Tremor Questionnaire (QUEST) were administered along with kinematic assessment of the treated limb. Participants performed scripted tasks with motion sensors placed over each arm joint. Dosing patterns were determined using the movement disorder neurologist's interpretation of muscles contributing to the kinematically analyzed upper limb tremor biomechanics. There was a 33.8% (p<0.05) functional improvement (FTM part C) and a 39.8% (p<0.0005) improvement in QUEST score at week 96 compared to pretreatment scores at week 0. Although there was a 44.6% (p<0.0005) non-dose-dependent reduction in maximal grip strength, only 2 participants complained of mild weakness. Following the fourth serial treatment, mean action tremor score was reduced by 62.9% (p=0.001) in the treated and by 44.4% (p=0.03) in the untreated arm at week 96 compared to week 48. Individualized BoNT-A dosing patterns to each individual's tremor biomechanics provided an effective monotherapy for ET as function improved without functionally limiting muscle weakness.

[PMID: 29376092]
We investigated the effects of deep brain stimulation (DBS) or lesions of the ventral intermediate nucleus (Vim) of the thalamus for spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and examined the pathophysiological role of neuronal activity of the Vim underlying ataxia. Five patients with SCA with cortical atrophy (ages 60-69 years; 2 sporadic and three familial SCA) and five patients with essential tremor (ET) (ages 57-71 years) were treated with Vim surgery. Intraoperatively, we recorded neuronal activity from single neurons in the Vim thalamus while patients were at rest and compared the physiological properties of those neurons between patients with SCA and those with ET. Postsurgery mean scores for the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Scale were improved from 78 to 44 in SCA patients and from 54 to 21 in ET patients. Stronger stimulation was necessary to optimize outcomes in SCA as compared to ET patients. We analyzed 68 Vim neurons in SCA and 60 Vim neurons in ET. Mean discharge rates, burst characteristics, and oscillatory activity were similar for both patient groups, however, we observed that the ratio of cells responding to passive manipulation was significantly smaller (<i>P</i> = 0.0001) in SCA (22%) than in ET (71%). Thalamic surgery led to a significant improvement in tremor in SCA patients. One potential mechanism underlying ataxia in SCA may be disruption of cerebellar sensory feedback, which modulates motor commands in the cerebello-thalamo-cortical network.

[PMID: 31559624]
The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin (FTM) tremor rating scale has been widely used in clinics for the estimation of tremor severity. However, a Spanish language version of this scale has still not been formally validated. To provide support to the validity and reliability of this version of FTM Scale. A cross-sectional study was conducted on essential tremor patients. Severity was rated using the FTM scale. Upper limb disability was evaluated by terms of Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand Scale (DASH), and to health-related quality of life using the Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36). Statistical analysis included sample description, reliability (Cronbach's alpha), convergent validity, and discrimination capacity tests (ROC curves). Forty patients with essential tremor (22 women, 18 men) were included, with a mean age of 65.8 ± 14.7 years (range: 21-90 years). Internal consistency of the FTM was high: Cronbach's alpha: 0,90 (subscale A: 0.85; subscale B: 0.91; subscale C: 0.77), and the floor and ceiling effects were negligible. The FTM (subscale C) showed high correlations with DASH, and acceptable diagnostic capacity, with an area under the curve of 0.86 (95% CI: 0.67-1.00), sensitivity 78% and specificity 75% for a cut-off score > 5.5. The Spanish version of FTM the rating scale is a reliable and valid tool to evaluate disability in patients with essential tremor, and a suitable instrument for use in medical research, as well as in clinical practice.

[PMID: 31323173]
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an approved therapy option for movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD), essential Tremor (ET), and dystonia. While current research focuses on rechargeable implantable pulse generators (IPGs), little is known about changes of the motor functions after IPG replacement and the consequences of additionally implanted hardware. To assess changes of the motor functions, the therapy impedances, and the total electric energy delivered (TEED) after elective IPG replacement. We prospectively acquired the data of 47 patients with PD, ET, and dystonia treated with bilateral DBS. Motor functions were rated prior to and after surgery using the revised Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part III (MDS-UPDRS-III), the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor-Rating-Scale (FTM-TRS), and the Unified Dystonia Rating Scale (UDRS). Furthermore, the therapy impedances and TEED were assessed at the aforementioned times. While preoperative motor scores were 48.32 ± 17.16 in PD, 39.71 ± 12.28 in ET, and 18.48 ± 16.30 in dystonia patients, postoperative scores were 47.84 ± 24.33, 32.86 ± 15.82, and 15.02 ± 15.17, respectively. Only in dystonia patients, motor scores significantly differed. Perioperative therapy impedance changes were 142.66 ± 105.35 Ω (Kinetra® to Activa® PC), -68.75 ± 43.05 Ω (Activa® PC to Activa® PC), and - 51.38 ± 38.75 Ω (Activa® PC to Activa® RC). Perioperative TEED changes were - 37.15 ± 38.87 μJ, 2.03 ± 35.91 μJ, and 12.39 ± 6.31 μJ in that first, second, and third group, respectively. Both the therapy impedances and TEED significantly differed between groups. Although there were no statistically significant changes in the motor functions of all patients after elective IPG replacement, the therapy impedances were significantly higher and TEED was significantly lower after IPG replacement with concurrent Pocket Adapter implantation.

[PMID: 30565036]
Despite being considered as a benign, genetic and monosymptomatic disorder, ET is a poorly understood entity with etiological and pathological heterogeneity. The aim of the present study was to examine the relation between proximal and distal muscle strength and upper limb functionality and tremor severity in patients with essential tremor (ET). The study enrolled 25 tremor patients followed at the neurology clinic of a university hospital and 19 healthy controls. Demographic data, risk factors, disease duration and dominant hand of the participants were recorded. Back and leg strength was assessed using a back and leg dynamometer and hand dynamometer and pinchmeter were used to determine hand strength. Functional ability of the participants was evaluated using the Minnesota Manual Dexterity Test (MMDT), Perdue Pegboard (PPBT) and Nine Hole Peg Test (NHPT). Tremor severity was assessed using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (FTMTRS) and the Lower Extremity Clinical Tremor Assessment Scale (LECTAS). A significant difference was found in the average back and leg muscle strength between ET patients and healthy controls (p < 0.05). The mean values for right/left hand muscle strength were not significantly different between the two groups (p > 0.05). Among the upper limb functional ability tests, significant differences were found between the two groups in the mean time to complete NHPT, Minnesota placing subtest and PPBT test (p < 0.05). While gender and risk factors were not significantly different between the two groups (p > 0.05), there was a significant difference with respect to the educational level (p < 0.01). No significant difference was found between back and leg muscle strength and FTMTRS and LECTAS (p > 0.05). A negative correlation and a significant association were found between average strength measurements obtained with the left hand dynamometer and FTMTRS in the ET group (p = 0.030, r = - 0.434). A positive correlation and a significant association were found between left hand strength and mean turning time in the MMDT in the control group (p = 0.041, r = 0.473). ET patients experience loss of proximal muscle strength and functional disability. Further studies are planned to investigate the effects of physical therapy modalities targeting increased proximal muscle strength on tremor severity and functional ability in ET patients.

[PMID: 29777361]
Tremor is the most frequent and disabling neurological side effect under Calcineurin inhibitor-induced immunosuppression, but no studies have defined its phenomenology, severity, distribution, the impact on quality of life, as well as of other neurological symptoms associated. 126 consecutive kidney-transplanted patients, under treatment with Cyclosporin A, Tacrolimus and non-Calcineurin inhibitors, within therapeutic range, were enrolled. Participants underwent a deep neurological examination by two blinded to the treatment raters, and a blood sampling to assess plasmatic immunosuppressant level and nephrological function tests. Tremor and cerebellar signs were scored according to the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin and the SARA scale. Parkinsonism was excluded applying the UPDRS (part III). Tremor was more common and severe in the Tacrolimus group, similar to impairment in ADL. Regardless of treatment, tremor involved both upper and lower limbs and was activated by action, but in about 50% of cases presented in action and rest condition. Plasmatic level of Tacrolimus was higher in patients with tremor than in those without, while cholesterol was significantly lower. Cerebellar and neuropathic signs were overall mild and were not significantly different across the three groups comparing patients with and without tremor. Non-Calcineurin inhibitors such as Sirolimus have the lowest propensity to induce tremor and with a milder severity, while Calcineurin inhibitors, especially Tacrolimus, the highest, and regardless of the formulation. Plasmatic concentration of Tacrolimus was higher in tremulous patients; further research needs to validate the role of cholesterol plasmatic concentration in predicting the occurrence of tremor in patients on Tacrolimus.

[PMID: 10461102]
Postoperative lesion volume and clinical outcome were assessed in 19 Parkinson's disease (PD) patients who received posteroventral pallidotomy, and in 14 essential tremor (ET) patients who received ventrolateral thalamotomy. Before and after surgery, PD patients were evaluated using the Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS), and ET patients were evaluated using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin (FTM) tremor rating scale. Inner and total lesion volumes were determined with postoperative MR imaging and three-dimensional data segmentation. Lesion volumes were compared to percent improvement in UPDRS and FTM scores, using Spearman's rank-order correlation test. No rank-order correlations were found between lesion volume and clinical improvement in either the PD or the ET patients. In performing stereotactic surgery for movement disorders, any lesion volume within a prescribed range may be equally effective in relieving symptoms associated with PD or ET.

[PMID: 30122598]
Essential tremor (ET), one of the most common neurological disorders is typically evaluated with validated rating scales which only provide a subjective assessment during a clinical visit, underestimating the fluctuations tremor during different daily activities. Motion sensors have shown favorable performances in both quantifying tremor and voluntary human activity recognition (HAR). To create an automated system of a reference scale using motion sensors supported by deep learning algorithms to accurately rate ET severity during voluntary activities, and to propose an IOTA based blockchain application to share anonymously tremor data. A smartwatch-based tremor monitoring system was used to collect motion data from 20 subjects while they were doing standard tasks. Two neurologists rated ET by Fahn-Tolosa Marin Tremor Rating Scale (FTMTRS). Supported by deep learning techniques, activity classification models (ACMs) and tremor evaluation models (TEMs) were created and algorithms were implemented, to distinguish voluntary human activities and evaluate tremor severity respectively. A practical application example showed that the proposed ACMs can classify six typical activities with high accuracy (89.73%-98.84%) and the results produced by the TEMs are significantly correlated with the FTMTRS ratings of two neurologists (r<sub>1</sub> = 0.92, p<sub>1</sub> = 0.008; r<sub>2</sub> = 0.93, p<sub>2</sub> = 0.007). This study demonstrated that motion sensor data, supported by deep learning algorithms, can be used to classify human activities and evaluate essential tremor severity during different activities.

[PMID: 25527389]
In the last decade our perspective on essential tremor (ET) as a pure motor system disorder has begun to change. By virtue of recent studies of nonmotor symptoms (NMSs) that are used to characterize Parkinson's disease (PD), these symptoms have also been added to the definition of ET. There is increasing evidence to suggest that ET might not be as benign and monosymptomatic as we previously thought. The aim of this study was to evaluate nonmotor symptoms in ET, and to compare them with PD. We studied 37 ET and 23 PD patients. Tremor rate was evaluated using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale (FTM-TRS) in ET patients. The patients with PD were scored for motor symptoms using the unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS)-III and the Hoehn-Yahr scale. Cognitive functions were assessed with the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test. NMSs were evaluated with the nonmotor symptoms questionnaire (NMSQuest). In the ET group, the most common NMSs were forgetting things, feeling sad, nocturia, urgency, and difficulty concentrating. The mean NMSQuest score was 8.43 ± 4.14 in the ET group and 14.06 ± 5.44 in the PD group (p value <0.001). However, except for 12 items in NMSQuest, in comparing items one by one there was no statistical difference between them. The mean MoCA total score was 17.81 ± 4.56 in the ET group and 17.08 ± 4.08 in the PD group (p value 0.675). There were no significant differences in MoCA subgroup scores. Evaluation of nonmotor symptoms in ET may help us to understand this emerging definition of ET. This study contributes evidence toward this new concept.

[PMID: 29330020]
Deep brain stimulation of the ventro-intermedius nucleus of the thalamus is an established treatment for tremor of differing etiologies but factors that may predict the short- and especially long-term outcome of surgery are still largely unknown. We retrospectively investigated the clinical, pharmacological, electrophysiological and anatomical features that might predict the initial response and preservation of benefit in all patients who underwent deep brain stimulation for tremor. Data were collected at the following time points: baseline (preoperative), one-year post-surgery, and most recent visit. Tremor severity was recorded using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale and/or the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. A total of 52 patients were included in the final analysis: 31 with essential tremor, 15 with cerebellar tremor of different etiologies, and 6 with Parkinson's disease. Long-term success (mean follow-up duration 34.7 months, range 1.7-121.1 months) was reported in 63.5%. Predictors of long-term benefit were: underlying tremor etiology (best outcome in Parkinson's disease, worst outcome in cerebellar tremor); age at surgery (the older the better); baseline tremor severity (the greater the better); lack of response to benzodiazepines; a more anterior electrode placement and single-unit beta power (the greater the better). Specific patients' features (including single unit beta activity) and electrode locations may predict the short- and long-term benefit of thalamic stimulation for tremor. Future prospective studies enrolling a much larger sample of patients are needed to substantiate the associations detected by this retrospective study.

[PMID: 31721077]
Tremor and parkinsonism are recognized side effects of valproate; however, the relationship between rest tremor and other signs of parkinsonism has not been addressed in patients taking valproate. We studied a cohort of 125 consecutive patients treated with valproate due to epilepsy or migraine, evaluated with the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (FTM-TRS). A total of 14 (11.2%) patients had rest tremor (bilateral n = 10, unilateral n = 4). Patients with rest tremor had significant higher scores in the FTM-TRS (P < 0.001), but only one was diagnosed with parkinsonism. Patients may have valproate-induced parkinsonism or exacerbated motor features of Parkinson's disease by valproate. The frequency of parkinsonism was 1.6% in this cohort and of 3% in the pooled data of 717 patients from previous reports. Rest tremor is observed in 11.2% of patients treated with valproate and is related to the burden of valproate-induced tremor, rather than the presence of parkinsonism.

[PMID: 25471376]
There is a growing amount of evidence to suggest that besides motor features, patients with essential tremor (ET) may exhibit significant nonmotor features, such as mild cognitive deficits, fatigue, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and sleep disturbances. The goal of this study was to examine nonmotor features in young patients with ET and their impact on quality of life. 45 patients (24.55 ± 7.16 years old) with ET and 35 controls were evaluated using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Beck Depression Inventory, Beck Anxiety Scale, Fatigue Severity Scale, and Short Form-36. Cognitive functions were evaluated using the Turkish version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Battery (MoCA). We ruled out other possible causes of the tremor. The tremor rate was evaluated using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale. Poor sleep quality, fatigue, anxiety, and depressive symptoms were more common, and MoCA total scores were lower in the patient group. Fatigue, depressive symptoms, and higher anxiety levels were seen to have a negative effect on physical and mental health. Excessive daytime sleepiness had a negative effect on physical health. There is an emerging interest in nonmotor features of ET. This study showed that even young patients have nonmotor features that decrease their quality of life. This might tell us that nonmotor symptoms could be a part of the disease in the early stages.

[PMID: 30893720]
<b>Objective:</b> To explore the clinical characteristics and short-term prognosis of Holmes' tremor (HT) patients. <b>Methods:</b> The clinical and imaging data of HT patients in 5 teaching hospitals between January 2014 and January 2018 were retrospectively analyzed, and Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (TRS) was used to compare the clinical severity and short-term prognosis between the different subtypes. <b>Results:</b> (1) The time from primary disease to tremor onset was 2 days to 20 months (median time 29 d) in 23 patients with HT enrolled, and the most common cause of HT was cerebrovascular disease (78.3%). (2) The most common involved locations were midbrain (65.2%), thalamus (47.8%) and cerebellum (30.4%). No significant difference in total TRS scores between the isolated lesion group (12 cases) and multiple lesions group (11 cases) (<i>P=</i>0.57), while the scores of the mesencephalic group (15 cases) was significantly higher than the non-mesencephalic group (8 cases) (<i>P=</i>0.00). (3) One case was treated with deep brain stimulation (DBS), while 22 cases were treated with medical therapy. Levodopa combined with clonazepam (7/12) and single levodopa (9/20) were partially effective. (4) At the 3-month follow-up after discharge, patients received DBS had good prognosis. Among the 22 patients treated with medicine, only 8 (36.4%) patients had good outcomes. The short-term prognosis was not significantly different between the isolated and multiple lesion groups (<i>P=</i>0.40), while it was worse in the mesencephalic group than the non-mesencephalic group (<i>P=</i>0.02). <b>Conclusion:</b> The most common cause of HT is cerebrovascular disease, and primary lesions are midbrain, thalamus, and cerebellum. The pharmacologic agents are partially valid for disease control of HT and the short-term prognosis is poor, while the patients with mesencephalic involvement have more severe tremor and worse prognosis.

[PMID: 29929813]
To evaluate the safety and efficacy of incobotulinumtoxinA (IncoA) injection for treatment of essential hand tremor. In essential tremor and Parkinson's disease tremor, administration of onabotulinumtoxinA via a fixed injection approach improves the tremor but a high percentage of patients (30-70%) develop moderate to severe hand weakness which has limited its use in clinical practice. This study was performed from July 2013 to July 2016 on 33 subjects. This is a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial injecting 80-120 units of IncoA into 8-14 hand and forearm muscles using a customized approach. The subjects were followed for 28 weeks. The treatment efficacy was evaluated by the Fahn Tolosa Marin tremor rating score and NIH genetic criteria for tremor severity at 4 and 8 weeks after each of the two sets of treatments. Hand strength was assessed by an ergometer. There was statistically significant improvement in clinical rating score of tremor at 4 and 8 weeks following the IncoA injection. In this study, injection of IncoA treatment via a customized approach improved essential tremor on the clinical scales and patient's perception with a low occurrence of significant hand weakness.

[PMID: 29530725]
Movement disorders are not rare in demyelinating diseases but there are few studies comparing their frequency between multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. Our aim was to determine the frequency and the related features of movement disorders in a cohort of patients with multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. It is a cross-sectional study of patients with multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. Patients were evaluated by a movement disorder specialist. Data from a personal interview and neurological examination were collected. Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale was used for tremor evaluation. Health-related quality of life was assessed using EuroQol instrument. Two hundred fifty-three patients were included (mean [SD] age, 40 [12] years; 74.3% female; median [IQR] EDSS score 2.5 [1.0-6.0]); 26% presented with movement disorders. Paroxysmal dystonia (n = 32) and tremor (n = 27) were the most common movement disorders. Patients with multiple sclerosis and low Expanded Disability Status Scale score (below 4.0) have fewer movement disorders than patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. The diagnosis of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder was strongly associated with paroxysmal dystonia (OR = 22.07, 95% CI = 2.56-189.78; p = 0.005). Patients with multiple sclerosis and patients without movement disorders have a slightly better quality of life. Paroxysmal dystonia was the most common movement disorder in demyelinating diseases and strongly associated with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.

[PMID: 29382631]
Besides fluctuations, therapy refractory tremor is one of the main indications of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in patients with idiopathic Parkinson syndrome (IPS). Although thalamic DBS (ventral intermediate nucleus [Vim] of thalamus) has been shown to reduce tremor in 85-95% of patients, bradykinesia and rigidity often are not well controlled. The dentato-rubro-thalamic tract (DRT) that can directly be targeted with special diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging sequences has been shown as an efficient target for thalamic DBS. The subthalamic nucleus (STN) is typically chosen in younger patients as the target for dopamine-responsive motor symptoms. This study investigates a one-path thalamic (Vim/DRT) and subthalamic implantation of DBS electrodes and possibly a combined stimulation strategy for both target regions. This study investigates a one path thalamic (Vim/DRT) and subthalamic implantation of DBS electrodes and a possibly combined stimulation strategy for both target regions. This is a randomized, active-controlled, double-blinded (patient- and observer-blinded), monocentric trial with three treatments, three periods and six treatment sequences allocated according to a Williams design. Eighteen patients will undergo one-path thalamic (Vim/DRT) and STN implantation of DBS electrodes. After one month, a double-blinded and randomly-assigned stimulation of the thalamic target (Vim/DRT), the STN and a combined stimulation of both target regions will be performed for a period of three months each. The primary objective is to assess the quality of life obtained by the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (39 items) for each stimulation modality. Secondary objectives include tremor reduction (obtained by the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale, video recordings, the Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale, and by tremor analysis), psychiatric assessment of patients, and to assess the safety of intervention. At the moment, the recruitment is stopped and 12 patients have been randomized and treated. A futility analysis is being carried out by means of a conditional power analysis. The approach of the OPINION trial planned to make, for the first time, a direct comparison of the different stimulation conditions (Vim/DRT, compared to STN, compared to Vim/DRT+STN) in a homogeneous patient population and, furthermore, will allow for intraindividual comparison of each condition with the "quality of life" outcome parameter. We hypothesize that the combined stimulation of the STN and the thalamic (Vim/DRT) target will be superior with respect to the patients' quality of life as compared to the singular stimulation of the individual target regions. If this holds true, this work might change the standardized treatment described in the previous section. ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02288468; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02288468 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/6wlKnt2pJ); and German Clinical Trials Register: DRKS00007526; https://www.drks.de/drks_ web/navigate.do?navigationId=trial.HTML&TRIAL_ID=DRKS00007526 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/6wlKyXZZL).

[PMID: 28387629]
OBJECTIVE Unilateral Gamma Knife thalamotomy (GKT) is a well-established treatment for patients with medically refractory tremor who are not eligible for invasive procedures due to increased risk of compications. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether staged bilateral GKT provides benefit with acceptable risk to patients suffering from disabling medically refractory bilateral tremor. METHODS Eleven patients underwent staged bilateral GKT during a 17-year period (1999-2016). Eight patients had essential tremor (ET), 2 had Parkinson's disease (PD)-related tremor, and 1 had multiple-sclerosis (MS)-related tremor. For the first GKT, a median maximum dose of 140 Gy was delivered to the posterior-inferior region of the nucleus ventralis intermedius (VIM) through a single isocenter with 4-mm collimators. Patients who benefitted from unilateral GKT were eligible for a contralateral GKT 1-2 years later (median 22 months). For the second GKT, a median maximum dose of 130 Gy was delivered to the opposite VIM nucleus to a single 4-mm isocenter. The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin (FTM) clinical tremor rating scale was used to score tremor, drawing, and drinking before and after each GKT. The FTM writing score was assessed only for the dominant hand before and after the first GKT. The Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) was used to assess quality of life and activities of daily living before and after the first and second GKT. RESULTS The median time to last follow-up after the first GKT was 35 months (range 11-70 months). All patients had improvement in at least 1 FTM score after the first GKT. Three patients (27.3%) had tremor arrest and complete restoration of function (noted via FTM tremor, writing, drawing, and drinking scores equaling zero). No patient had tremor recurrence or diminished tremor relief after the first GKT. One patient experienced new temporary neurological deficit (contralateral lower-extremity hemiparesis) from the first GKT. The median time to last follow-up after the second GKT was 12 months (range 2-70 months). Nine patients had improvement in at least 1 FTM score after the second GKT. Two patients had tremor arrest and complete restoration of function. No patient experienced tremor recurrence or diminished tremor relief after the second GKT. No patient experienced new neurological or radiological adverse effect from the second GKT. Statistically significant improvements were noted in the KPS score following the first and second GKT. CONCLUSIONS Staged bilateral GKT provided effective relief for medically refractory, disabling, bilateral tremor without increased risk of neurological complications. It is an appropriate strategy for carefully selected patients with medically refractory bilateral tremor who are not eligible for deep brain stimulation.

[PMID: 26982989]
Essential tremor (ET) was long believed to be a monosymptomatic disorder. However, studies have evidenced structural changes and attention is now being focused on non-motor symptoms. The objective of the study is to describe and compare ET patients with control groups according to their cognitive functions, and secondarily, to compare their sociodemographic characteristics and other clinical features. All participants were assessed using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale for the severity of tremor; a neuropsychological assessment battery and a screening questionnaire for mood and anxiety symptoms. There were no significant age and gender differences between all groups. As for neuropsychological assessment results, a significant difference was found only in the Pegboard test. We also found a significant negative correlation between a poorer cognitive test results and disease severity and a significant differences regarding depression or anxiety symptoms in patients with ET. The study results suggest that patients with ET have impaired manual dexterity and attention.

[PMID: 17343274]
The purpose of this study was to evaluate interrater and intrarater reliability of the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (TRS) in essential tremor (ET). Proper treatment of ET is contingent upon correct assessment of the severity, loss of function, and disability related to tremor. Videotape recordings of 17 subjects with ET evaluated with the TRS were produced and sent to 59 raters. Once the raters returned the videotape and completed the score sheet, they were mailed a second tape with the same recordings presented in a different order. In the interrater reliability evaluation, modified Kappa statistics for seven tremor type composites ranged from 0.10 to 0.65 in the first videotape and 0.17 to 0.62 in the second videotape. Interrater reliabilities were greater for Part A items (magnitude of tremor in different body parts) than for Part B items (tremor in writing and drawings) of the TRS. The average Spearman correlation was 0.87, indicating very good consistency between the two videotapes, but correlations for Part A were somewhat better than for Part B. It is best when the same rater performs repeated measures of tremor on a patient, particularly when judging tremor in handwriting and drawings. Training of raters on use of the TRS would help standardize judgement.

[PMID: 20457958]
Gamma knife thalamotomy (GKT) has been used as a therapeutic option for patients with disabling tremor refractory to medications. Impressive improvement of tremor has been reported in the neurosurgical literature, but the reliability of such data has been questioned. To prospectively evaluate clinical outcomes after GKT for disabling tremor with blinded assessments. Prospective study with blinded independent neurologic evaluations. University hospital. Consecutive patients who underwent unilateral GKT for essential tremor and Parkinson disease tremor at our center. These patients were unwilling or deemed unsuitable candidates for deep brain stimulation or other surgical procedures. Unilateral GKT and regular follow-up evaluations for up to 30 months, with blinded video evaluations by a movement disorders neurologist. Clinical outcomes, as measured by the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale and activities of daily living scores, and incidence of adverse events. From September 1, 2006, to November 30, 2008, 18 patients underwent unilateral GKT for essential tremor and Parkinson disease tremor at our center. Videos for 14 patients (11 with essential tremor, 3 with Parkinson disease tremor) with at least 6 months' postoperative follow-up were available for analysis (mean [SD] follow-up duration, 19.2 [7.3] months; range, 7-30 months). The Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale activities of daily living scores improved significantly after GKT (P = .03; median and mean change scores, 2.5 and 2.7 points, respectively [range of scale was 0-27]), but there was no significant improvement in other Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale items (P = .53 for resting tremor, P = .24 for postural tremor, P = .62 for action tremor, P = .40 for drawing, P > .99 for pouring water, P = .89 for head tremor). Handwriting and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale activities of daily living scores tended to improve (P = .07 and .11, respectively). Three patients developed delayed neurologic adverse events. Overall, we found that GKT provided only modest antitremor efficacy. Of the 2 patients with essential tremor who experienced marked improvement in tremor, 1 subsequently experienced a serious adverse event. Further prospective studies with careful neurologic evaluation of outcomes are necessary before GKT can be recommended for disabling tremor on a routine clinical basis.

[PMID: 24038576]
The Movement Disorder Society established a task force to review rating scales for the assessment of tremor. Screening instruments used in identifying patients with tremor were also reviewed. Seven tremor severity scales, six activities of daily living (ADL)/disability scales, four quality-of-life scales, and five screening instruments were identified by searching PubMed.gov. The availability, use, acceptability, reliability, validity, and sensitivity to change were reviewed for each scale; and each scale was classified as recommended, suggested or listed based on whether 3, 2, or 1 of the following criteria were met: (1) used in the assessment of tremor (yes/no), (2) used in published studies by people other than the developers (yes/no), and (3) successful clinimetric testing (yes/no). Five tremor severity scales (the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale, the Bain and Findley Clinical Tremor Rating Scale, the Bain and Findley Spirography Scale, the Washington Heights-Inwood Genetic Study of Essential Tremor Rating Scale, and the Tremor Research Group Essential Tremor Rating Assessment Scale), one ADL/disability scale (the Bain and Findley Tremor ADL Scale), one quality-of-life scale (the Quality of Life in Essential Tremor Questionnaire), and one screening instrument (the Washington Heights-Inwood Genetic Study of Essential Tremor Rating Scale, version 1) are recommended using these criteria. However, all scales need a more comprehensive analysis of sensitivity to change in order to judge their utility in clinical trials and individual patient assessments. The task force recommends that further work with existing recommended scales be performed as opposed to the development of new tremor scales.

[PMID: 29481820]
The use of wearable technology is an emerging field of research in movement disorders. This paper introduces a clinical study to evaluate the feasibility, clinical correlation and reliability of using a system based in smartwatches to quantify tremor in essential tremor (ET) patients and check its acceptance as clinical monitoring tool. The system is based on a commercial smartwatch and an Android smartphone. An investigational Android application controls the process of recording raw data from the smartwatch three-dimensional gyroscopes. Thirty-four ET patients were consecutively enrolled in the experiments and assessed along one year. Arm tremor was videofilmed and scored using the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (FTM-TRS). Tremor intensity was quantified with the root mean square of angular velocity measured in the patients' wrists. Eighty-two assessments with smartwatches were performed. Spearman's correlation coefficients (ρ) between clinical tremor (FTM-TRS) scores and smartwatch measures for tremor intensity were 0.590 at rest; ρ = 0.738 in steady posture; ρ = 0.189 in finger-to-nose maneuvers; and ρ = 0.652 in pouring water task. Smartwatch reliability was checked by intraclass realiability coefficients: 0.85, 0.95, 0.91, 0.95 respectively. Most of patients showed good acceptance of the system. This commodity hardware contributes to quantify tremor objectively in a consulting-room by customized Android smart devices as clinical monitoring tool. The NetMD system for tremor analysis is feasible, well-correlated with clinical scores, reliable and well-accepted by patients to tremor follow-up. Therefore, it could be an option to objectively quantify tremor in ET patients during their regular follow-up.

[PMID: 28913163]
Although essential tremor is the most common movement disorder, there is little knowledge about the pathophysiological mechanisms of this disease. Therefore, we explored brain connectivity based on slow spontaneous fluctuations of blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal in patients with essential tremor (ET). A cohort of 19 ET patients and 23 healthy individuals were scanned in resting condition using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). <i>General connectivity</i> was assessed by eigenvector centrality (EC) mapping. <i>Selective connectivity</i> was analyzed by correlations of the BOLD signal between the preselected seed regions and all the other brain areas. These measures were then correlated with the tremor severity evaluated by the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (FTMTS). Compared to healthy subjects, ET patients were found to have lower EC in the cerebellar hemispheres and higher EC in the anterior cingulate and in the primary motor cortices bilaterally. In patients, the FTMTS score correlated positively with the EC in the putamen. In addition, the FTMTS score correlated positively with selective connectivity between the thalamus and other structures (putamen, pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), parietal cortex), and between the pre-SMA and the putamen. We observed a selective coupling between a number of areas in the sensorimotor network including the basal ganglia and the ventral intermediate nucleus of thalamus, which is widely used as neurosurgical target for tremor treatment. Finally, ET was marked by suppression of general connectivity in the cerebellum, which is in agreement with the concept of ET as a disorder with cerebellar damage.

[PMID: 29293948]
Essential tremor is a neurological syndrome of heterogeneous pathology and aetiology that is characterized by tremor primarily in the upper extremities. This tremor is commonly hypothesized to be driven by a single or multiple neural oscillator(s) within the cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathway. Several studies have found an association of blood-oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal in the cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathway with essential tremor, but there is behavioural evidence that also points to the possibility that the severity of tremor could be influenced by visual feedback. Here, we directly manipulated visual feedback during a functional MRI grip force task in patients with essential tremor and control participants, and hypothesized that an increase in visual feedback would exacerbate tremor in the 4-12 Hz range in essential tremor patients. Further, we hypothesized that this exacerbation of tremor would be associated with dysfunctional changes in BOLD signal and entropy within, and beyond, the cerebello-thalamo-cortical pathway. We found that increases in visual feedback increased tremor in the 4-12 Hz range in essential tremor patients, and this increase in tremor was associated with abnormal changes in BOLD amplitude and entropy in regions within the cerebello-thalamo-motor cortical pathway, and extended to visual and parietal areas. To determine if the tremor severity was associated with single or multiple brain region(s), we conducted a birectional stepwise multiple regression analysis, and found that a widespread functional network extending beyond the cerebello-thalamo-motor cortical pathway was associated with changes in tremor severity measured during the imaging protocol. Further, this same network was associated with clinical tremor severity measured with the Fahn, Tolosa, Marin Tremor Rating Scale, suggesting this network is clinically relevant. Since increased visual feedback also reduced force error, this network was evaluated in relation to force error but the model was not significant, indicating it is associated with force tremor but not force error. This study therefore provides new evidence that a widespread functional network is associated with the severity of tremor in patients with essential tremor measured simultaneously at the hand during functional imaging, and is also associated with the clinical severity of tremor. These findings support the idea that the severity of tremor is exacerbated by increased visual feedback, suggesting that designers of new computing technologies should consider using lower visual feedback levels to reduce tremor in essential tremor.