[PMID: 19936787]
The Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS;MIM 300523) of X-linked mental retardation and hypotonia is caused by mutations in a thyroid hormone transporter gene--the monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8 also known as SLC16A2) gene. A 23-month-old boy with severe developmental delay, hypotonia, recurrent emesis, and irritability is described. He was diagnosed with hypothyroidism at the age of 4 months. However, T3 level was elevated. Molecular analysis of the MCT8 gene detected a single base duplication in exon 5 c.1614dupC (p.Ile539fs), consistent with a diagnosis of AHDS. While T3 is the best marker for this disorder, elevations in TSH should alert to the diagnosis.

[PMID: 22543196]
As a prerequisite for thyroid hormone (TH) metabolism and action TH has to be transported into cells where TH deiodinases and receptors are located. The trans-membrane passage of TH is facilitated by TH transporters of which the monocarboxylate transporter MCT8 has been most intensively studied. Inactivating mutations in the gene encoding MCT8 are associated with a severe form of psychomotor retardation and abnormal serum TH levels (Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome). In order to define the underlying pathogenic mechanisms, Mct8 knockout mice have been generated and intensively studied. Most surprisingly, Mct8 ko mice do not show any neurological symptoms but fully replicate the abnormal serum thyroid state. We will summarize the findings of these mouse studies that shed light on various aspects of Mct8 deficiency and unambiguously demonstrated the pivotal role of Mct8 in mediating TH transport in various tissues. These studies have also revealed the presence of the complex interplay between different pathogenic mechanisms that contribute to the generation of the abnormal TH serum profile. Most importantly, studies of Mct8 ko mice indicated the presence of additional TH transporters that act in concert with Mct8. Interesting candidates for such a function are the L-type amino acid transporters Lat1 and Lat2 as well as the organic anion transporting polypeptide Oatp1c1. Overall, the analysis of Mct8 deficient mice has greatly expanded our knowledge about the (patho-) physiological function of this transporter and established a sound basis for the characterization of additional TH transporter candidates. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

[PMID: 20435089]
Transport of thyroid hormones across the plasma membrane is required for binding to their nuclear receptors. Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is a plasma membrane thyroid hormone transport protein, which has recently gained much attention, since mutations in MCT8 are associated with severe mental retardation in patients afflicted with the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. MCT8 is expressed along the blood-brain-barrier and on central neurons. We have found that desipramine (DMI), a tricyclic antidepressant, acts as an inhibitor of thyroid hormone transport by MCT8. Uptake of 3,5,3'-triiodo-L-thyronine (T(3)) into primary cortical neurons could be blocked with desipramine as well as with the known, but unspecific, inhibitor bromosulphtalein (BSP). T(3) uptake by neurons derived from Mct8-deficient cells was not further decreased by DMI. In a heterologous expression system, both human MCT8 and its close homolog, MCT10, were sensitive to inhibition by DMI. Kinetic experiments demonstrated a non-competitive mode of inhibition. Numerous interactions between thyroid hormones, depressive symptoms, and antidepressant treatments have been reported in the literature. Our findings add to the evidence that antidepressant drugs may affect CNS thyroid hormone function.

[PMID: 20713192]
Thyroid hormones are known to be essential for growth, development and metabolism. Recently mutations in the SLC16A2 gene coding for the monocarboxylate thyroid hormone transporter 8, MCT8, have been associated with Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), an X-linked condition characterized by severe mental retardation, dysarthria, athetoid movements, muscle hypoplasia and spastic paraplegia. Here we describe in detail the clinical and biochemical features in a boy affected by AHDS with severe neurological abnormalities and a novel de novo SLC16A2 gene insertion, 1343-1344insGCCC, resulting in a truncated protein lacking the last four transmembrane domains (TMDs) as well as the carboxyl cytoplasmic end. He presents mental retardation, axial hypotonia, hypertonia of arms and legs, paroxysmal dyskinesias, seizures. The endocrine phenotype showed low serum total and free thyroxine (T4), very elevated total and free triiodothyronine (T3) and normal thyrotropin (TSH) with blunted response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). The latter finding was unexpected and suggested that the lack of functional MCT8 was counterbalanced at the thyrotrope cell level by high serum T3 concentration and/or by increased intrapituitary type 2 deiodinase (D2) activity. Our case constitutes a relevant contribution to better characterize this disorder and to elucidate the functional consequences of SLC16A2 gene mutations.

[PMID: 21896621]
The monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8; SLC16A2) has a pivotal role in neuronal triiodothyronine (T(3)) uptake. Mutations of this transporter determine a distinct X-linked psychomotor retardation syndrome (Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS)) that is attributed to disturbed thyroid hormone levels, especially elevated T(3) levels. We describe the genetic analysis of the MCT8 gene in a patient suspected for AHDS and the clinical and endocrine effects of L-thyroxine (LT(4)) or liothyronine (LT(3)) treatment intending to overcome the T(3) uptake resistance through alternative transporters. The six exons of the MCT8 gene were amplified individually by PCR. As multiple exons were missing, the length of the X-chromosomal deletion was determined by a dense SNP array, followed by PCR-based fine mapping to define the exact borders of the deleted segment. The clinical and endocrine data of the patient during 6.5 years of LT(4) treatment and two periods (3 months each) of low- and high-dose LT(3) were evaluated. A partial deletion of the MCT8 gene (comprising five of six exons) was detected, confirming the suspected AHDS. MCT8 dysfunction was associated with partial resistance to T(3) at the hypothalamus and pituitary level, with normal responsiveness at the peripheral organs (liver and cardiovascular system). Thyroid hormone administration had no beneficial effect on the neurological status of the patient. We identified a 70 kb deletion encompassing exons 2-6 of the MCT8 gene in our AHDS patient. Both LT(4) and LT(3) administration had no therapeutic effect. Alternatively, treatment of AHDS patients with thyroid hormone analogs should be considered.

[PMID: 24268987]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome is an X-linked condition caused by mutations of the monocarboxylate transporter 8 gene. This syndrome is characterized by axial hypotonia, severe mental retardation, dysarthria, athetoid movements, spastic paraplegia, and a typical thyroid hormone profile. In most of the cases reported so far, brain magnetic resonance imaging showed delayed myelination of the central white matter and this finding greatly affects the diagnosis of the syndrome. We present a new case studied with magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy and we reviewed all the articles published between 2004 and 2012 containing information on brain neuroimaging in this syndrome. An Italian boy, showing a classical phenotype of the syndrome, was diagnosed at 17months of age. Genetic analysis revealed a new frameshift mutation of the monocarboxylate transporter 8 gene. His brain magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy, performed at the age of 14months, were normal. Among the 33 cases reported in the literature, 3 cases had normal neuroimaging and in 7 of 14 cases, having a longitudinal follow-up, the initial finding of delayed myelination gradually improved. Our case and the review of the pertinent literature suggest that Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome should be suspected in males with the typical neurological and thyroid profile, even in cases with normal brain myelination.

[PMID: 19018842]
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8 or SLC16A2) is important for the neuronal uptake of triiodothyronine (T3) in its function as a specific and active transporter of thyroid hormones across the cell membrane, thus being essential for human brain development. We report on a German male with Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome presenting with severe intellectual and motor disability, paroxysmal dyskinesia combined with truncal muscular hypotonia, and peripheral muscular hypertonia at his current age of 9 years. Additionally, the patient has a lesion in the left putamen region revealed by magnetic resonance imaging and elevated serum T3 levels. The male appeared to have a hemizygous mutation (R271H) in the MCT8 gene that was sequenced directly from genomic DNA and occurred de novo in the maternal germline, as both his mother and his sister were not carriers of the mutation. Ruling out a common polymorphism, 50 normal individuals of the same ethnic background did not harbour the mutation. The identified MCT8 gene mutation (R271H) is very likely to be the genetic cause for neuronal hypothyroidism despite elevated serum T3 levels.

[PMID: 22890106]
Iodothyronines are charged amino acid derivatives that cannot passively cross a phospholipid bilayer. Transport of thyroid hormones across plasma membranes is mediated by integral membrane proteins belonging to several gene families. These transporters therefore allow or limit access of thyroid hormones into brain. Since thyroid hormones are essential for brain development and cell differentiation, it is expected that genetic deficiency of such transporters would result in neurodevelopmental derangements. We introduce concepts of thyroid hormone transport into the brain and into brain cells. Important thyroid hormone transmembrane transporters are presented along with their expression patterns in different brain cell types. A focus is placed on monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) which has been identified as an essential thyroid hormone transporter in humans. Mutations in MCT8 underlie one of the first described X-linked mental retardation syndromes, the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. Thyroid hormone transporter molecules are expressed in a developmental and cell type-specific pattern. Any thyroid hormone molecule has to cross consecutively the luminal and abluminal membranes of the capillary endothelium, enter astrocytic foot processes, and leave the astrocyte through the plasma membrane to finally cross another plasma membrane on its way towards its target nucleus. We can expect more transporters being involved in or contributing to in neurodevelopmental or neuropsychiatric disease. Due to their expression in cellular components regulating the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis, mutations and polymorphisms are expected to impact on negative feedback regulation and hormonal setpoints. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

[PMID: 15889350]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome was among the first of the X-linked mental retardation syndromes to be described (in 1944) and among the first to be regionally mapped on the X chromosome (in 1990). Six large families with the syndrome have been identified, and linkage studies have placed the gene locus in Xq13.2. Mutations in the monocarboxylate transporter 8 gene (MCT8) have been found in each of the six families. One essential function of the protein encoded by this gene appears to be the transport of triiodothyronine into neurons. Abnormal transporter function is reflected in elevated free triiodothyronine and lowered free thyroxine levels in the blood. Infancy and childhood in the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome are marked by hypotonia, weakness, reduced muscle mass, and delay of developmental milestones. Facial manifestations are not distinctive, but the face tends to be elongated with bifrontal narrowing, and the ears are often simply formed or cupped. Some patients have myopathic facies. Generalized weakness is manifested by excessive drooling, forward positioning of the head and neck, failure to ambulate independently, or ataxia in those who do ambulate. Speech is dysarthric or absent altogether. Hypotonia gives way in adult life to spasticity. The hands exhibit dystonic and athetoid posturing and fisting. Cognitive development is severely impaired. No major malformations occur, intrauterine growth is not impaired, and head circumference and genital development are usually normal. Behavior tends to be passive, with little evidence of aggressive or disruptive behavior. Although clinical signs of thyroid dysfunction are usually absent in affected males, the disturbances in blood levels of thyroid hormones suggest the possibility of systematic detection through screening of high-risk populations.

[PMID: 20083155]
Thyroid hormone (TH) is crucial for the development of different organs, in particular the brain, as disturbances in TH supply cause severe neurological abnormalities. TH transporters are necessary for the intracellular availability of TH to have access to the deiodinases and nuclear receptors inside the cell. The clinical importance of TH transporters is dramatically shown in patients with mutations in MCT8, suffering from severe X-linked psychomotor retardation in combination with disturbed TH levels, especially high serum T(3) levels, now referred as Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS). Worldwide >45 families have now been identified with MCT8 mutations. Most MCT8 mutations result in a complete loss of TH transport function when tested in vitro, but some mutations show significant residual activity and are associated with a somewhat milder clinical phenotype. It is difficult to identify MCT8 patients only on the basis of the clinical characteristics of X-linked mental retardation. Therefore, the criterion for MCT8 mutation screening in these patients is the profile of increased T(3) and low-normal to low FT(4) serum levels.

[PMID: 24027558]
The major product secreted by the thyroid is thyroxine (T4), whereas most of the biologically active triiodothyronine (T3) derives from the peripheral conversion of T4 into T3. The deiodinase enzymes are involved in activation and inactivation of thyroid hormones (THs). Type 1 and type 2 deiodinase (D1 and D2) convert T4 into T3 whereas D3 degrades T4 and T3 into inactive metabolites and is thus the major physiological TH inactivator. The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis maintains circulating TH levels constant, while the deiodinases tissue-specifically regulate intracellular thyroid status by controlling TH action in a precise spatio-temporal fashion. Here we review the data related to the recent identification of a paraneoplastic syndrome called "consumptive hypothyroidism," which exemplifies how deiodinases alter substantially the concentration of TH in blood. This syndrome results from the aberrant uncontrolled expression of D3 that can induce a severe form of hypothyroidism by inactivating T4 and T3 in defined tumor tissue. This rare TH insufficiency generally affects patients in the first years of life, and has distinct features in terms of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis with respect to other forms of hypothyroidism.

[PMID: 20628049]
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8, SLC16A2) is a thyroid hormone (TH) transmembrane transport protein mutated in Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, a severe X-linked psychomotor retardation. The neurological and endocrine phenotypes of patients deficient in MCT8 function underscore the physiological significance of carrier-mediated TH transmembrane transport. MCT8 belongs to the major facilitator superfamily of 12 transmembrane-spanning proteins and mediates energy-independent bidirectional transport of iodothyronines across the plasma membrane. Structural information is lacking for all TH transmembrane transporters. To gain insight into structure-function relations in TH transport, we chose human MCT8 as a paradigm. We systematically performed conventional and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based uptake measurements into MCT8-transfected cells using a large number of compounds structurally related to iodothyronines. We found that human MCT8 is specific for L-iodothyronines and requires at least one iodine atom per aromatic ring. Neither thyronamines, decarboxylated metabolites of iodothyronines, nor triiodothyroacetic acid and tetraiodothyroacetic acid, TH derivatives lacking both chiral center and amino group, are substrates for MCT8. The polyphenolic flavonoids naringenin and F21388, potent competitors for TH binding at transthyretin, did not inhibit T(3) transport, suggesting that MCT8 can discriminate its ligand better than transthyretin. Bioinformatic studies and a first molecular homology model of MCT8 suggested amino acids potentially involved in substrate interaction. Indeed, alanine mutation of either Arg(445) (helix 8) or Asp(498) (helix 10) abrogated T(3) transport activity of MCT8, supporting their predicted role in substrate recognition. The MCT8 model allows us to rationalize potential interactions of amino acids including those mutated in patients with Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome.

[PMID: 18589880]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS) is a rare X-linked disorder caused by mutation in the gene encoding the monocarboxylate transporter-8. Abnormal transport function is reflected by elevated free T3 and decreased free T4 levels along with clinical features characterized by neurological abnormalities including global developmental delay, central hypotonia, rotatory nystagmus, impaired hearing, spasticity and contractures of joints. We report a child with classical clinical features along with confirmatory deranged thyroid levels in blood.

[PMID: 19541799]
Thyroid hormone is a pleiotropic hormone with widespread biological actions. For instance, adequate levels of thyroid hormone are critical for the development of different tissues such as the central nervous system, but are also essential for the regulation of metabolic processes throughout life. The biological activity of thyroid hormone depends not only on serum thyroid hormone levels, but is also regulated at the tissue level by the expression and activity of deiodinases, which activate thyroid hormone or mediate its degradation. In addition, thyroid hormone transporters are necessary for the uptake of thyroid hormone into target tissues. With the discovery of monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) as a specific thyroid hormone transporter and the finding that mutations in this transporter lead to a syndrome of severe psychomotor retardation and elevated serum 3,3',5-tri-iodothyronine levels known as the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, the interest in this area of research has greatly increased. In this review, we will focus on the molecular aspects of thyroid hormone transporters, including MCT8, MCT10, organic anion transporting polypeptides, and the effects of genetic variation in these transporters.

[PMID: 20879691]
Thyroid hormones are essential for brain development. The active thyroid hormone, T3, binds to several products of two genes, the nuclear thyroid hormone receptors alpha and beta, and thus regulates gene expression. Mutations in a thyroid hormone transmembrane transport protein, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), underlie one of the first described X-linked mental retardation syndromes, the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. This discovery sparked great interest in the process of thyroid hormone transmembrane transport. Iodothyronines are charged amino acid derivatives and require protein facilitators to cross cellular membranes. Thyroid hormones are translocated across lipid bilayers by several members of the major facilitator superfamily, including monocarboxylate transporters, amino acid transporters, and organic anion transporting polypeptides. Although until recently few researchers considered thyroid hormone transporters an important object of study, there is now a large number of candidate transporters to be reckoned with in the brain. Moreover, to finally cross the neuronal plasma membrane, any iodothyronine molecule on its way toward a neuronal nucleus has to cross consecutively the lumenal and ablumenal membranes of the capillary endothelium, enter astrocytic foot processes, and leave the astrocyte through the plasma membrane. Moreover, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and precursor and stem cells are thyroid hormone responsive and likely express thyroid hormone transporters. Hence, the many roles played by thyroid hormones in the development, function, and regeneration of the nervous system are dependent on the spatiotemporal expression of several transmembrane transport proteins.

[PMID: 21825978]
To discuss the recent advances on thyroid hormone transport in the brain. A special attention is paid to the X-linked thyroid hormone cell transport (THCT) defect (also known as the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome), caused by mutations of the specific thyroid hormone transporter MCT8 gene. MCT8 is involved in thyroid hormone transport in the brain. MRI of patients with THCT defect showed myelination delays, probably related to impaired thyroid hormone action on oligodendrocytes. MCT8 is also expressed in the thyroid and has an important role in thyroid hormone secretion. The altered circulating concentrations of thyroid hormone in the patients are partly because of impaired secretion and altered peripheral metabolism. Increased deiodinase activity is important in the pathophysiology of the syndrome. High D1 activity in liver and kidney increases T4 and rT3 deiodination, and contributes to the increased serum T3. High D2 activity in the brain contributes to compensate the deficient T3 transport by increasing local T3 production. Patients with suspected X-linked leukoencephalopathy should be screened for MCT8 gene mutations. Research on the brain pathophysiology of the THCT defect should focus on the specific role of Mct8 on oligodendrocytes and myelination.

[PMID: 23392090]
Cellular entry is an important step preceding intracellular metabolism and action of thyroid hormone (TH). Transport of TH across the plasma membrane does not take place by simple diffusion but requires transporter proteins. One of the most effective and specific TH transporters identified to date is monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), the gene of which is located on the X chromosome. Although MCT8 is expressed in many tissues, its function appears to be most critical in the brain. Hemizygous MCT8 mutations in males cause severe psychomotor retardation, known as the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), and abnormal serum TH levels. AHDS thus represents a type of TH resistance caused by a defect in cellular TH transport.

[PMID: 24275187]
Thyroid function tests (TFTs) are amongst the most commonly requested laboratory investigations in both primary and secondary care. Fortunately, most TFTs are straightforward to interpret and confirm the clinical impression of euthyroidism, hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. However, in an important subgroup of patients the results of TFTs can seem confusing, either by virtue of being discordant with the clinical picture or because they appear incongruent with each other [e.g. raised thyroid hormones (TH), but with non-suppressed thyrotropin (TSH); raised TSH, but with normal TH]. In such cases, it is important first to revisit the clinical context, and to consider potential confounding factors, including alterations in normal physiology (e.g. pregnancy), intercurrent (non-thyroidal) illness, and medication usage (e.g. thyroxine, amiodarone, heparin). Once these have been excluded, laboratory artefacts in commonly used TSH or TH immunoassays should be screened for, thus avoiding unnecessary further investigation and/or treatment in cases where there is assay interference. In the remainder, consideration should be given to screening for rare genetic and acquired disorders of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis [e.g. resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), thyrotropinoma (TSHoma)]. Here, we discuss the main pitfalls in the measurement and interpretation of TFTs, and propose a structured algorithm for the investigation and management of patients with anomalous/discordant TFTs.

[PMID: 21835051]
The monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is a member of the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) and transports specificly iodothyronines. MCT8 mutations are the underlying cause of a syndrome of severe X-linked psychomotor retardation known as the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by abnormally high T3, low/normal T4 serum levels and slightly elevated serum TSH. To date, more than 25 pathogenic mutations in hMCT8 are known and they are valuable indicators of important regions for structural and functional MCT8 properties. We designed a structural human MCT8 model and studied reported pathogenic missense mutations with focus on the estimation of those amino acid positions which are probably sensitive for substrate transport. Furthermore, assuming similarities between determinants of T3 binding observed in the published crystal structure of the thyroid hormone receptor beta occupied by its ligand T3 and the structural MCT8 model, we explore potential T3 binding sites in the MCT8 substrate channel cavity. We found that all known pathogenic missense mutations are located exclusively in the transmembrane helices and to a high degree at conserved residues among the MCT family. Furthermore, mutations either of or to prolines/glycines are located mainly at helices 9-12 and are expected to cause steric clashes or structural misfolding. In contrast, several other mutations are close to the potential substrate channel and affected amino acids are likely involved in the switching mechanism between different transporter conformations. Finally, three potential substrate binding sites are predicted for MCT8. Naturally occurring mutations of MCT8 provide molecular insights into protein regions important for protein folding, substrate binding and the switching mechanism during substrate transport. Future studies guided by this information should help to clarify structure-function relationships at MCT8 which may bear broader relevance for other members of the MCT family. This includes decoding of the complete set of transport-sensitive residue positions and description of structural re-arrangements during transport.

[PMID: 18398436]
Mutations in the thyroid monocarboxylate transporter 8 gene (MCT8/SLC16A2) have been reported to result in X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) in patients with clinical features of the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS). We performed MCT8 mutation analysis including 13 XLMR families with LOD scores >2.0, 401 male MR sibships and 47 sporadic male patients with AHDS-like clinical features. One nonsense mutation (c.629insA) and two missense changes (c.1A>T and c.1673G>A) were identified. Consistent with previous reports on MCT8 missense changes, the patient with c.1673G>A showed elevated serum T3 level. The c.1A>T change in another patient affects a putative translation start codon, but the same change was present in his healthy brother. In addition normal serum T3 levels were present, suggesting that the c.1A>T (NM_006517) variation is not responsible for the MR phenotype but indicates that MCT8 translation likely starts with a methionine at position p.75. Moreover, we characterized a de novo translocation t(X;9)(q13.2;p24) in a female patient with full blown AHDS clinical features including elevated serum T3 levels. The MCT8 gene was disrupted at the X-breakpoint. A complete loss of MCT8 expression was observed in a fibroblast cell-line derived from this patient because of unfavorable nonrandom X-inactivation. Taken together, these data indicate that MCT8 mutations are not common in non-AHDS MR patients yet they support that elevated serum T3 levels can be indicative for AHDS and that AHDS clinical features can be present in female MCT8 mutation carriers whenever there is unfavorable nonrandom X-inactivation.

[PMID: 21098685]
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8 or SLC16A2) mutations cause X-linked Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. Heterozygous females are usually asymptomatic, but pregnancy may modify thyroid function and MCT8 is expressed in the placenta, suggesting that maternal and fetal abnormalities might develop even in the absence of MCT8 fetal mutation. Genetic counseling is so far based on X-linked transmission, and prenatal diagnosis is rarely performed. To describe thyroid function and the prenatal diagnosis in pregnant mothers harboring heterozygous MCT8 mutations and management of the persistent maternal hypothyroxinemia. Patients Two women heterozygous for MCT8 mutations (c.1690G>A and c.1393-1G>C) were monitored throughout pregnancy. Prenatal diagnosis included sex determination, direct MCT8 sequencing, and familial linkage analysis. Ultrasonography and hormonal assays for maternal thyroid function evaluation were performed serially during pregnancy. Neonatal thyroid hormonal status was assessed. None of the three fetuses (two males and one female) carried MCT8 mutations. One of the two heterozygous mothers revealed gestational hypothyroxinemia, prompting early levothyroxine (l-T₄) therapy until delivery. The second heterozygous mother showed normal thyroid function but was preventively traited by l-T₄ and all of the three neonates had normal thyroid hormone levels and thyroid gland at birth, suggesting advantages of prenatal care and/or compensatory mechanisms. Heterozygous MCT8 women should be monitored for requirement of l-T₄ therapy to prevent fetal and neonatal hypothyroidism and to avoid risk of potential cognitive delay due to gestational hypothyroxinemia. Moreover, when the disease-causing mutation is known and/or the first child is affected, prenatal diagnosis for male fetuses should be assessed early for MCT8 mutations by direct sequencing.

[PMID: 24170966]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS), an X linked condition, is characterized by congenital hypotonia that progresses to spasticity with severe psychomotor delays, in combination with altered thyroid hormone levels, in particular, high serum T3 levels. Recently, this disease was proved to be caused by mutations in SLC16A2 coding for the monocarboxylate thyroid hormone transporter 8 (MCT8). Here we describe a 26-year -old Japanese patient with AHDS who had deletion of exon 3 of SLC16A2.

[PMID: 15980113]
We report a novel 1 bp deletion (c.1834delC) in the MCT8 gene in a large Brazilian family with Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), an X linked condition characterised by severe mental retardation and neurological dysfunction. The c.1834delC segregates with the disease in this family and it was not present in 100 control chromosomes, further confirming its pathogenicity. This mutation causes a frameshift and the inclusion of 64 additional amino acids in the C-terminal region of the protein. Pathogenic mutations in the MCT8 gene, which encodes a thyroid hormone transporter, results in elevated serum triiodothyronine (T3) levels, which were confirmed in four affected males of this family, while normal levels were found among obligate carriers. Through in vitro functional assays, we showed that this mutation decreases cellular T3 uptake and intracellular T3 metabolism. Therefore, the severe neurological defects present in the patients are due not only to deficiency of intracellular T3, but also to altered metabolism of T3 in central neurones. In addition, the severe muscle hypoplasia observed in most AHDS patients may be a consequence of high serum T3 levels.

[PMID: 23161551]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS) is a severe psychomotor retardation characterized by neurological impairment and abnormal thyroid hormone (TH) levels. Mutations in the TH transporter, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), are associated with AHDS. MCT8 knock-out mice exhibit impaired TH levels; however, they lack neurological defects. Here, the zebrafish mct8 gene and promoter were isolated, and mct8 promoter-driven transgenic lines were used to show that, similar to humans, mct8 is primarily expressed in the nervous and vascular systems. Morpholino-based knockdown and rescue experiments revealed that MCT8 is strictly required for neural development in the brain and spinal cord. This study shows that MCT8 is a crucial regulator during embryonic development and establishes the first vertebrate model for MCT8 deficiency that exhibits a neurological phenotype.

[PMID: 19641107]
Thyroid hormone transport into cells requires plasma membrane transport proteins. Mutations in one of these, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), have been identified as underlying cause for the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, an X-linked mental retardation in which the patients also present with abnormally high 3',3,5-triiodothyronine (T(3)) plasma levels. Mice deficient in Mct8 replicate the thyroid hormone abnormalities observed in the human condition. However, no neurological deficits have been described in mice lacking Mct8. Therefore, we subjected Mct8-deficient mice to a comprehensive immunohistochemical, neurological, and behavioral screen. Several behavioral abnormalities were found in the mutants. Interestingly, some of these behavioral changes are compatible with hypothyroidism, whereas others rather indicate hyperthyroidism. We thus hypothesized that neurons exclusively dependent on Mct8 are in a hypothyroid state, whereas neurons expressing other T(3) transporters become hyperthyroid, if they are exposed directly to the high plasma T(3). The majority of T(3) uptake in primary cortical neurons is mediated by Mct8, but pharmacological inhibition suggested functional expression of additional T(3) transporter classes. mRNAs encoding six T(3) transporters, including L-type amino acid transporters (LATs), were coexpressed with Mct8 in isolated neurons. We then demonstrated Lat2 expression in cultured neurons and throughout murine brain development. In contrast, LAT2 is expressed in microglia in the developing human brain during gestation, but not in neurons. We suggest that lack of functional complementation by alternative thyroid hormone transporters in developing human neurons precipitates the devastating neurodevelopmental phenotype in MCT8-deficient patients, whereas Mct8-deficient mouse neurons are functionally complemented by other transporters, for possibly Lat2.

[PMID: 22719050]
Thyroid hormone is essential for normal proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes. Thus, untreated congenital hypothyroidism is marked by severe short stature. The monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is a highly specific transporter for thyroid hormone. The hallmarks of Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, caused by MCT8 mutations, are severe psychomotor retardation and elevated T(3) levels. However, growth is mostly normal. We therefore hypothesized that growth plate chondrocytes use transporters other than MCT8 for thyroid hormone uptake. Extensive analysis of thyroid hormone transporter mRNA expression in mouse chondrogenic ATDC5 cells revealed that monocarboxylate transporter 10 (Mct10) was most abundantly expressed among the transporters known to be highly specific for thyroid hormone, namely Mct8, Mct10, and organic anion transporter 1c1. Expression levels of Mct10 mRNA diminished with chondrocyte differentiation in these cells. Accordingly, Mct10 mRNA was expressed most abundantly in the growth plate resting zone chondrocytes in vivo. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Mct10 mRNA in ATDC5 cells decreased [(125)I]T(3) uptake up to 44% compared with negative control (P < 0.05). Moreover, silencing Mct10 mRNA expression abolished the known effects of T(3), i.e. suppression of proliferation and enhancement of differentiation, in ATDC5 cells. These results suggest that Mct10 functions as a thyroid hormone transporter in chondrocytes and can explain at least in part why Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome patients do not exhibit significant growth impairment.

[PMID: 23235483]
Two siblings with psychomotor retardation, congenital hypotonia, spasticity, and no speech acquisition underwent MRI and Tc ethyl cysteinate dimer SPECT imaging. The SPECT images showed a reduction in regional cerebral blood flow in the bilateral frontal cortex and cerebellum in both cases. T2-weighted and fluid attenuated inversion recovery images obtained using MRI showed delayed myelination and cortical atrophy in mainly the frontal lobes. Based on the MRI findings, the abnormal serum levels of thyroid hormone, and the gene mutation, the siblings were diagnosed as having monocarboxylate transporter 8 deficiency. A reduction in regional cerebral blood flow, as observed using SPECT, may be a common feature of monocarboxylate transporter 8 deficiency.

[PMID: 17899191]
Thyroid hormones are known to be essential for growth, development, and metabolism. Recently, the monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) was identified as a thyroid hormone transporter, and MCT8 mutations have been associated with Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, an X linked condition characterized by severe mental retardation, dysarthria, athetoid movements, muscle hypoplasia, and spastic paraplegia. Here we describe in detail the clinical and biochemical features and the response to thyroid hormone (L-thyroxine (LT4)) administration in a boy with an MCT8 mutation (c.1649delA) that truncates the protein in the twelfth transmembrane domain. It is of note that brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed delayed myelination from infancy. Endocrine functions other than thyroid hormone regulation and metabolism were intact, resulting in normal hypothalamic/pituitary function tests. While LT4 administration suppressed thyrotropin (TSH) secretion, no significant changes in thyroid hormone values or clinical symptoms were observed. the characteristic thyroid hormone function tests and brain MRI findings may allow screening of high-risk populations for a better understanding of MCT8 pathophysiology.

[PMID: 17574010]
Thyroid hormone is essential for the proper development and function of the brain. The active form of thyroid hormone is T(3), which binds to nuclear receptors. Recently, a transporter specific for T(3), MCT8 (monocarboxylate transporter 8) was identified. MCT8 is highly expressed in liver and brain. The gene is located in Xq13 and mutations in MCT8 are responsible for an X-linked condition, Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS). This syndrome is characterized by congenital hypotonia that progresses to spasticity with severe psychomotor delays. Affected males also present with muscle hypoplasia, generalized muscle weakness, and limited speech. Importantly, these patients have elevated serum levels of free T(3), low to below normal serum levels of free T(4), and levels of thyroid stimulating hormone that are within the normal range. This constellation of measurements of thyroid function enables quick screening for AHDS in males presenting with cognitive impairment, congenital hypotonia, and generalized muscle weakness.

[PMID: 21303950]
Mutations of the monocarboxylate transporter 8 gene (MCT8, SLC16A2) cause the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, an X-linked syndrome of severe intellectual deficit and neurological impairment. Mct8 transports thyroid hormones (T4 and T3), and the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome is likely caused by lack of T3 transport to neurons during critical periods of fetal brain development. To evaluate the role of Mct8 in thyroid hormone action in the fetal brain we administered T4 or T3 to thyroidectomized pregnant dams treated with methyl-mercapto-imidazol to produce maternal and fetal hypothyroidism. Gene expression was then measured in the fetal cerebral cortex. T4 increased Camk4, Sema3c, and Slc7a3 expression, but T3 was without effect. To investigate the cause for the lack of T3 action we analyzed the expression of organic anion transport polypeptide (Oatp14, Slco1c1), a T4 transporter, and Mct8 (Slc16a2), a T4 and T3 transporter, by confocal microscopy. Both proteins were present in the brain capillaries forming the blood-brain barrier and in the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus forming the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier. It is concluded that T4 from the maternal compartment influences gene expression in the fetal cerebral cortex, possibly after transport via organic anion transporter polypeptide and/or Mct8, and conversion to T3 in the astrocytes. On the other hand, T3 does not reach the target neurons despite the presence of Mct8. The data indicate that T4, through local deiodination, provides most T3 in the fetal rat brain. The role of Mct8 as a T3 transporter in the fetal rat brain is therefore uncertain.

[PMID: 23592749]
Mutations in monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8; SLC16A2) cause the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, a severe X-linked psychomotor retardation syndrome. MCT8 belongs to the major facilitator superfamily of 12 transmembrane-spanning proteins and transports thyroid hormones across the blood-brain barrier and into neurons. How MCT8 distinguishes thyroid hormone substrates from structurally closely related compounds is not known. The goal of this study was to identify critical amino acids along the transport channel cavity, which participate in thyroid hormone recognition. The fact that T3 is bound between a His-Arg clamp in the crystal structure of the T3 receptor/T3 complex prompted us to investigate whether such a motif might potentially be relevant for T3 recognition in MCT8. We therefore replaced candidate histidines and arginines by site-directed mutagenesis and performed activity assays in MDCK-1 cells and Xenopus oocytes. Histidines were replaced by alanine, phenylalanine, and glutamine to probe for molecular properties like aromatic ring structure and H-bonding properties. It was found that some mutations in His192 and His415 significantly changed substrate transport kinetics. Arg301 at the intracellular end of the substrate channel is at an ideal distance to His415 to participate in a His-Arg clamp and mutation to alanine-abrogated hormone transport. Molecular modeling demonstrates a perfect fit of T3 poised into the substrate channel between His415 and Arg301 and observing the same geometry as in the T3 receptor.

[PMID: 23419639]
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), an X linked condition, is characterized by severe intellectual disability, dysarthria, athetoid movements, muscle hypoplasia and spastic paraplegia in combination with altered TH levels, in particular, high serum T3 levels. Mutations in the MCT8 gene coding for the monocarboxylate thyroid hormone transporter 8 have been associated with AHDS. Here we describe a family with the presence of a MCT8 gene mutation, p.A224T, in three consecutive generations. In two generations its presence was detected in the hemizygous state in two males with neurological abnormalities including mental retardation, axial hypotonia, hypertonia of arms and legs and athetoid movements. One of them presented normal thyroid hormone levels. Mutation was also detected, although in the heterozygous state, in three females showing thyroid hormone levels in the normal range. Our results show the difficulty of distinguishing AHDS from patients with X-linked intellectual disability solely on the basis of clinical features and biochemical tests, and we advise screening for MCT8 mutations in either young or older patients with severe intellectual disability, axial hypotonia/dystonia, poor head control, spastic paraplegia, and athetoid movements even when they have normal thyroid hormone profiles.

[PMID: 23550058]
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is a thyroid hormone (TH)-specific transporter. Mutations in the MCT8 gene are associated with Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS), consisting of severe psychomotor retardation and disturbed TH parameters. To study the functional consequences of different MCT8 mutations in detail, we combined functional analysis in different cell types with live-cell imaging of the cellular distribution of seven mutations that we identified in patients with AHDS. We used two cell models to study the mutations in vitro: 1) transiently transfected COS1 and JEG3 cells, and 2) stably transfected Flp-in 293 cells expressing a MCT8-cyan fluorescent protein construct. All seven mutants were expressed at the protein level and showed a defect in T3 and T4 transport in uptake and metabolism studies. Three mutants (G282C, P537L, and G558D) had residual uptake activity in Flp-in 293 and COS1 cells, but not in JEG3 cells. Four mutants (G221R, P321L, D453V, P537L) were expressed at the plasma membrane. The mobility in the plasma membrane of P537L was similar to WT, but the mobility of P321L was altered. The other mutants studied (insV236, G282C, G558D) were predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum. In essence, loss of function by MCT8 mutations can be divided in two groups: mutations that result in partial or complete loss of transport activity (G221R, P321L, D453V, P537L) and mutations that mainly disturb protein expression and trafficking (insV236, G282C, G558D). The cell type-dependent results suggest that MCT8 mutations in AHDS patients may have tissue-specific effects on TH transport probably caused by tissue-specific expression of yet unknown MCT8-interacting proteins.

[PMID: 21264952]
Cellular thyroid hormone uptake and efflux are mediated by transmembrane transport proteins. One of these, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is mutated in Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome, a severe mental retardation associated with abnormal thyroid hormone constellations. Since mice deficient in Mct8 exhibit a milder neurological phenotype than patients, we hypothesized that alternative thyroid hormone transporters may compensate in murine brain cells for the lack of Mct8. Using qPCR, Western Blot, and immunocytochemistry, we investigated the expression of three different thyroid hormone transporters, i.e., Mct8 and L-type amino acid transporters Lat1 and Lat2, in mouse brain. All three thyroid hormone transporters are expressed from corticogenesis and peak around birth. Primary cultures of neurons and astrocytes express Mct8, Lat1, and Lat2. Microglia specifically expresses Mct10 and Slco4a1 in addition to high levels of Lat2 mRNA and protein. As in vivo, a brain microvascular endothelial cell line expressed Mct8 and Lat1. 158N, an oligodendroglial cell line expressed Mct8 protein, consistent with delayed myelination in MCT8-deficient patients. Functional T(3)- and T(4)-transport assays into primary astrocytes showed K(M) values of 4.2 and 3.7 μM for T(3) and T(4). Pharmacological inhibition of L-type amino acid transporters by BCH and genetic inactivation of Lat2 reduced astrocytic T(3) uptake to the same extent. BSP, a broad spectrum inhibitor, including Mct8, reduced T(3) uptake further suggesting the cooperative activity of several T(3) transporters in astrocytes.

[PMID: 19811520]
Mutations in the SLC16A2 gene have been implicated in Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS), an X-linked learning disability* syndrome associated with thyroid function test (TFT) abnormalities. Delayed myelination is a non-specific finding in individuals with learning disability whose genetic basis is often uncertain. The aim of this study was to describe neuroimaging findings and neurological features in males with SLC16A2 gene mutations. We reviewed brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings and neurological features in a cohort of five males aged between 1 year 6 months and 6 years (median 4y) from four families harbouring SLC16A2 gene mutations. The participants presented aged between 4 and 9 months with initial hypotonia and subsequent spastic paraparesis with dystonic posturing and superimposed paroxysmal dyskinesias. Dystonic cerebral palsy was the most common initial clinical diagnosis, and AHDS was suspected only retrospectively, considering the characteristically abnormal thyroid function tests, with high serum tri-iodothyronine (T(3)), as the most consistent finding. Brain MRI showed absent or markedly delayed myelination in all five participants, prompting the suspicion of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in one patient. Our findings indicate a consistent association between defective neuronal T(3) uptake and delayed myelination. SLC16A2 involvement should be considered in males with learning disability, an associated motor or movement disorder, and evidence of delayed myelination on brain MRI. Although dysmorphic features suggestive of AHDS are not always present, T(3) measurement is a reliable screening test.