[PMID: 17015472]
Apoptosis, induced by a number of death stimuli, is associated with a fragmentation of the mitochondrial network. These morphological changes in mitochondria have been shown to require proteins, such as Drp1 or hFis1, which are involved in regulating the fission of mitochondria. However, the precise role of mitochondrial fission during apoptosis remains elusive. Here we report that inhibiting the fission machinery in Bax/Bak-mediated apoptosis, by down-regulating of Drp1 or hFis1, prevents the fragmentation of the mitochondrial network and partially inhibits the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria but fails to block the efflux of Smac/DIABLO. In addition, preventing mitochondrial fragmentation does not inhibit cell death induced by Bax/Bak-dependent death stimuli, in contrast to the effects of Bcl-xL or caspase inhibition. Therefore, the fission of mitochondria is a dispensable event in Bax/Bak-dependent apoptosis.

[PMID: 23027751]
The mechano-enzyme dynamin-related protein 1 plays an important role in mitochondrial fission and is implicated in cell physiology. Dysregulation of Drp1 is associated with abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and neuronal damage. Drp1 shares structural and functional similarities with dynamin 1 with respect to domain organization, ability to self-assemble into spiral-like oligomers and GTP-cycle-dependent membrane scission. Structural studies of human dynamin-1 have greatly improved the understanding of this prototypical member of the dynamin superfamily. However, high-resolution structural information for full-length human Drp1 covering the GTPase domain, the middle domain and the GTPase effector domain (GED) is still lacking. In order to obtain mechanistic insights into the catalytic activity, a nucleotide-free GTPase-GED fusion protein of human Drp1 was expressed, purified and crystallized. Initial X-ray diffraction experiments yielded data to 2.67 Å resolution. The hexagonal-shaped crystals belonged to space group P2(1)2(1)2, with unit-cell parameters a = 53.59, b = 151.65, c = 43.53 Å, one molecule per asymmetric unit and a solvent content of 42%. Expression of selenomethionine-labelled protein is currently in progress. Here, the expression, purification, crystallization and X-ray diffraction analysis of the Drp1 GTPase-GED fusion protein are presented, which form a basis for more detailed structural and biophysical analysis.

[PMID: 22334657]
The mechanoenzyme dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) hydrolyzes GTP to power mitochondrial fission, a process required for organelle biogenesis, quality control, transport, and apoptosis. The pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin is essential for targeting to and severing of lipid tubules, but the function of the corresponding variable domain (VD, or insert B) of Drp1 is unknown. We replaced the VD of Drp1 with a panel of linker sequences of varying length and secondary structure composition and found that the VD is dispensable for mitochondrial recruitment, association with the Drp1-anchoring protein Mff (mitochondrial fission factor), and basal and protonophore-induced mitochondrial fragmentation. Indeed, several ΔVD mutants constitutively localized to the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) and fragmented mitochondria more efficiently than wild-type Drp1. Consistent with an autoinhibitory role of the VD, we identified Arg-376 in the Drp1 stalk domain as necessary for Mff interaction, assembly into spirals, and mitochondrial fission. Switching the length of N- and C-terminal α-helical segments in the VD-replacing linker converted Drp1 from constitutively active and OMM-localized to inactive and cytosolic. Other hypoactive ΔVD mutants formed stable and characteristically shaped aggregates, including extended filaments. Phosphorylation of a PKA site bordering the VD disassembled the filamentous ΔVD mutant and accelerated cytosolic diffusion of full-length Drp1. We propose a model for regulation of Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission, in which posttranslational modifications in or near the VD alter the conformation of a membrane-proximal oligomerization interface to influence Drp1 assembly rate and/or geometry. This in turn modulates Arg-376-dependent OMM targeting of Drp1 via multivalent interactions with Mff.

[PMID: 23888838]
Mitochondrial functions are altered in many human diseases including cancer. Development of mitochondria-targeted therapies, either through restoring normal mitochondrial function or promoting mitochondrial-induced cell death, is one of the attractive strategies to improve the outcome of cancer treatment. Recent advances have revealed the important functional involvement of mitochondrial dynamics in cancer biology. Dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), a member of the dynamin family of GTPases required for mitochondrial fission, has been found upregulated in certain types of cancers, such as lung and breast cancers. In addition, the roles of Drp1 in cell cycle progression, genome instability, cell migration and apoptosis in cancer cells have also been recently uncovered. These findings raise the possibility of targeting Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission as an effective therapy for treating cancer. This article explores the function of Drp1 in cancer cells and discusses the theoretical basis for the development of potential targeted therapy.

[PMID: 23904108]
Mitochondria are dynamic organelles forming a tubular network that is continuously fusing and dividing to control their morphology and functions. Recent literature has shed new light on a potential link between the dynamic behavior of mitochondria and muscle development. In this study, we investigate the role of mitochondrial fission factor dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) in myogenic differentiation. We found that differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts induced by serum starvation was accompanied by a gradual increase in Drp1 protein expression (to ∼350% up to 3 days) and a fast reduction of Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser-637 (to ∼30%) resulting in translocation of Drp1 protein from the cytosol to mitochondria. During differentiation, treatment of myoblasts with mitochondrial division inhibitor (mdivi-1), a specific inhibitor of Drp1 GTPase activity, caused extensive formation of elongated mitochondria, which coincided with increased apoptosis evidenced by both enhanced caspase-3 activity and increased number of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells. Furthermore, the mdivi-1-treated myotubes (day 3 in differentiation media) showed a reduction in mitochondrial DNA content, mitochondrial mass, and membrane potential in a dose-dependent manner indicating defects in mitochondrial biogenesis during myogenic differentiation. Most interestingly, mdivi-1 treatment significantly suppressed myotube formation in both C2C12 cells and primary myoblasts. Likewise, stable overexpression of a dominant negative mutant Drp1 (K38A) dramatically reduced myogenic differentiation. These data suggest that Drp-1-dependent mitochondrial division is a necessary step for successful myogenic differentiation, and perturbation of mitochondrial dynamics hinders normal mitochondrial adaptations during muscle development. Therefore, in the present study, we report a novel physiological role of mitochondrial dynamics in myogenic differentiation.

[PMID: 20850011]
In response to many apoptotic stimuli, oligomerization of Bax is essential for mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization and the ensuing release of cytochrome c. These events are accompanied by mitochondrial fission that appears to require Drp1, a large GTPase of the dynamin superfamily. Loss of Drp1 leads to decreased cytochrome c release by a mechanism that is poorly understood. Here we show that Drp1 stimulates tBid-induced Bax oligomerization and cytochrome c release by promoting tethering and hemifusion of membranes in vitro. This function of Drp1 is independent of its GTPase activity and relies on arginine 247 and the presence of cardiolipin in membranes. In cells, overexpression of Drp1 R247A/E delays Bax oligomerization and cell death. Our findings uncover a function of Drp1 and provide insight into the mechanism of Bax oligomerization.

[PMID: 22020994]
Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa interacting protein 1 (BNIP1), which is predominantly localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is a pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3)-only protein. Here, we show that the expression of BNIP1 induced not only a highly interconnected ER network but also mitochondrial fragmentation in a BH3 domain-dependent manner. Functional analysis demonstrated that BNIP1 expression increased dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) expression followed by the mitochondrial translocation of Drp1 and subsequent mitochondrial fission. Both BNIP1-induced mitochondrial fission and the translocation of Drp1 were abrogated by Bcl-2 overexpression. These results collectively indicate that ER-specific BNIP1 plays an important role in mitochondrial dynamics by modulating the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 in a BH3 domain-dependent fashion.

[PMID: 25658204]
Mitochondrial division is essential for mitosis and metazoan development, but a mechanistic role in cancer biology remains unknown. Here, we examine the direct effects of oncogenic RAS(G12V)-mediated cellular transformation on the mitochondrial dynamics machinery and observe a positive selection for dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), a protein required for mitochondrial network division. Loss of DRP1 prevents RAS(G12V)-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and renders cells resistant to transformation. Conversely, in human tumor cell lines with activating MAPK mutations, inhibition of these signals leads to robust mitochondrial network reprogramming initiated by DRP1 loss resulting in mitochondrial hyper-fusion and increased mitochondrial metabolism. These phenotypes are mechanistically linked by ERK1/2 phosphorylation of DRP1 serine 616; DRP1(S616) phosphorylation is sufficient to phenocopy transformation-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, and DRP1(S616) phosphorylation status dichotomizes BRAF(WT) from BRAF(V600E)-positive lesions. These findings implicate mitochondrial division and DRP1 as crucial regulators of transformation with leverage in chemotherapeutic success.

[PMID: 23334860]
Closure of the ductus arteriosus (DA) is essential for the transition from fetal to neonatal patterns of circulation. Initial PO2-dependent vasoconstriction causes functional DA closure within minutes. Within days a fibrogenic, proliferative mechanism causes anatomic closure. Though modulated by endothelial-derived vasodilators and constrictors, O2 sensing is intrinsic to ductal smooth muscle cells and oxygen-induced DA constriction persists in the absence of endothelium, endothelin, and cyclooxygenase mediators. O2 increases mitochondrial-derived H2O2, which constricts ductal smooth muscle cells by raising intracellular calcium and activating rho kinase. However, the mechanism by which oxygen changes mitochondrial function is unknown. The purpose of this study was to determine whether mitochondrial fission is crucial for O2-induced DA constriction and closure. Using DA harvested from 30 term infants during correction of congenital heart disease, as well as DA from term rabbits, we demonstrate that mitochondrial fission is crucial for O2-induced constriction and closure. O2 rapidly (<5 minutes) causes mitochondrial fission by a cyclin-dependent kinase- mediated phosphorylation of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) at serine 616. Fission triggers a metabolic shift in the ductal smooth muscle cells that activates pyruvate dehydrogenase and increases mitochondrial H2O2 production. Subsequently, fission increases complex I activity. Mitochondrial-targeted catalase overexpression eliminates PO2-induced increases in mitochondrial-derived H2O2 and cytosolic calcium. The small molecule Drp1 inhibitor, Mdivi-1, and siDRP1 yield concordant results, inhibiting O2-induced constriction (without altering the response to phenylephrine or KCl) and preventing O2-induced increases in oxidative metabolism, cytosolic calcium, and ductal smooth muscle cells proliferation. Prolonged Drp1 inhibition reduces DA closure in a tissue culture model. Mitochondrial fission is an obligatory, early step in mammalian O2 sensing and offers a promising target for modulating DA patency.

[PMID: 16684605]
Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons degenerate in diabetic neuropathy (DN) and exhibit mitochondrial damage. We studied mitochondria of cultured DRG neurons exposed to high glucose as an in vitro model of DN. High glucose sequentially increases the expression, activation and localization of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bim and Bax and the mitochondrial fission protein dynamin-regulated protein 1 (Drp1). High glucose causes association of Drp1/Bax, similar to other apoptotic stimuli. Collectively, these events promote mitochondrial fragmentation and reduce mitochondrial number, suggestive of apoptotic mitochondrial fission. Drp1 is also upregulated in DRG from experimentally diabetic rats, suggesting a role for mitochondrial fission in DN. Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) protects high glucose-treated DRG neurons by preventing mitochondrial accumulation of Bim and Bax but does not modulate Drp1 expression or localization. We propose that mitochondria are compromised by convergence of Bim/Bax proteins with Drp1, which contributes to high glucose-induced injury in DRG neurons.

[PMID: 25012575]
Mitochondrial functions are essential for the survival and function of neurons. Recently, it has been demonstrated that mitochondrial functions are highly associated with mitochondrial morphology, which is dynamically changed by the balance between fusion and fission. Mitochondrial morphology is primarily controlled by the activation of dynamin-related proteins including dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), which promotes mitochondrial fission. Drp1 activity is regulated by several post-translational modifications, thereby modifying mitochondrial morphology. Here, we found that phosphorylation of Drp1 at serine 616 (S616) is mediated by cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) in post-mitotic rat neurons. Perturbation of CDK5 activity modified the level of Drp1S616 phosphorylation and mitochondrial morphology in neurons. In addition, phosphorylated Drp1S616 preferentially localized as a cytosolic monomer compared with total Drp1. Furthermore, roscovitine, a chemical inhibitor of CDKs, increased oligomerization and mitochondrial translocation of Drp1, suggesting that CDK5-dependent phosphorylation of Drp1 serves to reduce Drp1's fission-promoting activity. Taken together, we propose that CDK5 has a significant role in the regulation of mitochondrial morphology via inhibitory phosphorylation of Drp1S616 in post-mitotic neurons.

[PMID: 22703557]
Glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone, enhance hepatic energy metabolism and gluconeogenesis partly through changes in mitochondrial function. Mitochondrial function is influenced by the balance between mitochondrial fusion and fission events. However, whether glucocorticoids modulate mitochondrial function through the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics is currently unknown. Here, we report that the effects of dexamethasone on mitochondrial function and gluconeogenesis in hepatoma cells are dependent on the mitochondrial fission protein dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1). Dexamethasone increased routine oxygen consumption, maximal respiratory capacity, superoxide anion, proton leak, and gluconeogenesis in hepatoma cells. Under these conditions, dexamethasone altered mitochondrial morphology, which was paralleled by a large increase in Drp1 expression, and reduced mitofusin 1 (Mfn1) and Mfn2. In vivo dexamethasone treatment also enhanced Drp1 expression in mouse liver. On the basis of these observations, we analyzed the dependence on the Drp1 function of dexamethasone effects on mitochondrial respiration and gluconeogenesis. We show that the increase in mitochondrial respiration and gluconeogenesis induced by dexamethasone are hampered by the inhibition of Drp1 function. Our findings provide the first evidence that the effects of glucocorticoids on hepatic metabolism require the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1. In summary, we demonstrate that the mitochondrial effects of dexamethasone both on mitochondrial respiration and on the gluconeogenic pathway depend on Drp1.

[PMID: 24080278]
Direct DNA damage is often considered the primary cause of cancer in patients exposed to ionizing radiation or environmental carcinogens. Although mitochondria are known to play an important role in radiation-induced cellular response, the mechanisms by which cytoplasmic stimuli modulate mitochondrial dynamics and functions are largely unknown. In the present study, we examined changes in mitochondrial dynamics and functions triggered by α particle damage to the mitochondria in human small airway epithelial cells, using a precision microbeam irradiator with a beam width of 1 μm. Targeted cytoplasmic irradiation using this device resulted in mitochondrial fragmentation and a reduction of cytochrome c oxidase and succinate dehydrogenase activity, when compared with nonirradiated controls, suggesting a reduction in respiratory chain function. In addition, mitochondrial fragmentation or fission was associated with increased expression of the dynamin-like protein DRP1, which promotes mitochondrial fission. DRP1 inhibition by the drug mdivi-1 prevented radiation-induced mitochondrial fission, but respiratory chain function in mitochondria inhibited by radiation persisted for 12 hours. Irradiated cells also showed an increase in mitochondria-derived superoxide that could be quenched by dimethyl sulfoxide. Taken together, our results provide a mechanistic explanation for the extranuclear, nontargeted effects of ionizing radiation.

[PMID: 19638400]
Dynamin-related protein (Drp) 1 is a key regulator of mitochondrial fission and is composed of GTP-binding, Middle, insert B, and C-terminal GTPase effector (GED) domains. Drp1 associates with mitochondrial fission sites and promotes membrane constriction through its intrinsic GTPase activity. The mechanisms that regulate Drp1 activity remain poorly understood but are likely to involve reversible post-translational modifications, such as conjugation of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins. Through a detailed analysis, we find that Drp1 interacts with the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 via multiple regions and demonstrate that Drp1 is a direct target of SUMO modification by all three SUMO isoforms. While Drp1 does not harbor consensus SUMOylation sequences, our analysis identified2 clusters of lysine residues within the B domain that serve as noncanonical conjugation sites. Although initial analysis indicates that mitochondrial recruitment of ectopically expressed Drp1 in response to staurosporine is unaffected by loss of SUMOylation, we find that Drp1 SUMOylation is enhanced in the context of the K38A mutation. This dominant-negative mutant, which is deficient in GTP binding and hydrolysis, does not associate with mitochondria and prevents normal mitochondrial fission. This finding suggests that SUMOylation of Drp1 is linked to its activity cycle and is influenced by Drp1 localization.

[PMID: 23128392]
Mitochondria are highly dynamic and undergo constant fusion and fission that are essential for maintaining physiological functions of cells. Although dysfunction of mitochondria has been implicated in tumorigenesis, little is known about the roles of mitochondrial dynamics in metastasis, the major cause of cancer death. In the present study, we found a marked upregulation of mitochondrial fission protein dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) expression in human invasive breast carcinoma and metastases to lymph nodes. Compared with non-metastatic breast cancer cells, mitochondria also were more fragmented in metastatic breast cancer cells that express higher levels of total and active Drp1 and less mitochondrial fusion protein 1 (Mfn1). Silencing Drp1 or overexpression of Mfn1 resulted in mitochondria elongation or clusters, respectively, and significantly suppressed metastatic abilities of breast cancer cells. In contrast, silencing Mfn proteins led to mitochondrial fragmentation and enhanced metastatic abilities of breast cancer cells. Interestingly, these manipulations of mitochondrial dynamics altered the subcellular distribution of mitochondria in breast cancer cells. For example, silencing Drp1 or overexpression of Mfn1 inhibited lamellipodia formation, a key step for cancer metastasis, and suppressed chemoattractant-induced recruitment of mitochondria to lamellipodial regions. Conversely, silencing Mfn proteins resulted in more cell spreading and lamellipodia formation, causing accumulation of more mitochondria in lamellipodia regions. More importantly, treatment with a mitochondrial uncoupling agent or adenosine triphosphate synthesis inhibitor reduced lamellipodia formation and decreased breast cancer cell migration and invasion, suggesting a functional importance of mitochondria in breast cancer metastasis. Together, our findings show a new role and mechanism for regulation of cancer cell migration and invasion by mitochondrial dynamics. Thus targeting dysregulated Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission may provide a novel strategy for suppressing breast cancer metastasis.

[PMID: 25348719]
Mitochondria are dynamic organelles, and their fusion and fission regulate cellular signaling, development, and mitochondrial homeostasis, including mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) distribution. Cardiac myocytes have a specialized cytoplasmic structure where large mitochondria are aligned into tightly packed myofibril bundles; however, recent studies have revealed that mitochondrial dynamics also plays an important role in the formation and maintenance of cardiomyocytes. Here, we precisely analyzed the role of mitochondrial fission in vivo. The mitochondrial fission GTPase, Drp1, is highly expressed in the developing neonatal heart, and muscle-specific Drp1 knockout (Drp1-KO) mice showed neonatal lethality due to dilated cardiomyopathy. The Drp1 ablation in heart and primary cultured cardiomyocytes resulted in severe mtDNA nucleoid clustering and led to mosaic deficiency of mitochondrial respiration. The functional and structural alteration of mitochondria also led to immature myofibril assembly and defective cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Thus, the dynamics of mtDNA nucleoids regulated by mitochondrial fission is required for neonatal cardiomyocyte development by promoting homogeneous distribution of active mitochondria throughout the cardiomyocytes.

[PMID: 25036098]
Dynamin-Related Protein 1 (Drp1), a large GTPase of the dynamin superfamily, is required for mitochondrial fission in healthy and apoptotic cells. Drp1 activation is a complex process that involves translocation from the cytosol to the mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM) and assembly into rings/spirals at the MOM, leading to membrane constriction/division. Similar to dynamins, Drp1 contains GTPase (G), bundle signaling element (BSE) and stalk domains. However, instead of the lipid-interacting Pleckstrin Homology (PH) domain present in the dynamins, Drp1 contains the so-called B insert or variable domain that has been suggested to play an important role in Drp1 regulation. Different proteins have been implicated in Drp1 recruitment to the MOM, although how MOM-localized Drp1 acquires its fully functional status remains poorly understood. We found that Drp1 can interact with pure lipid bilayers enriched in the mitochondrion-specific phospholipid cardiolipin (CL). Building on our previous study, we now explore the specificity and functional consequences of this interaction. We show that a four lysine module located within the B insert of Drp1 interacts preferentially with CL over other anionic lipids. This interaction dramatically enhances Drp1 oligomerization and assembly-stimulated GTP hydrolysis. Our results add significantly to a growing body of evidence indicating that CL is an important regulator of many essential mitochondrial functions.

[PMID: 24388463]
Hypertension leads to cardiac hypertrophy as an adaptive response to increased workload. While initial development of hypertrophy is compensatory when contractile function is maintained, persistent stress on heart leads to deteriorated cardiac function and onset of heart failure. Mitochondrial dysfunction develops in the failing heart; however, whether it presents in compensatory cardiac hypertrophy is controversial. Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and age-matched normotensive Wistar Kyoto rats were used in the study. Mitochondrial function and remodeling-related mechanisms in the left ventricles were measured by enzyme activity tests, Western blots, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Compensatory cardiac hypertrophy in SHR was indicated by higher heart/weigh ratio, left ventricular systolic pressure and ±dp/dt(max) (P<.001, P<.05, and P<.01, respectively). Enzyme activities of mitochondrial complex I and II were significantly reduced (P<.05 and P<.01) in SHR in concert with decreased expression of complex subunits (P<.01 for NDUFS3, P=.068 for SDHB, and P<.05 for ATP5A1). Mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 was decreased (P<.05), while fusion protein OPA1 was increased (P<.01). Parkin and SirT1/AMPK-PGC-1α signaling, responsible for mitochondrial elimination and biogenesis respectively, were decreased in SHR (P<.01 for Parkin, P<.001 for SirT1 and p-AMPK). Our results implicated that mitochondrial function and remodeling, indicated by mitochondrial enzyme activities and remodeling-related molecules, were compromised in compensatory hypertrophied myocardium of the SHR hypertensive model. Mitochondrial function in compensatory hypertrophied myocardium is controversial. Our present study found mitochondrial dysfunction in the left ventricle of spontaneously hypertensive rats, which was possibly a result of compromised mitochondrial remodeling including mitochondrial dynamics, elimination, and biogenesis.

[PMID: 20649536]
Mitochondria in cells comprise a tubulovesicular network shaped continuously by complementary fission and fusion events. The mammalian Drp1 protein plays a key role in fission, while Mfn1, Mfn2, and OPA1 are required for fusion. Shifts in the balance between these opposing processes can occur rapidly, indicating that modifications to these proteins may regulate mitochondrial membrane dynamics. We highlight posttranslational modifications of the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1, for which these regulatory mechanisms are best characterized. This dynamin-related GTPase undergoes a number of steps to mediate mitochondrial fission, including translocation from cytoplasm to the mitochondrial outer membrane, higher-order assembly into spirals, GTP hydrolysis associated with a conformational change and membrane deformation, and ultimately disassembly. Many of these steps may be influenced by covalent modification of Drp1. We discuss the dynamic nature of Drp1 modifications and how they contribute not only to the normal regulation of mitochondrial division, but also to neuropathologic processes.

[PMID: 25332205]
Both fusion and fission contribute to mitochondrial quality control. How unopposed fusion affects survival of cardiomyocytes and left ventricular function in the heart is poorly understood. We investigated the role of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), a GTPase that mediates mitochondrial fission, in mediating mitochondrial autophagy, ventricular function, and stress resistance in the heart. Drp1 downregulation induced mitochondrial elongation, accumulation of damaged mitochondria, and increased apoptosis in cardiomyocytes at baseline. Drp1 downregulation also suppressed autophagosome formation and autophagic flux at baseline and in response to glucose deprivation in cardiomyocytes. The lack of lysosomal translocation of mitochondrially targeted Keima indicates that Drp1 downregulation suppressed mitochondrial autophagy. Mitochondrial elongation and accumulation of damaged mitochondria were also observed in tamoxifen-inducible cardiac-specific Drp1 knockout mice. After Drp1 downregulation, cardiac-specific Drp1 knockout mice developed left ventricular dysfunction, preceded by mitochondrial dysfunction, and died within 13 weeks. Autophagic flux is significantly suppressed in cardiac-specific Drp1 knockout mice. Although left ventricular function in cardiac-specific Drp1 heterozygous knockout mice was normal at 12 weeks of age, left ventricular function decreased more severely after 48 hours of fasting, and the infarct size/area at risk after ischemia/reperfusion was significantly greater in cardiac-specific Drp1 heterozygous knockout than in control mice. Disruption of Drp1 induces mitochondrial elongation, inhibits mitochondrial autophagy, and causes mitochondrial dysfunction, thereby promoting cardiac dysfunction and increased susceptibility to ischemia/reperfusion.

[PMID: 24485837]
Mitochondria are dynamic organelles, undergoing both fission and fusion regularly in interphase cells. Mitochondrial fission is thought to be part of a quality-control mechanism whereby damaged mitochondrial components are segregated from healthy components in an individual mitochondrion, followed by mitochondrial fission and degradation of the damaged daughter mitochondrion. Fission also plays a role in apoptosis. Defects in mitochondrial dynamics can lead to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease. Mitochondrial fission requires the dynamin GTPase Drp1, which assembles in a ring around the mitochondrion and appears to constrict both outer and inner mitochondrial membranes. However, mechanisms controlling Drp1 assembly on mammalian mitochondria are unclear. Recent results show that actin polymerization, driven by the endoplasmic reticulum-bound formin protein INF2, stimulates Drp1 assembly at fission sites. Here, we show that myosin II also plays a role in fission. Chemical inhibition by blebbistatin or small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated suppression of myosin IIA or myosin IIB causes an increase in mitochondrial length in both control cells and cells expressing constitutively active INF2. Active myosin II accumulates in puncta on mitochondria in an actin- and INF2-dependent manner. In addition, myosin II inhibition decreases Drp1 association with mitochondria. Based on these results, we propose a mechanistic model in which INF2-mediated actin polymerization leads to myosin II recruitment and constriction at the fission site, enhancing subsequent Drp1 accumulation and fission.

[PMID: 24878071]
Autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinson's disease is most often caused by mutations in the genes encoding the cytosolic E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin and the mitochondrial serine/threonine kinase PINK1. Studies in Drosophila models and mammalian cells have demonstrated that these proteins regulate various aspects of mitochondrial physiology, including organelle transport, dynamics and turnover. How PINK1 and Parkin orchestrate these processes, and whether they always do so within a common pathway remain to be clarified. We have revisited the role of PINK1 and Parkin in mitochondrial dynamics, and explored its relation to the mitochondrial clearance program controlled by these proteins. We show that PINK1 and Parkin promote Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission by mechanisms that are at least in part independent. Parkin-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation was abolished by treatments interfering with the calcium/calmodulin/calcineurin signaling pathway, suggesting that it requires dephosphorylation of serine 637 of Drp1. Parkinson's disease-causing mutations with differential impact on mitochondrial morphology and organelle degradation demonstrated that the pro-fission effect of Parkin is not required for efficient mitochondrial clearance. In contrast, the use of Förster energy transfer imaging microscopy revealed that Drp1 and Parkin are co-recruited to mitochondria in proximity of PINK1 following mitochondrial depolarization, indicating spatial coordination between these events in mitochondrial degradation. Our results also hint at a major role of the outer mitochondrial adaptor MiD51 in Drp1 recruitment and Parkin-dependent mitophagy. Altogether, our observations provide new insight into the mechanisms underlying the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics by Parkin and its relation to the mitochondrial clearance program mediated by the PINK1/Parkin pathway.

[PMID: 20179104]
Mitochondria display different morphologies, depending on cell type and physiological situation. In many senescent cell types, an extensive elongation of mitochondria occurs, implying that the increase of mitochondrial length in senescence could have a functional role. To test this hypothesis, human endothelial cells (HUVECs) were aged in vitro. Young HUVECs had tubular mitochondria, whereas senescent cells were characterized by long interconnected mitochondria. The change in mitochondrial morphology was caused by downregulation of the expression of Fis1 and Drp1, two proteins regulating mitochondrial fission. Targeted photodamage of mitochondria induced the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which triggered mitochondrial fragmentation and loss of membrane potential in young cells, whereas senescent cells proved to be resistant. Alterations of the Fis1 and Drp1 expression levels also influenced the expression of the putative serine-threonine kinase PINK1, which is associated with the PARK6 variant of Parkinson's disease. Downregulation of PINK1 or overexpression of a PINK1 mutant (G309D) increased the sensitivity against ROS in young cells. These results indicate that there is a Drp1- and Fis1-induced, and PINK1-mediated protection mechanism in senescent cells, which, when compromised, could contribute to the age-related progression of Parkinson's disease and arteriosclerosis.

[PMID: 15791210]
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can elicit proapoptotic signalling that results in transmission of Ca(2+) to the mitochondria, which in turn stimulates recruitment of the fission enzyme DRP1 to the surface of the organelle. Here, we show that BH3-only BIK activates this pathway at the ER in intact cells, resulting in mitochondrial fragmentation but little release of cytochrome c to the cytosol. The BIK-induced transformations in mitochondria are dynamic in nature and involve DRP1-dependent remodelling and opening of cristae, where the major stores of cytochrome c reside. This novel function for DRP1 is distinct from its recognized role in regulating mitochondrial fission. Selective permeabilization of the outer membrane with digitonin confirmed that BIK stimulation results in mobilization of intramitochondrial cytochrome c. Of note, BIK can cooperate with a weak BH3-only protein that targets mitochondria, such as NOXA, to activate BAX by a mechanism that is independent of DRP1 enzyme activity. When expressed together, BIK and NOXA cause rapid release of mobilized cytochrome c and activation of caspases.

[PMID: 25192600]
It is well established that mitochondrial fragmentation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Mitochondrial fission is mediated by dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), which is highly expressed in nervous system and regulated by various posttranslational modifications including phosphorylation. We identified glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)3β-dependent Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser(40) and Ser(44), which increases Drp1 GTPase activity and its mitochondrial distribution and could induce mitochondrial fragmentation. Moreover, neurons transfected with Ser(40)Ser(44) phosphomimic Drp1 showed increased mitochondria fragmentation and were more vulnerable to amyloid-β (Aβ)-induced apoptosis. Therefore, blocking GSK3β-induced Drp1 phosphorylation may be an effective way to protect neurons from Aβ toxicity. To address this, we designed and synthesized an artificial polypeptide named TAT-Drp1-SpS, which could specifically block GSK3β-induced Drp1 phosphorylation. Our results demonstrated that TAT-Drp1-SpS treatment could significantly reduce Aβ-induced neuronal apoptosis in cultured neurons. Notably, TAT-Drp1-SpS administration in hippocampus Cornu Ammonis 1 (CA1) region significantly reduced Aβ burden and rescued the memory deficits in AD transgenic mice. Although Aβ has multiple targets to exert its neurotoxicity, our findings suggested that GSK3β-induced mitochondrial fragmentation was, at least partially, mediated by Aβ toxicity and contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. Taken together, GSK3β-induced Drp1 phosphorylation provides a novel mechanism for mitochondrial fragmentation in AD, and our findings suggested a novel therapeutic strategy for AD.

[PMID: 24764190]
Major depression disorder (MDD) or depression is highly prevalent in individuals with diabetes, and the depressive symptoms are more severe and less responsive to antidepressant therapies in these patients. The underlying mechanism is little understood. We hypothesized that the pathophysiology of comorbid depression was more complex than that proposed for MDD and that neural cell death played a role in the disease severity. To test this hypothesis, we generated streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic mice. These mice had blood glucose levels threefold above controls and exhibited depressive phenotypes as judged by a battery of behavioral tests, thus confirming the comorbidity in mice. Immunohistological studies showed markedly increased TUNEL-positive cells in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of the comorbid mice, indicating apoptosis. This finding was supported by increased caspase-3 and decreased Bcl-2 proteins in these brain regions. In addition, the serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) level of comorbid mice was reduced compared with controls, further supporting the neurodegenerative change. Mechanistic analyses showed an increased expression of mitochondrial fission genes fission protein 1 (Fis1) and dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), and a decreased expression of mitochondrial fusion genes mitofusin 1 (Mfn1), mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) and optical atrophy 1 (Opa1). Representative assessment of the proteins Drp1 and Mfn2 mirrored the mRNA changes. The data demonstrated that neural cell death was associated with the depressive phenotype of comorbid mice and that a fission-dominant expression of genes and proteins mediating mitochondrial dynamics played a role in the hyperglycemia-induced cell death. The study provides new insight into the disease mechanism and could aid the development of novel therapeutics aimed at providing neuroprotection by modulating mitochondrial dynamics to treat comorbid depression with diabetes.

[PMID: 22367970]
We recently reported increased mitochondrial fission and decreased fusion, increased amyloid beta (Aβ) interaction with the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1, increased mitochondrial fragmentation, impaired axonal transport of mitochondria and synaptic degeneration in neurons affected by AD. In the present study, we extended our previous investigations to determine whether phosphorylated tau interacts with Drp1 and to elucidate mitochondrial damage in the progression of AD. We also investigated GTPase activity, which is critical for mitochondrial fragmentation, in postmortem brain tissues from patients with AD and brain tissues from APP, APP/PS1 and 3XTg.AD mice. Using co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analyses, for the first time, we demonstrated the physical interaction between phosphorylated tau and Drp1. Mitochondrial fission-linked GTPase activity was significantly elevated in the postmortem frontal cortex tissues from AD patients and cortical tissues from APP, APP/PS1 and 3XTg.AD mice. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that Drp1 interacts with Aβ and phosphorylated tau, likely leading to excessive mitochondrial fragmentation, and mitochondrial and synaptic deficiencies, ultimately possibly leading to neuronal damage and cognitive decline. Treatment designed to reduce the expression of Drp1, Aβ and/or phosphorylated tau may decrease the interaction between Drp1 and phosphorylated tau and the interaction between Drp1 and Aβ, conferring protection to neurons from toxic insults of excessive Drp1, Aβ and/or phosphorylated tau.

[PMID: 24755420]
Shigella infection in epithelial cells induces cell death which is accompanied by mitochondrial dysfunction. In this study the role of the mitochondrial fission protein, Drp1 during Shigella infection in HeLa cells was examined. Significant lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release was detected in the culture supernatant when HeLa cells were infected with Shigella at a high multiplicity of infection. Drp1 inhibition with Mdivi-1 and siRNA knockdown significantly reduced LDH release. HeLa cell death was also accompanied by mitochondrial fragmentation. Tubular mitochondrial networks were partially restored when Drp1 was depleted with either siRNA or inhibited with Mdivi-1. Surprisingly either Mdivi-1 treatment or Drp1 siRNA-depletion of HeLa cells also reduced Shigella plaque formation. The effect of Mdivi-1 on Shigella infection was assessed using the murine Sereny model, however it had no impact on ocular inflammation. Overall our results suggest that Drp1 and the mitochondria play important roles during Shigella infection.

[PMID: 24631294]
Evidence suggests an association between aberrant mitochondrial dynamics and cardiac diseases. Because myocardial metabolic deficiency caused by insulin resistance plays a crucial role in heart disease, we investigated the role of dynamin-related protein-1 (DRP1; a mitochondrial fission protein) in the pathogenesis of myocardial insulin resistance. DRP1-expressing H9c2 myocytes, which had fragmented mitochondria with mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) depolarization, exhibited attenuated insulin signaling and 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2-DG) uptake, indicating insulin resistance. Treatment of the DRP1-expressing myocytes with Mn(III)tetrakis(1-methyl-4-pyridyl)porphyrin pentachloride (TMPyP) significantly improved insulin resistance and mitochondrial dysfunction. When myocytes were exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), they increased DRP1 expression and mitochondrial fragmentation, resulting in ΔΨm depolarization and insulin resistance. When DRP1 was suppressed by siRNA, H2O2-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance were restored. Our results suggest that a mutual enhancement between DRP1 and reactive oxygen species could induce mitochondrial dysfunction and myocardial insulin resistance. In palmitate-induced insulin-resistant myocytes, neither DRP1-suppression nor TMPyP restored the ΔΨm depolarization and impaired 2-DG uptake, however they improved insulin signaling. A mutual enhancement between DRP1 and ROS could promote mitochondrial dysfunction and inhibition of insulin signal transduction. However, other mechanisms, including lipid metabolite-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, may be involved in palmitate-induced insulin resistance.

[PMID: 24616159]
Accumulating evidence indicate physiological significance of mitochondrial dynamics such as mitochondrial fusion and division, the dynamic movement of mitochondria along microtubules and interaction of mitochondria with the endoplasmic reticulum. A disruption in mitochondrial dynamics leads to a functional deterioration of mitochondria, resulting in a variety of diseases including neurodegenerative disorders. We previously identified a mitochondrial ubiquitin ligase MITOL/MARCH5, which belongs to the membrane-associated RING-CH E3 ubiquitin ligase (MARCH) family (also called MARCH5). MITOL plays an important role in the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics including mitochondrial morphology, transport and interaction with ER, at least in part, through the ubiquitinations of mitochondrial fission factor Drp1, microtubule-associated protein 1B and mitofusin2, respectively. This review focuses on recent findings that show how MITOL regulates mitochondrial dynamics and which suggest physiological disorders resulting from a failure in such regulation.

[PMID: 21613270]
PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and Parkin act in a common pathway to regulate mitochondrial dynamics, the involvement of which in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) is increasingly being appreciated. However, how the PINK1/Parkin pathway influences mitochondrial function is not well understood, and the exact role of this pathway in controlling mitochondrial dynamics remains controversial. Here we used mammalian primary neurons to examine the function of the PINK1/Parkin pathway in regulating mitochondrial dynamics and function. In rat hippocampal neurons, PINK1 or Parkin overexpression resulted in increased mitochondrial number, smaller mitochondrial size and reduced mitochondrial occupancy of neuronal processes, suggesting that the balance of mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics is tipped toward more fission. Conversely, inactivation of PINK1 resulted in elongated mitochondria, indicating that the balance of mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics is tipped toward more fusion. Furthermore, overexpression of the fission protein Drp1 (dynamin-related protein 1) or knocking down of the fusion protein OPA1 (optical atrophy 1) suppressed PINK1 RNAi-induced mitochondrial morphological defect, and overexpression of PINK1 or Parkin suppressed the elongated mitochondria phenotype caused by Drp1 RNAi. Functionally, PINK1 knockdown and overexpression had opposite effects on dendritic spine formation and neuronal vulnerability to excitotoxicity. Finally, we found that PINK1/Parkin similarly influenced mitochondrial dynamics in rat midbrain dopaminergic neurons. These results, together with previous findings in Drosophila dopaminergic neurons, indicate that the PINK1/Parkin pathway plays conserved roles in regulating neuronal mitochondrial dynamics and function.

[PMID: 21459773]
The purpose of our study was to better understand the relationship between mitochondrial structural proteins, particularly dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) and amyloid beta (Aβ) in the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Using qRT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses, we measured mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial structural genes in the frontal cortex of patients with early, definite and severe AD and in control subjects. We also characterized monomeric and oligomeric forms of Aβ in these patients. Using immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting analysis, we investigated the interaction between Aβ and Drp1. Using immunofluorescence analysis, we determined the localization of Drp1 and intraneuronal and oligomeric Aβ in the AD brains and primary hippocampal neurons from Aβ precursor protein (AβPP) transgenic mice. We found increased expression of the mitochondrial fission genes Drp1 and Fis1 (fission 1) and decreased expression of the mitochondrial fusion genes Mfn1 (mitofusin 1), Mfn2 (mitofusin 2), Opa1 (optic atrophy 1) and Tomm40. The matrix gene CypD was up-regulated in AD patients. Results from our qRT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses suggest that abnormal mitochondrial dynamics increase as AD progresses. Immunofluorescence analysis of the Drp1 antibody and the Aβ antibodies 6E10 and A11 revealed the colocalization of Drp1 and Aβ. Drp1 immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting analysis of Aβ antibodies 6E10 and A11 revealed that Drp1 interacts with Aβ monomers and oligomers in AD patients, and these abnormal interactions are increased with disease progression. Primary neurons that were found with accumulated oligomeric Aβ had lost branches and were degenerated, indicating that oligomeric Aβ may cause neuronal degeneration. These findings suggest that in patients with AD, increased production of Aβ and the interaction of Aβ with Drp1 are crucial factors in mitochondrial fragmentation, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic damage. Inhibiting, these abnormal interactions may be a therapeutic strategy to reduce mitochondrial fragmentation, neuronal and synaptic damage and cognitive decline in patients with AD.

[PMID: 25237193]
Drp1 is a dynamin-like GTPase that mediates mitochondrial and peroxisomal division in a process dependent on self-assembly and coupled to GTP hydrolysis. Despite the link between Drp1 malfunction and human disease, the molecular details of its membrane activity remain poorly understood. Here we reconstituted and directly visualized Drp1 activity in giant unilamellar vesicles. We quantified the effect of lipid composition and GTP on membrane binding and remodeling activity by fluorescence confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. In contrast to other dynamin relatives, Drp1 bound to both curved and flat membranes even in the absence of nucleotides. We also found that Drp1 induced membrane tubulation that was stimulated by cardiolipin. Moreover, Drp1 promoted membrane tethering dependent on the intrinsic curvature of the membrane lipids and on GTP. Interestingly, Drp1 concentrated at membrane contact surfaces and, in the presence of GTP, formed discrete clusters on the vesicles. Our findings support a role of Drp1 not only in the formation of lipid tubes but also on the stabilization of tightly apposed membranes, which are intermediate states in the process of mitochondrial fission.

[PMID: 26038571]
The role of Parkin in hearts is unclear. Germ-line Parkin knockout mice have normal hearts, but Parkin is protective in cardiac ischemia. Parkin-mediated mitophagy is reportedly either irrelevant, or a major factor, in the lethal cardiomyopathy evoked by cardiac myocyte-specific interruption of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1)-mediated mitochondrial fission. To understand the role of Parkin-mediated mitophagy in normal and mitochondrial fission-defective adult mouse hearts. Parkin mRNA and protein were present at low levels in normal mouse hearts, but were upregulated after cardiac myocyte-directed Drp1 gene deletion in adult mice. Alone, forced cardiac myocyte Parkin overexpression activated mitophagy without adverse effects. Likewise, cardiac myocyte-specific Parkin deletion evoked no adult cardiac phenotype, revealing no essential function for, and tolerance of, Parkin-mediated mitophagy in normal hearts. Concomitant conditional Parkin deletion with Drp1 ablation in adult mouse hearts prevented Parkin upregulation in mitochondria of fission-defective hearts, also increasing 6-week survival, improving ventricular ejection performance, mitigating adverse cardiac remodeling, and decreasing cardiac myocyte necrosis and replacement fibrosis. Underlying the Parkin knockout rescue was suppression of Drp1-induced hyper-mitophagy, assessed as ubiquitination of mitochondrial proteins and mitochondrial association of autophagosomal p62/sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) and processed microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3-II). Consequently, mitochondrial content of Drp1-deficient hearts was preserved. Parkin deletion did not alter characteristic mitochondrial enlargement of Drp1-deficient cardiac myocytes. Parkin is rare in normal hearts and dispensable for constitutive mitophagic quality control. Ablating Drp1 in adult mouse cardiac myocytes not only interrupts mitochondrial fission, but also markedly upregulates Parkin, thus provoking mitophagic mitochondrial depletion that contributes to the lethal cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 24302731]
It is believed that mitochondrial dynamics is coordinated with endosomal traffic rates during cytoskeletal remodeling, but the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. The adenovirus early region 4 ORF4 protein (E4orf4) subverts signaling by Src family kinases (SFK) to perturb cellular morphology, membrane traffic, and organellar dynamics and to trigger cell death. Using E4orf4 as a model, we uncovered a functional connection between mitochondria-shaping proteins and the small GTPase Rab11a, a key regulator of polarized transport via recycling endosomes. We found that E4orf4 induced dramatic changes in the morphology of mitochondria along with their mobilization at the vicinity of a polarized actin network typifying E4orf4 action, in a manner controlled by SFK and Rab11a. Mitochondrial remodeling was associated with increased proximity between Rab11a and mitochondrial membranes, changes in fusion-fission dynamics, and mitochondrial relocalization of the fission factor dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), which was regulated by the Rab11a effector protein FIP1/RCP. Knockdown of FIP1/RCP or inhibition of Drp1 markedly impaired mitochondrial remodeling and actin assembly, involving Rab11a-mediated mitochondrial dynamics in E4orf4-induced signaling. A similar mobilization of mitochondria near actin-rich structures was mediated by Rab11 and Drp1 in viral Src-transformed cells and contributed to the biogenesis of podosome rosettes. These findings suggest a role for Rab11a in the trafficking of Drp1 to mitochondria upon SFK activation and unravel a novel functional interplay between Rab11a and mitochondria during reshaping of the cell cytoskeleton, which would facilitate mitochondria redistribution near energy-requiring actin-rich structures.