[PMID: 18817898]
Transcription coupled repair (TCR) is a nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway that is dedicated to repair in the transcribed strand of an active gene. The genome overall NER is called global genomic repair (GGR). Elc1, the yeast homolog of the mammalian elongation factor elongin C, has been shown to be a component of a ubiquitin ligase complex that contains Rad7 and Rad16, two factors that are specifically required for GGR. Elc1 has also been suggested to be present in another ubiquitin ligase complex that lacks Rad7 and Rad16 and is involved in UV-induced ubiquitylation and subsequent degradation of RNA polymerase II. Here we show that elc1 deletion increases UV sensitivity of TCR-deficient cells but does not affect the UV sensitivity of otherwise wild type and GGR-deficient cells. Cells deleted for elc1 show normal NER in the transcribed strand of an active gene but have no detectable NER in the non-transcribed strand. Elc1 does not affect UV-induced mutagenesis when TCR is operative, but plays an important role in preventing the mutagenesis if TCR is defective. Furthermore, the levels of Rad7 and Rad16 proteins are not significantly decreased in elc1 cells, and overexpression of Rad7 and Rad16 individually or simultaneously in elc1 cells does not restore repair in the non-transcribed strand of an active gene. Our results suggest that Elc1 has no function in TCR but plays an important role in GGR. Furthermore, the role of Elc1 in GGR may not be subsidiary to that of Rad7 and Rad16.

[PMID: 8807287]
Transcription-coupled repair, the targeted repair of the transcribed strands of active genes, is defective in bacteria, yeast, and human cells carrying mutations in mfd, RAD26 and ERCC6, respectively. Other factors probably are also uniquely involved in transcription-repair coupling. Recently, a defect was described in transcription-coupled repair for Escherichia coli mismatch repair mutants and human tumor cell lines with mutations in mismatch repair genes. We examined removal of UV-induced DNA damage in yeast strains mutated in mismatch repair genes in an effort to confirm a defect in transcription-coupled repair in this system. In addition, we determined the contribution of the mismatch repair gene MSH2 to transcription-coupled repair in the absence of global genomic repair using rad7 delta mutants. We also determined whether the Rad26-independent transcription-coupled repair observed in rad26 delta and rad7 delta rad26 delta mutants depends on MSH2 by examining repair deficiencies of rad26 delta msh2 delta and rad7 delta rad26 delta msh2 delta mutants. We found no defects in transcription-coupled repair caused by mutations in the mismatch repair genes MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, and MSH3. Yeast appears to differ from bacteria and human cells in the capacity for transcription-coupled repair in a mismatch repair mutant background.

[PMID: 12142466]
A specialized nucleotide excision repair pathway known as transcription-coupled repair (TCR) counteracts the toxic effects of DNA damage in transcriptionally active genes. The clustering of active genes into gene-rich chromosomal domains predicts that the sites of TCR are unevenly distributed through the genome. To elucidate the genomic organization and chromosomal localization of TCR, we isolated DNA fragments encompassing TCR-mediated repair sites from UV-C irradiated xeroderma pigmentosum group C cells, which can only repair the transcribed strand of active genes. This DNA was used as a molecular probe to visualize TCR in normal metaphase spreads by reverse fluorescence in situ hybridization. Whereas DNA repair sites in normal human cells are evenly distributed through the genome, TCR is highly localized at specific chromosomal domains. Particularly, clusters of TCR sites were identified at early-replicating gene-rich bands and telomeric regions of several chromosomes. High gene-density chromosomes such as chromosome 19 and the GC-rich domains of several chromosomes (T bands) are preferential locations of TCR. Our results demonstrate that the intragenomic localization of TCR resembles the uneven distribution of the human transcriptome, CpG islands, and hyperacetylated histones, enforcing the basic link between DNA repair, transcription, and nuclear organization in a complex genome.

[PMID: 10637337]
We examined the role of yeast transcription initiation factor IIE (TFIIE) in eukaryotic transcription-coupled repair (TCR), the preferential removal of DNA damage from the transcribed strands of genes over non-transcribed sequences. TFIIE can recruit the transcription initiation/repair factor TFIIH to the RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) initiation complex to facilitate promoter clearance. Following exposure to UV radiation, the RNA pol II elongation complex is blocked at sites of UV-induced DNA damage, and may be recognized by nucleotide excision repair proteins, thus enabling TCR. The TFA1 gene encodes the large subunit of TFIIE. We determined how DNA repair is affected by TFA1 conditional mutations. In particular, we find proficient TCR in a heat-sensitive tfa1 mutant at the non-permissive temperature during which growth is inhibited and overall RNA pol II transcription is reported to be inhibited. We demonstrate that transcription of the RPB2 gene was reduced, but readily detectable, in the heat-sensitive tfa1 mutant at the non-permissive temperature and thereby prove that TCR does occur in an expressed gene in the absence of TFIIE in vivo. We demonstrate that TCR occurs even at low levels of transcription.

[PMID: 9637246]
Defects in DNA mismatch repair have been shown to lead to increased genomic instability and mutability. We recently found that human cells defective in the DNA mismatch repair gene, hMSH2, were deficient in the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) of both oxidative DNA damage, including thymine glycols, and UV-induced DNA damage. However, in a hMLH1 mutant, only a reduction in the TCR of UV damage was observed. In this study, we examined whether TCR of thymine glycols in Saccharomyces cerecisiae also requires the genes involved in DNA mismatch repair. We found that yeast cells containing mutations in MSH2 were deficient in the removal of thymine glycols from the transcribed strand of the RPB2 gene, while cells with mutations in either MLH1 or PMS1 alone showed near normal levels of TCR of thymine glycols. Interestingly, double mutants in the MLH1 and PMS1 genes were deficient in TCR of thymine glycols. Taken together, these results suggest that these two MutL homologues can act independently of each other, but that they have overlapping roles in TCR. Overall levels of thymine glycol removal were not reduced in the mismatch repair mutants. In contrast to the results with thymine glycols, no defects in TCR of pyrimidine dimers were found in cells with mutations in MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, and MLH1/PMS1.

[PMID: 11821423]
DNA damage is preferentially repaired in the transcribed strand of many active genes. Although the concept of DNA repair coupled with transcription has been widely accepted, its mechanisms remain elusive. We recently reported that in Chinese hamster ovary cells while ultraviolet light-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) are preferentially repaired in the transcribed strand of dihydrofolate reductase gene, CPDs are efficiently repaired in both strands of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) locus, in either a transcribed or nontranscribed APRT gene (1). These results suggested that the transcription dependence of repair may depend on genomic context. To test this hypothesis, we constructed transfectant cell lines containing a single, actively transcribed APRT gene, integrated at different genomic sites. Mapping of CPD repair in the integrated APRT genes in three transfectant cell lines revealed two distinct repair patterns, either preferential repair of CPDs in the transcribed strand or very poor repair in both strands. Similar kinetics of micrococcal nuclease digestion were seen for all three transfectant APRT gene domains and endogenous APRT locus. Our results suggest that both the efficiency and strand-specificity of repair of an actively transcribed gene are profoundly affected by genomic context but do not reflect changes in first order nucleosomal structure.

[PMID: 15380101]
7,8-Dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) is the most frequent mutagenic lesion caused by oxidative stress. Eukaryotic cells use a specific DNA glycosylase, OGG1, to excise 8-oxoG from DNA. The mild phenotype of OGG1 null mice has been attributed to the existence of alternative pathways, including Cockayne syndrome B (CSB)-dependent transcription coupled repair (TCR), for removal of 8-oxoG. We have studied repair and transcription activities at 8-oxoG lesions with a reconstituted transcription system (RTS; RNA polymerase II, TBP, TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIF and TFIIH), as well as in cellular extracts and in vivo. All measurable repair activity at 8-oxoG lesions takes place in the 3'-direction from the lesion, indicating base excision repair (BER) activity and negligible role of nucleotide excision repair (NER). Although 8-oxoG has been shown to be preferentially removed from the transcribed strand, in vitro experiments with purified transcription factors failed to identify a definite block for RNA polymerase II at the lesion. However, a weak block was observed at the lesion during transcription carried out with RTS as well as with cellular extracts. RNA polymerase II was identified at the site of the lesion on obstructed templates. Wild-type cells, as well as cells carrying targeted mutations of genes required for removal of 8-oxoG, were transfected with a luciferase expression vector containing an 8-oxoG lesion. No significant obstruction at 8-oxoG lesions was observed by this in vivo approach. In control experiments transcription elongation was completely blocked by cisplatin.

[PMID: 7957102]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a universal sub-pathway of the nucleotide excision repair (NER) system that is limited to the transcribed strand of active structural genes. It accomplishes the preferential elimination of transcription-blocking DNA lesions and permits rapid resumption of the vital process of transcription. A defect in TCR is responsible for the rare hereditary disorder Cockayne syndrome (CS). Recently we found that mutations in the ERCC6 repair gene, encoding a putative helicase, underly the repair defect of CS complementation group B. Here we report the cloning and characterization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog of CSB/ERCC6, which we designate RAD26. A rad26 disruption mutant appears viable and grows normally, indicating that the gene does not have an essential function. In analogy with CS, preferential repair of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in the transcribed strand of the active RBP2 gene is severely impaired. Surprisingly, in contrast to the human CS mutant, yeast RAD26 disruption does not induce any UV-, cisPt- or X-ray sensitivity, explaining why it was not isolated as a mutant before. Recovery of growth after UV exposure was somewhat delayed in rad26. These findings suggest that TCR in lower eukaryotes is not very important for cell survival and that the global genome repair pathway of NER is the major determinant of cellular resistance to genotoxicity.

[PMID: 9288788]
Defects in DNA mismatch repair have been associated with both hereditary and sporadic forms of cancer. Recently, it has been shown that human cell lines deficient in mismatch repair were also defective in the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) of UV-induced DNA damage. We examined whether TCR of ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage also requires the genes involved in DNA mismatch repair. Cells defective in the hMSH2 gene were deficient in the removal of oxidative damage, including thymine glycols, from the transcribed strand of an active gene. However, an hMLH1 mutant showed normal levels of TCR. By comparison, defects in either hMSH2 or hMLH1 resulted in reduced TCR of UV damage. Introducing chromosomes carrying either hMSH2 or hMLH1 into these cell lines restored their ability to carry out TCR. Deficiencies in either hMSH2 or hMLH1 did not result in decreased overall genomic levels of repair or lead to an increased sensitivity to either UV or ionizing radiation. Our results provide the first evidence for a protein that is absolutely required for the preferential removal of UV-induced DNA damage but not oxidative DNA damage from the transcribed strand of an active human gene.

[PMID: 15249207]
The blockage of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (pol II) at a DNA damage site on the transcribed strand triggers a transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR), which rapidly removes DNA damage on the transcribed strand of the expressed gene and allows the resumption of transcription. To analyze the effect of UV-induced DNA damage on transcription elongation, an in vitro transcription elongation system using pol II and oligo(dC)-tailed templates containing a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) or 6-4 photoproduct (6-4PP) at a specific site was employed. The results showed that pol II incorporated nucleotides opposite the CPD and 6-4PP and then stalled. Pol II formed a stable ternary complex consisting of pol II, the DNA damage template, and the nascent transcript. Furthermore, atomic force microscopy imaging revealed that pol II stalled at the damaged region. These findings may provide the basis for analysis of the initiation step of TCR.

[PMID: 17893751]
The eukaryotic cell encounters more than one million various kinds of DNA lesions per day. The nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway is one of the most important repair mechanisms that removes a wide spectrum of different DNA lesions. NER operates through two sub pathways: global genome repair (GGR) and transcription-coupled repair (TCR). GGR repairs the DNA damage throughout the entire genome and is initiated by the HR23B/XPC complex, while the CSB protein-governed TCR process removes DNA lesions from the actively transcribed strand. The sequence of events and the role of particular NER proteins are currently being extensively discussed. NER proteins also participate in other cellular processes like replication, transcription, chromatin maintenance and protein turnover. Defects in NER underlay severe genetic disorders: xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), Cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodystrophy (TTD).

[PMID: 22902626]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is the major pathway involved in the removal of UV-induced photolesions from the transcribed strand of active genes. Two Cockayne syndrome (CS) complementation group proteins, CSA and CSB, are important for TCR repair. The molecular mechanisms by which CS proteins regulate TCR remain elusive. Here, we report the characterization of KIAA1530, an evolutionarily conserved protein that participates in this pathway through its interaction with CSA and the TFIIH complex. We found that UV irradiation led to the recruitment of KIAA1530 onto chromatin in a CSA-dependent manner. Cells lacking KIAA1530 were highly sensitive to UV irradiation and displayed deficiency in TCR. In addition, KIAA1530 depletion abrogated stability of the CSB protein following UV irradiation. More excitingly, we found that a unique CSA mutant (W361C), which was previously identified in a patient with UV(s)S syndrome, showed defective KIAA1530 binding and resulted in a failure of recruiting KIAA1530 and stabilizing CSB after UV treatment. Together, our data not only reveal that KIAA1530 is an important player in TCR but also lead to a better understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying UV(s)S syndrome.

[PMID: 20463888]
Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER), which removes a variety of helix-distorting lesions from DNA, is initiated by two distinct DNA damage-sensing mechanisms. Transcription Coupled Repair (TCR) removes damage from the active strand of transcribed genes and depends on the SWI/SNF family protein CSB. Global Genome Repair (GGR) removes damage present elsewhere in the genome and depends on damage recognition by the XPC/RAD23/Centrin2 complex. Currently, it is not well understood to what extent both pathways contribute to genome maintenance and cell survival in a developing organism exposed to UV light. Here, we show that eukaryotic NER, initiated by two distinct subpathways, is well conserved in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. In C. elegans, involvement of TCR and GGR in the UV-induced DNA damage response changes during development. In germ cells and early embryos, we find that GGR is the major pathway contributing to normal development and survival after UV irradiation, whereas in later developmental stages TCR is predominantly engaged. Furthermore, we identify four ISWI/Cohesin and four SWI/SNF family chromatin remodeling factors that are implicated in the UV damage response in a developmental stage dependent manner. These in vivo studies strongly suggest that involvement of different repair pathways and chromatin remodeling proteins in UV-induced DNA repair depends on developmental stage of cells.

[PMID: 11182543]
Transcription coupled repair (TCR), a special sub-pathway of nucleotide excision repair (NER), removes transcription blocking lesions rapidly from the transcribing strand of active genes. In this study, we have evaluated the importance of the TCR pathway in the induction of chromosomal aberrations and apoptosis in isogenic Chinese hamster cell lines, which differ in TCR efficiency. AA8 is the parental cell line, which is proficient in the genome overall repair of UV-C radiation induced 6-4 photoproducts (6-4 PP) and the repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) from the transcribing strand of active genes. UV61 cells (hamster homologue of human Cockayne's syndrome (CS) group B cells) originally isolated from AA8, exhibit proficient repair of 6-4 PP but are deficient in CPD removal by the TCR pathway. Upon UV-C irradiation of cells in G1-phase, UV61 showed a dramatic increase in apoptotic response as compared to AA8 cells. Abolition of TCR by treatment with alpha-amanitin (an inhibitor of RNA polymerase II) in AA8 cells also resulted in an elevated apoptotic response like that observed in UV61 cells treated with UV alone. This suggests that the lack of TCR is largely responsible for increased apoptotic response in UV61 cells. Furthermore, the chromosomal aberrations and sister chromatid exchange (SCE) induced by UV were also found to be higher in UV61 cells than in TCR proficient AA8 cells. This study shows that the increased chromosomal aberrations and apoptotic death in UV61 cells is due to their inability to remove CPD from the transcribing strand of active genes and suggests a protective role for TCR in the prevention of both chromosomal aberrations and apoptosis induced by DNA damage. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis and time-course appearance of apoptotic cells suggest that the conversion of UV-DNA damage into chromosomal aberrations precedes and determines the apoptotic process.

[PMID: 15913669]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is generally observed as more rapid or more efficient removal of certain types of DNA damage from the transcribed strands of expressed genes compared with the nontranscribed strands. It has been clearly demonstrated to be a subpathway of nucleotide excision repair (NER) in E. coli, yeast and mammalian cells. Genetic and biochemical studies indicate that it is a highly complex process and requires the participation of the NER pathway, the RNA polymerase complex and additional factors. An early event in TCR is likely the blocking of RNA polymerase complex elongation by damage present in the transcribed strands of expressed genes. Whether TCR is involved in base excision repair pathways or the repair of common forms of oxidative damage is less clear. This review is focused on the description of possible mechanisms of TCR in E. coli and mammalian cells.

[PMID: 17015469]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER), which is arguably the most versatile DNA repair system, is strongly attenuated in human cells of the monocytic lineage when they differentiate into macrophages. Within active genes, however, both DNA strands continue to be proficiently repaired. The proficient repair of the nontranscribed strand cannot be explained by the dedicated subpathway of transcription-coupled repair (TCR), which is targeted to the transcribed strand in expressed genes. We now report that the previously termed differentiation-associated repair (DAR) depends upon transcription, but not simply upon RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) encountering a lesion: proficient repair of both DNA strands can occur in a part of a gene that the polymerase never reaches, and even if the translocation of RNAPII is blocked with transcription inhibitors. This suggests that DAR may be a subset of global NER, restricted to the subnuclear compartments or chromatin domains within which transcription occurs. Downregulation of selected NER genes with small interfering RNA has confirmed that DAR relies upon the same genes as global genome repair, rather than upon TCR-specific genes. Our findings support the general view that the genomic domains within which transcription is active are more accessible than the bulk of the genome to the recognition and repair of lesions through the global pathway and that TCR is superimposed upon that pathway of NER.

[PMID: 14599741]
DNA damage results in the up-regulation of several genes involved in different cellular physiological processes, such as the nucleotide excision repair (NER) mechanism that copes with a broad range of DNA alterations, including the carcinogenic ultraviolet (UV) light-induced pyrimidine dimers (PDs). There are two NER sub-pathways: transcription coupled repair (TCR) that is specific for the transcribed strands (TS) of active genes and global genomic repair (GGR) that repairs non-transcribed DNA sequences (NTD) and the non-transcribed strands (NTS) of expressed genes. To elucidate the role of UV-dependent de novo protein synthesis in nucleotide excision repair in the budding yeast, we investigated the effect of the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, on the removal of PDs. Log phase as well as G(1)-synchronized cells were treated with the drug shortly before UV irradiation and immediately thereafter, and the repair of damaged DNA was assessed with the high resolution primer extension technique. The results show that in both cellular conditions, the inhibition of UV-dependent de novo protein synthesis by cycloheximide impairs the excision repair of the transcriptionally active GAL10 and URA3 genes, with a greater effect on the non-transcribed strands. This indicates that UV-mediated de novo protein synthesis is required for efficient nucleotide excision repair, but not for the preferential repair of the TSs. On the other hand, cycloheximide did not affect the repair of either strand of the repressed GAL10 gene or the non-transcribed promoter region of the URA3 gene, showing that UV-induced de novo protein synthesis is not required for PD removal from transcriptionally inactive DNA sequences. Together, these data show that despite the fact that NTD and NTSs are normally repaired by the GGR sub-pathway, their requirement for UV-dependent de novo protein synthesis is different, which may suggest a difference in the processing of UV lesions in these non-transcribed sequences of the genome.

[PMID: 14599769]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a multistep process capable to remove a variety of DNA distorting lesions from prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes. In eukaryotic cells, the process requires more than 30 proteins to perform the different steps, i.e. recognition of DNA damage, single strand incisions and excision of the lesion-containing DNA fragment and DNA repair synthesis/ligation. NER can operate via two subpathways: global genome repair (GGR) and a specialized pathway coupled to active transcription (transcription-coupled repair, TCR) and directed to DNA lesions in the transcribed strand of active genes. Both in vivo as well as in cultured cells the fast removal of transcription blocking lesions by TCR is crucial to escape from lethal effects of inhibited transcription inhibition The most delicate step in NER is the recognition of the DNA lesions in their different chromatin context and the mechanism of damage recognition in GGR and TCR is principally different and requires specific proteins. In GGR, the XPC-HR23B is essential for the formation of the incision complex. In TCR the Cockayne syndrome (CS) gene products are key players in the recognition of a stalled RNA polymerase the presumed signaling structure for repair of transcribed strands. In this study, we show that the extent of recovery of UV-inhibited transcription and TCR strictly depends on the amount of CSB protein as well as the amount of DNA damage present in the cell. This indicates that the ratio between DNA damage frequency and CSB protein concentration in the cell is rather critical for acute cellular response, i.e. recovery of inhibited transcription upon DNA damage infliction, and hence cellular survival.

[PMID: 9065408]
In humans, DNA lesions such as pyrimidine dimers in the template strand of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II are repaired faster than those in the coding strand and nontranscribed regions of the genome. This phenomenon, referred to as transcription-coupled repair (i) requires active transcription, (ii) does not require the XPC gene product which is essential for general/basal repair reactions, and (iii) requires the CSA and CSB proteins. We have developed an in vitro model system that consists of purified human excision repair factors and a DNA substrate analogous to a transcription bubble terminating at a cyclobutane thymine dimer. In this system the thymine dimer was excised independent of XPC. Furthermore, the thymine dimer in the bubble-containing substrate was removed approximately 3-fold faster by the excision repair nuclease reconstituted with or without XPC, compared with the removal of thymine dimer from a base paired duplex by the entire set of excision nuclease factors. These results provide important insight into the mechanism of transcription-coupled repair in humans.

[PMID: 8972850]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) mechanism is the major pathway responsible for the removal of a large variety of bulky lesions from the genome. Two different NER subpathways have been identified, i.e. the transcription-coupled and the global genome repair pathways. For DNA-damage induced by ultraviolet light both transcription-coupled repair and global genome repair are essential to confer resistance to cytotoxic effects. To gain further insight into the contribution of NER subpathways in the repair of bulky lesions and in their prevention of biological effects we measured the rate of repair of dG-C8-AF in active and inactive genes in normal human cells, XP-C cells (only transcription-coupled repair) and XP-A cells (completely NER-deficient) exposed to NA-AAF. XP-C cells are only slightly more sensitive to NA-AAF than normal cells and, like normal cells, they are able to recover RNA synthesis repressed by the treatment. In contrast, XP-A cells are sensitive to NA-AAF and unable to recover from RNA synthesis inhibition. Repair of dG-C8-AF in the active ADA gene proceeds in a biphasic way and without strand specificity, with a subclass of lesions quickly repaired during the first 8 h after treatment. Repair in the inactive 754 gene occurs more slowly than in the ADA gene. In XP-C cells, repair of dG-C8-AF in the ADA gene is confined to the transcribed strand and occurs at about half the rate of repair seen in normal cells. Repair in the inactive 754 gene in XP-C cells is virtually absent. Consistent with these results we found that repair replication in XP-C is drastically reduced when compared with normal cells and abolished by alpha-amanitin indicating that the repair in XP-C cells is mediated by transcription-coupled repair only. Our data suggest that dG-C8-AF is a target for transcription-coupled repair and that this repair pathway is the main pathway or recovery of RNA synthesis inhibition conferring resistance to cytotoxic effects of NA-AAF. In spite of this, repair of dG-C8-AF in active genes in normal cells by transcription-coupled repair and global genome repair is not additive, but dominated by global genome repair. This indicates that the subset of lesions which are capable of stalling RNA polymerase II, and are, therefore, a substrate for TCR, are also the lesions which are very efficiently recognized by the global genome repair system.

[PMID: 9934845]
The genetic disorders xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne syndrome (CS) exhibit deficiencies in the repair of UV-induced DNA damage. CS fibroblasts retain proficient nucleotide excision repair (NER) of inactive (or bulk) DNA, but are deficient in the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) of active genes. In contrast, XP complementation group C (XP-C) fibroblasts retain proficient TCR, but are deficient in bulk DNA repair. The remaining NER-deficient XP groups exhibit deficiencies in both repair pathways. Ad5HCMVsp1lacZ is a recombinant adenovirus vector that is unable to replicate in human fibroblasts, but can efficiently infect and express the beta-galactosidase reporter gene in these cells. We have examined the host cell reactivation (HCR) of beta-galactosidase activity for UV-irradiated Ad5HCMVsp1lacZ in non-irradiated and UV-irradiated normal, XP-B, XP-C, XP-D, XP-F, XP-G, CS-A and CS-B fibroblasts. HCR of beta-galactosidase activity for UV-irradiated Ad5HCMVsp1lacZ was reduced in non-irradiated cells from each of the repair-deficient groups examined (including XP-C) relative to that in non-irradiated normal cells. Prior irradiation of cells with low UV fluences resulted in an enhancement of HCR for normal and XP-C strains, but not for the remaining XP and CS strains. HCR of the UV-damaged reporter gene in UV-irradiated XP and CS strains was similar to measurements of TCR reported previously for these cells. These results suggest that UV treatment results in an induced repair of UV-damaged DNA in the transcribed strand of an active gene in XP-C and normal cells through an enhancement of TCR or a mechanism which involves the TCR pathway.

[PMID: 16158195]
We have used a non-replicating recombinant adenovirus, Ad5MCMVlacZ, which expresses the beta-galactosidase reporter gene, to examine both constitutive and inducible repair of UV-damaged DNA in repair proficient CHO-AA8 Chinese hamster ovary cells and in mutant CHO-UV61 cells which are deficient in the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) pathway of nucleotide excision repair. Host cell reactivation (HCR) of beta-galactosidase activity for UV-irradiated Ad5MCMVlacZ was significantly reduced in non-irradiated CHO-UV61 cells compared to that in non-irradiated CHO-AA8 cells suggesting that repair in the transcribed strand of the UV-damaged reporter gene in untreated cells utilizes TCR. Prior UV-irradiation of cells with low UV fluences resulted in a transient enhancement of HCR for expression of the UV-damaged reporter gene in CHO-AA8 cells but not in TCR deficient CHO-UV61 cells. These results suggest the presence of an inducible DNA pathway in CHO cells that results from an enhancement of TCR or a mechanism that involves the TCR pathway.

[PMID: 18291710]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a pathway dedicated to the removal of damage from the template strands of actively transcribed genes. Although the detailed mechanism of TCR is not yet understood, it is believed to be triggered when a translocating RNA polymerase is arrested at a lesion or unusual structure in the DNA. Conventional assays for TCR require high doses of DNA damage for the statistical analysis of repair in the individual strands of DNA sequences ranging in size from a few hundred bases to 30kb. The single cell gel electrophoresis (Comet) assay allows detection of single- or double-strand breaks at a 10-100-fold higher level of resolution. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) combined with the Comet assay (Comet-FISH) affords a heightened level of sensitivity for the assessment of repair in defined DNA sequences of cells treated with physiologically relevant doses of genotoxins. This approach also reveals localized susceptibility to chromosomal breakage in cells from individuals with hypersensitivity to radiation or chemotherapy. Several groups have reported preferential repair in transcriptionally active genes or chromosomal domains using Comet-FISH. The prevailing interpretation of the behavior of DNA in the Comet assay assumes that the DNA is arranged in loops and matrix-attachment sites; that supercoiled, undamaged loops are contained within the nuclear matrix and appear in Comet "heads", and that Comet "tails" consist of relaxed DNA loops containing one or more breaks. According to this model, localization of FISH probes in Comet heads signifies that loops containing the targeted sequences are free of damage. This implies that preferential repair as detected by Comet-FISH might encompass large chromosomal domains containing both transcribed and non-transcribed sequences. We review the existing evidence and discuss the implications in relation to current models for the molecular mechanism of TCR.

[PMID: 9150262]
Two different subpathways play a role in removal of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) by nucleotide excision repair (NER). The relatively slow global genome repair subpathway operates on all CPDs irrespective of their position in the DNA, whereas the transcription-coupled repair subpathway is responsible for the rapid removal of CPDs from transcribed strands. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the RAD26 gene is implicated in transcription-coupled repair. However, transcription-coupled repair is not completely absent in rad26 mutants, and therefore other gene products are possibly involved in this subpathway. Based on in vitro experiments with purified components, the transcription elongation factor S-II appeared to be a candidate for a function in transcription-coupled repair. To investigate a possible role of S-II in transcription-coupled repair in vivo in yeast, S-II null mutations were introduced into various genetic backgrounds differing in NER capacity. UV sensitivity was not altered by disruption of the S-II gene in a RAD+ (NER proficient) strain, or in rad26 (impaired in efficient transcription-coupled repair), rad7 (lacking global genome repair), or rad7 rad26 (lacking global genome repair, but having residual transcription-coupled repair capacity) mutants. Moreover, S-II did not influence the repair rate on the transcribed strand of the RPB2 gene, either in repair-proficient or in rad7 rad26 backgrounds. Hence, transcription-coupled repair is fully functional in yeast cells lacking the gene encoding S-II. Furthermore, S-II is not required for the Rad26-independent residual transcription-coupled repair in vivo.

[PMID: 22749141]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a subpathway of nucleotide excision repair (NER) that acts specifically on lesions in the transcribed strand of expressed genes. First reported in mammalian cells, TCR was then documented in Escherichia coli. In this organism, an RNA polymerase arrested at a lesion is displaced by the transcription repair coupling factor, Mfd. This protein recruits the NER lesion-recognition factor UvrA, and then dissociates from the DNA. UvrA binds UvrB, and the assembled UvrAB* complex initiates repair. In mutants lacking active Mfd, TCR is absent. A gene transcribed by the bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase in E. coli also requires Mfd for TCR. The CSB protein (missing or defective in cells of patients with Cockayne syndrome, complementation group B) is essential for TCR in humans. CSB and its homologs in higher eukaryotes are likely functional equivalents of Mfd.

[PMID: 21466822]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a remarkably versatile DNA repair system, essential for maintenance of genomic stability. Hereditary alterations in NER enzymes can result in increased cancer propensity, but also in developmental, neurodegenerative, and progeroid syndromes. NER can be operationally divided in three subtypes, which share many common steps: global genomic repair (GGR) operates on the whole genome level, transcription domain-associated repair (DAR) is a concentration of NER activity within transcription factories, and transcription-coupled repair (TCR) provides faster repair of the transcribed strand of active genes. Interestingly, ubiquitination plays an important role in all three classes of NER, as well as in associated phenomena, such as damage signalling by histone ubiquitination, and degradation of stalled RNA polymerase II when repair does not occur in a timely manner.

[PMID: 16394029]
Stem cells, one of the progenitors of cancer, exist predominately in a quiescent state. Thus, understanding the mechanisms of DNA repair and mutagenesis in such arrested cells may help unravel the complex process of tumorigenesis. Two major nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathways are known to remove bulky physical or chemical lesions from DNA. Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) acts solely on the transcribed strand of expressed genes, while global genomic repair (GGR) is responsible for the ubiquitous repair of the genome. Indirectly, it has been shown that while TCR functions in quiescent cells GGR does not. To explicitly elucidate this phenomenon, we adapted a quantitative PCR (QPCR) assay to study UV-damage repair via TCR and GGR in quiescent and proliferating cells. We present evidence that repair of untranscribed silent regions of the genome and repair of the non-transcribed strand of active genes proceeds by two discrete mechanisms in quiescent cells; rather than by GGR, which was believed to encompass both. Thus, our findings suggest the existence of an alternate NER pathway in quiescent cells. The proposed subcategories of NER are as follows: (i) TCR, responsible for maintenance of transcribed strands; (ii) GGR, responsible for ubiquitous genome repair; and (iii) non-transcribed strand repair (NTSR), predominantly responsible for the repair of the NTS in arrested cells. In quiescent cells, it is evident that TCR and NTSR function and GGR are arrested. As a consequence, mutation accumulation at temporally silent genes and incomplete or imperfect repair of transcribed genes, in quiescent stem cells, may provide a source of cancer causing mutations.

[PMID: 15186415]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) in eukaryotes is a pathway conserved from yeast to humans that removes many bulky chemical adducts and UV-induced photoproducts from DNA in a relatively error-free manner. In addition to the recognition and excision of DNA damage throughout the genome (GGR), there exists a mechanism, transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TCR), for recognizing some types of DNA damage in the transcribed strand of genes in Escherichia coli, yeast and mammalian cells. An obstacle in the repair of the transcribed strand of active genes is the RNA polymerase complex stalled at sites of DNA damage. The stalled RNA polymerase complex may then mediate recruitment of repair proteins to damage in the transcribed strand. Proteins enabling TCR are the Cockayne syndrome B (CSB) protein in humans and its yeast homologue Rad26. Both CSB and Rad26 belong to the Swi2/Snf2 family of DNA-dependent ATPases, which change DNA accessibility to proteins by altering chromatin structure. To address how Rad26 functions in yeast repair, we used the genetic approach of overexpressing Rad26 and examined phenotypic changes, i.e. changes in NER. We found that repair of both the transcribed and the non-transcribed strands is increased. In addition, overexpression of Rad26 partially bypasses the requirement for Rad7 in GGR, specifically in the repair of non-transcribed sequences. As TCR takes place in very localized regions of DNA (i.e. within genes) in wild-type cells, we propose that overexpression of recombinant Rad26 increases accessibility of the damaged DNA in chromatin for interaction with repair proteins.

[PMID: 21214942]
In eukaryotic cells, there are two sub-pathways of nucleotide excision repair (NER), the global genome (gg) NER and the transcription-coupled repair (TCR). TCR can preferentially remove the bulky DNA lesions located at the transcribed strand of a transcriptional active gene more rapidly than those at the untranscribed strand or overall genomic DNA. This strand-specific repair in a suitable restriction fragment is usually determined by alkaline gel electrophoresis followed by Southern blotting transfer and hybridization with an indirect end-labeled single-stranded probe. Here we describe a new method of TCR assay based on strand-specific-PCR (SS-PCR). Using this method, we have investigated the role of DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKK) family, in the TCR pathway of UV-induced DNA damage. Although depletion of DNA-PKcs sensitized HeLa cells to UV radiation, it did not affect the ggNER efficiency of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) damage. We postulated that DNA-PKcs may involve in the TCR process. To test this hypothesis, we have firstly developed a novel method of TCR assay based on the strand-specific PCR technology with a set of smart primers, which allows the strand-specific amplification of a restricted gene fragment of UV radiation-damaged genomic DNA in mammalian cells. Using this new method, we confirmed that siRNA-mediated downregulation of Cockayne syndrome B resulted in a deficiency of TCR of the UV-damaged dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene. In addition, DMSO-induced silencing of the c-myc gene led to a decreased TCR efficiency of UV radiation-damaged c-myc gene in HL60 cells. On the basis of the above methodology verification, we found that the depletion of DNA-PKcs mediated by siRNA significantly decreased the TCR capacity of repairing the UV-induced CPDs damage in DHFR gene in HeLa cells, indicating that DNA-PKcs may also be involved in the TCR pathway of DNA damage repair. By means of immunoprecipitation and MALDI-TOF-Mass spectrometric analysis, we have revealed the interaction of DNA-PKcs and cyclin T2, which is a subunit of the human transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb). While the P-TEFb complex can phosphorylate the serine 2 of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and promote transcription elongation. A new method of TCR assay was developed based the strand-specific-PCR (SS-PCR). Our data suggest that DNA-PKcs plays a role in the TCR pathway of UV-damaged DNA. One possible mechanistic hypothesis is that DNA-PKcs may function through associating with CyclinT2/CDK9 (P-TEFb) to modulate the activity of RNA Pol II, which has already been identified as a key molecule recognizing and initializing TCR.

[PMID: 11452033]
It has been previously shown that disruption of RAD26 in yeast strain W303-1B results in a strain that is deficient in transcription-coupled repair (TCR), the preferential repair of the transcribed strand of an expressed gene over the non-transcribed strand and the rest of the genome. RAD26 encodes a protein that is homologous to Cockayne syndrome group B protein (CSB) and is a member of the SWI2/SNF2 family of DNA-dependent ATPases involved in chromatin remodeling. Like the rad26 mutant, cells from Cockayne syndrome patients are defective in TCR. We examined the role of Rad26 in TCR by disrupting RAD26 in two repair-proficient laboratory strains and, remarkably, observed no effect upon TCR. Our results indicate that disruption of RAD26 alone is insufficient to impair TCR. Thus, W303-1B must already possess a mutation that, together with disruption of RAD26, causes a deficiency in TCR. We suggest that other genes are mutated in Cockayne syndrome cells that contribute to the deficiency in TCR. Surprisingly, deletion of RAD26 results in expression of genes that are repressed by flanking transposon delta elements, an Spt(-) phenotype. The delta elements appear to perturb local chromatin structure. Expression of genes flanked by delta elements in rad26Delta mutants is consistent with a role for Rad26 in chromatin remodeling.

[PMID: 20978633]
This review concerns reversion of the argE3 (ochre) nonsense mutation to prototrophy in E. coli AB1157 strain as an informative system for mutation detection. Strain AB1157 bears the argE3 (ochre), hisG4 (ochre) and thr-1 (amber) mutations, and the supE44 amber suppressor on its chromosome. The Arg(+) phenotype can be restored by (i) any base substitution at the argE3 site that changes the nonsense UAA codon to any sense nucleotide triplet or to UAG recognized by the supE44 amber suppressor, or (ii) suppressor mutations enabling the reading of the UAA nonsense codon. The argE3 → Arg(+) reversion-based system enables (i) determination of the spontaneous or induced mutation level; (ii) determination of base substitutions (suppressor analysis); (iii) examination of transcription-coupled repair (TCR) since targets for DNA damage are situated on the transcribed or coding strand of DNA; (iv) detection of mutations resulting from single stranded DNA damage. This review focuses on studies carried out since the early 1990s till now with the application of the AB1157-based mutation detection system. Recently, the system has been used to obtain new data on the processes of methyl methanesulfonate-induced mutagenesis and DNA repair in E. coli alkB⁻ mutants.

[PMID: 19381941]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a sub-pathway of nucleotide excision repair that allows for the enhanced repair of the transcribed strand of active genes. A classical method to study DNA repair in vivo consists in the molecular analysis of UV-induced DNA damages at specific loci. Cells are irradiated with a defined dose of UV light leading to the formation of DNA lesions and incubated in the dark to allow repair. About 90% of the photoproducts consist of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, which can be cleaved by the DNA nicking activity of the T4 endonuclease V (T4endoV) repair enzyme. Strand-specific repair in a suitable restriction fragment is determined by alkaline gel electrophoresis followed by Southern blot transfer and indirect end-labeling using a single-stranded probe. Recent approaches have assessed the role of transcription factors in TCR by analyzing RNA polymerase II occupancy on a damaged template by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Cells are treated with formaldehyde in vivo to cross-link proteins to DNA and enrichment of a protein of interest is done by subsequent immunoprecipitation. Upon reversal of the protein-DNA cross-links, the amount of coprecipitated DNA fragments can be detected by quantitative PCR. To perform ChIP on UV-damaged templates, we included an in vitro photoreactivation step prior to PCR analysis to ensure that all precipitated DNA fragments serve as substrates for the PCR reaction. Here, we provide a detailed protocol for both the DNA repair analysis and the ChIP approaches to study TCR in chromatin.

[PMID: 16978026]
A dedicated excision repair pathway, termed transcription-coupled repair (TCR), targets the removal of DNA lesions from transcribed strands of expressed genes. Transcription arrest at the site of the lesion has been proposed as the first step for initiation of TCR. In support of this model, a strong correlation between arrest of transcription by a lesion in vitro and TCR of that lesion in vivo has been found in most cases analyzed. TCR has been reported for oxidative DNA damage; however, very little is known about how frequently occurring and spontaneous DNA damage, such as depurination and base deamination, affects progression of the transcription complex. We have previously determined that the oxidative lesion, thymine glycol, is a significant block to transcription by T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) but has no detectable effect on transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) in a reconstituted system with all of the required factors. Another oxidative lesion, 8-oxoguanine, only slightly blocked T7 RNAP and caused RNAP II to briefly pause at the lesion before bypassing it. Because an abasic site is an intermediate in the repair of oxidative damage, it was of interest to learn whether it arrested transcription. Using in vitro transcription assays and substrates containing a specifically positioned lesion, we found that an abasic site in the transcribed strand is a 60% block to transcription by T7 RNAP but nearly a complete block to transcription by mammalian RNAP II. An abasic site in the nontranscribed strand did not block either polymerase. Our results clearly indicate that an abasic site is a much stronger block to transcription than either a thymine glycol or an 8-oxoguanine. Because the predominant model for TCR postulates that only lesions that block RNAP will be subject to TCR, our findings suggest that the abasic site may be sufficient to initiate TCR in vivo.

[PMID: 14734564]
Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) and global genomic repair (GGR) of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers were investigated in the yeast GAL1-10 genes. Both Rpb9- and Rad26-mediated TCR are confined to the transcribed strands, initiating at upstream sites approximately 100 nucleotides from the upstream activating sequence shared by the two genes. However, TCR initiation sites do not correlate with either transcription start sites or TATA boxes. Rad16-mediated GGR tightly correlates with nucleosome positioning when the genes are repressed and are slow in the nucleosome core and fast in linker DNA. Induction of transcription enhanced GGR in nucleosome core DNA, especially in the nucleosomes around and upstream of the transcription start sites. Furthermore, when the genes were induced, GGR was slower in the transcribed regions than in the upstream regions. Finally, simultaneous deletion of RAD16, RAD26, and RPB9 resulted in no detectable repair in all sites along the region analyzed. Our results suggest that (a). TCR may be initiated by a transcription activator, presumably through the loading of RNA polymerase II, rather than by transcription initiation or elongation per se; (b). TCR and nucleosome disruption-enhanced GGR are the major causes of rapid repair in regions around and upstream of transcription start sites; (c). transcription machinery may hinder access of NER factors to a DNA lesion in the absence of a transcription-repair coupling factor; and (d). other than GGR mediated by Rad16 and TCR mediated by Rad26 and Rpb9, no other nucleotide excision repair pathway exists in these RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes.

[PMID: 12509290]
Many different cellular pathways have evolved to protect the genome from the deleterious effects of DNA damage that result from exposure to chemical and physical agents. Among these is a process called transcription-coupled repair (TCR) that catalyzes the removal of DNA lesions from the transcribed strand of expressed genes, often resulting in a preferential bias of damage clearance from this strand relative to its non-transcribed counterpart. Lesions subject to this type of repair include cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers that are normally repaired by nucleotide excision repair (NER) and thymine glycols (TGs) that are removed primarily by base excision repair (BER). While the mechanism underlying TCR is not completely clear, it is known that its facilitation requires proteins used by other repair pathways like NER. It is also believed that the signal for TCR is the stalled RNA polymerase that results when DNA damage prevents its translocation during transcription elongation. While there is a clear role for some NER proteins in TCR, the involvement of BER proteins is less clear. To explore this further, we studied the removal of 7-methylguanine (7MeG) and 3-methyladenine (3MeA) from the dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) gene of murine cell lines that vary in their repair phenotypes. 7MeG and 3MeA constitute the two principal N-methylpurines formed in DNA following exposure to methylating agents. In mammalian cells, alkyladenine DNA alkyladenine glycosylase (Aag) is the major enzyme required for the repair of these lesions via BER, and their removal from the total genome is quite rapid. There is no observable TCR of these lesions in specific genes in DNA repair proficient cells; however, it is possible that the rapid repair of these adducts by BER masks any TCR. The repair of 3MeA and 7MeG was examined in cells lacking Aag, NER, or both Aag and NER to determine if rapid overall repair masks TCR. The results show that both 3MeA and 7MeG are removed without strand bias from the dhfr gene of BER deficient (Aag deficient) and NER deficient murine cell lines. Furthermore, repair of 3MeA in this region is highly dependent on Aag, but repair of 7MeG is equally efficient in the repair proficient, BER deficient, and NER deficient cell lines. Strikingly, in the absence of both BER and NER, neither 7MeG nor 3MeA is repaired. These results demonstrate that NER, but not TCR, contributes to the repair of 7MeG, and to a lesser extent 3MeA.