[PMID: 15279074]
Pendred syndrome and the enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) are considered phenotypic variations of the same entity due to mutations in the SLC26A4 (pendrin) gene. Pendred syndrome consists in sensorineural deafness, goiter and impaired thyroid hormone synthesis while in EVA thyroid function seems to be preserved. The aim of this study was to evaluate thyroid function and morphology and to look for mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in patients presented with EVA. Among 57 consecutive patients with sensorineural deafness 15 with EVA, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), were identified and studied. A complete evaluation of thyroid function including thyroid echography and perchlorate discharge test was carried out in all patients with EVA; all exons of the SLC26A4 gene were amplified from peripheral leukocytes and directly sequenced, using specific intronic primers. Out of 15 patients with EVA, goiter was present in 8 (53%), hypothyroidism in 7 (47%), increased serum thyroglobulin levels in 8 (53%) and a positive perchlorate discharge test in 10 (67%). Nine alleles of the SLC26A4 gene were mutated: 2 novel mutations (L465W and G497R) and 4 already known mutations (T410M, R409H, T505N and IVS1001+1G>A) were found. Four subjects were compound heterozygous and 1 heterozygous (G497R/wt). All patients harbouring mutations in the SLC26A4 gene had goiter and a positive perchlorate discharge test: 3 were slightly hypothyroid and 2 euthyroid. The remaining 10 patients had no mutations in the SLC26A4 gene: 4 of them were hypothyroid, 2 with goiter and positive perchlorate discharge test, 2 without goiter and with negative perchlorate discharge test. Two patients without mutations were euthyroid with positive perchlorate discharge test. Patients with mutations in the SLC26A4 gene had larger thyroid volume (p<0.002), higher serum thyroglobulin (Tg) levels (p<0.002) and greater radioiodine discharge after perchlorate (p=0.09) than patients without mutations. The results of the present study lend support to the concept that all patients with mutated SLC26A4 gene have abnormalities of thyroid function tests.

[PMID: 20298745]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural deafness, goiter and a partial defect in iodide organification. Goiter development and hypothyroidism vary and appear to depend on nutritional iodide intake. Pendred syndrome is caused by biallelic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, which encodes pendrin, a multifunctional anion exchanger. Pendrin is mainly expressed in the thyroid, the inner ear, and the kidney. In the thyroid, pendrin localizes to the apical membrane of thyrocytes, where it may be involved in mediating iodide efflux. Loss-of-function mutations in the SLC26A4 gene are associated with a partial iodide organification defect, presumably because of a reduced iodide efflux into the follicular lumen. In the kidney, pendrin functions as a chloride/bicarbonate exchanger. In the inner ear, pendrin is important in the maintenance of a normal anion transport and the endocochlear potential. Elucidation of the function of pendrin has provided unexpected novel insights into the pathophysiology of thyroid hormone biosynthesis, chloride retention in the kidney, and composition of the endolymph.

[PMID: 15355436]
Sensorineural hearing defect and goiter are common features of Pendred's syndrome. The clinical diagnosis of Pendred's syndrome remains difficult because of the lack of sensitivity and specificity of the thyroid signs. The identification of PDS as the causative gene allowed molecular screening and enabled a re-evaluation of the syndrome to identify potential diagnostic characteristics. This report presents the clinical and genotypic findings of 30 French families, for whom a diagnosis of Pendred's syndrome had been made. Twenty-seven families had at least one mutated allele. Twenty-eight different mutations were identified, 11 of which had never been previously reported. The main clinical characteristics were: early hearing loss, fluctuation in terms of during deafness evolution, and the presence of an enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

[PMID: 17697873]
Pendred syndrome (PS) is an autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss, goiter, and a partial iodine organification defect. In this study, we characterized the thyroid status and identified mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in Chinese subjects with PS. We evaluated 7 unrelated Chinese subjects who had PS. Biochemical analysis, formal audiogram, ultrasonography of the thyroid gland, perchlorate discharge test, computerized tomography scan of the vestibular aqueducts, and DNA sequence analysis of SLC26A4 were performed. Levels of thyroid hormones were essentially normal in all patients: 2 patients had goiters and/or elevated serum thyroglobulin levels, whereas 2 other patients had positive thyroid antibodies and a positive perchlorate discharge test. We identified SLC26A4 gene mutations in 6 of 7 probands and their affected relatives. The affected subjects in family I was compound heterozygous for 2 missense mutations: a mutation in exon 9 (1079C>T) that resulted in the replacement of alanine by valine at codon 360 (A360V) and a mutation in exon 19 (2168A>G) that resulted in the replacement of histidine by arginine at codon 723 (H723R). The affected subjects in families II and III all were homozygous for a mutation in intron 7. The probands IV and V were compound heterozygotes for the mutation in intron 7 and in exon 19, and the proband VI was compound heterozygous for the intron 7 mutation and a missense mutation in exon 12 (1343C>T) that resulted in the replacement of serine by leucine at codon 448 (S448L). One novel mutation was identified (A360V). We identified biallelic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in 6 of 7 probands with PS in Taiwan, including a novel missense mutation. The mild thyroid dysfunction in these patients suggests that PS should be considered in all patients with congenital or early-onset hearing impairment.

[PMID: 7492068]
Four families, 29 members, with Pendred's syndrome were studied to clarify hearing loss and hormonal status. The ages ranged from 3 to 50 years. Complete Pendred's syndrome was found in 9 patients. They had bilateral profound hearing loss with residual hearing at low frequencies. Goiter was diagnosed at the age of 1 to 14 years with a positive perchlorate discharge test. Twelve of the patients' relatives showed partial Pendred's syndrome. Mild sensorineural hearing losses occurred in the low- and medium-range frequencies with normal perchlorate discharge test results in 6 cases. The other 6 had a slight drop in the perchlorate discharge test results with normal hearing. Five subjects were normal and 3 had normal hormonal and normal perchlorate discharge test results, but were not tested audiologically. This paper shows that patients with Pendred's syndrome may have goiter at birth or develop it between 8 and 14 years, that their deafness is bilateral and profound, and that their perchlorate discharge tests are positive. Relatives of Pendred's syndrome patients showed mild low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss without goiter and normal perchlorate discharge test results in half the cases, and a slight drop in the perchlorate discharge test results with normal hearing and without goiter in the other half. A correlation between these findings and genetic studies needs further investigation.

[PMID: 16263499]
Perchlorate has been detected in groundwater in many parts of the United States, and recent detection in vegetable and dairy food products indicates that contamination by perchlorate is more widespread than previously thought. Perchlorate is a competitive inhibitor of the sodium iodide symporter, the thyroid cell-surface protein responsible for transporting iodide from the plasma into the thyroid. An estimated 4.3% of the U.S. population is subclinically hypothyroid, and 6.9% of pregnant women may have low iodine intake. Congenital hypothyroidism affects 1 in 3,000 to 1 in 4,000 infants, and 15% of these cases have been attributed to genetic defects. Our objective in this review is to identify genetic biomarkers that would help define subpopulations sensitive to environmental perchlorate exposure. We review the literature to identify genetic defects involved in the iodination process of the thyroid hormone synthesis, particularly defects in iodide transport from circulation into the thyroid cell, defects in iodide transport from the thyroid cell to the follicular lumen (Pendred syndrome), and defects of iodide organification. Furthermore, we summarize relevant studies of perchlorate in humans. Because of perchlorate inhibition of iodide uptake, it is biologically plausible that chronic ingestion of perchlorate through contaminated sources may cause some degree of iodine discharge in populations that are genetically susceptible to defects in the iodination process of the thyroid hormone synthesis, thus deteriorating their conditions. We conclude that future studies linking human disease and environmental perchlorate exposure should consider the genetic makeup of the participants, actual perchlorate exposure levels, and individual iodine intake/excretion levels.

[PMID: 15807875]
To determine the proportion of the various types of thyroid disorders among newborns detected by the neonatal TSH screening programme, with a normally located thyroid gland. Patients and methods Of the 882 575 infants screened in our centre between 1981 and 2002, 85 infants with a normally located gland had persistent elevation of serum TSH values (an incidence of 1/10 383). Six of these 85 patients were lost to follow-up and were therefore excluded from the study. During follow-up, patients were classified as having permanent or transient hypothyroidism. Among the 79 patients included in the study, transient (n = 30, 38% of cases) and permanent (n = 49, 62% of cases) congenital hypothyroidism (CH) was demonstrated during the follow-up at the age of 0.7 +/- 0.6 years and 2.6 +/- 1.8 years (P < 0.0001), respectively. The proportion of premature births was significantly higher in the group with transient CH (57%) than in the group with permanent CH (2%) (P < 0.0001). A history of iatrogenic iodine overload was identified during the neonatal period in 69% of transient cases. Among permanent CH cases (n = 49), patients were classified as having a goitre (n = 27, 55% of cases), a normal sized and shaped thyroid gland (n = 14, 29% of cases) or a hypoplastic gland (n = 8, 16% of cases). The latter patients demonstrated global thyroid hypoplasia (n = 3), a right hemithyroid (n = 2), hypoplasia of the left lobe (n = 2), or asymmetry in the location of the two lobes (n = 1). Patients with a normal sized and shaped thyroid gland showed a significantly less severe form of hypothyroidism than those with a goitre or a hypoplastic thyroid gland (P < 0.0002). Among permanent CH cases, those with a goitre (n = 27) had an iodine organification defect (n = 10), Pendred syndrome (n = 1), a defect of thyroglobulin synthesis (n = 8), or a defect of sodium iodine symporter (n = 1), and in seven patients no aetiology could be determined. Among permanent cases with a normal sized and shaped thyroid gland (n = 14), a specific aetiology was found in only one patient (pseudohypoparathyroidism) and two patients had Down's syndrome. Among those with a globally hypoplastic gland, a TSH receptor gene mutation was found in two patients. A precise description of the phenotype can enhance our understanding of various forms of neonatal hypothyroidism as well as their prevalence and management. It also helps to identify cases of congenital hypothyroidism of unknown aetiology, which will need to be investigated in collaboration with molecular biologists.

[PMID: 21511235]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder defined by sensorineural deafness, goiter and a partial defect in the organification of iodide. It is caused by biallelic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, which encodes pendrin, a multifunctional anion exchanger. At the level of the inner ear, pendrin is important for the creation of a normal endolymph composition and the maintenance of the endocochlear potential. In the thyroid, pendrin is expressed at the apical membrane of thyroid follicular cells and it appears to be involved in mediating iodide efflux into the lumen and/or maintenance of the follicular pH. Goiter development and hypothyroidism vary among affected individuals and seem to be partially dependent on nutritional iodide intake. In the kidney, pendrin functions as a chloride/bicarbonate exchanger. Elucidation of the molecular basis of Pendred syndrome and the function of pendrin has provided unexpected novel insights into the pathophysiology of the inner ear, thyroid hormone synthesis, and chloride/bicarbonate exchange in the kidney.

[PMID: 18692402]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural hearing impairment, presence of goiter, and a partial defect in iodide organification, which may be associated with insufficient thyroid hormone synthesis. Goiter development and development of hypothyroidism are variable and depend on nutritional iodide intake. Pendred syndrome is caused by biallelic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, which encodes pendrin, a transporter of chloride, bicarbonate and iodide. This review discusses the controversies surrounding the potential role of pendrin in mediating apical iodide efflux into the lumen of thyroid follicles, and discusses its functional role in the kidney and the inner ear.

[PMID: 19205523]
The Pendred syndrome (PS) is an autosomally recessively inherited disease. Its diagnosis requires identification of the classical triad of symptoms, including hypoacusis, thyroid goitre and iodine organification defect in the thyroid, which may lead to thyroid functional disorders of hypothyroidism. SP is accompanied by anatomical anomalies. The objective is the hearing and balance system evaluation and the analysis of the inner ear structure and also the assessment of the function and structure of thyroid gland. For the research four families were qualified, 7 persons with PS, 12 persons altogether. In all the patients the anamnesis in the form of a questionnaire and laryngological examination were performed. It was followed by pure tone, speech and impedance audiometry and brainstem response testing as well. ENG was also conducted. Patients with hearing loss were subjected to magnetic resonance of temporal bone. For the whole group thyroid hormones levels and iodine organification in the thyroid identified in a test with potassium perchlorate were measured and also USG and scyntography were conducted. In audiological examination in 3 cases deafness, in 2 cases profound hypoacusis and in 2 mild hypoacusis were recognised. In the group in 2 patients the hypoacusis was of a mixed type. In radiological assessment the labirynth showed anatomical anomalies in the form of enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct and the endolyphatic sac, yet in 3 patients the anomalies also concerned the structure of cochlear and semicircular canals. Endocrine examination showed hypothyroidism in 5, its subclinical form in 1, diffuse thyroid goitre in 4 and nodular thyroid goiter in 2 cases. A complex clinical evaluation: endocrine and audiological, together with radiological diagnostic imaging, supported by molecular studies of SLC26A4 gene, are the procedures, necessary for complete and accurate diagnosis of PS and EVAS.

[PMID: 15863666]
Congenital hypothyroidism is the most common neonatal metabolic disorder and results in severe neurodevelopmental impairment and infertility if untreated. Congenital hypothyroidism is usually sporadic but up to 2% of thyroid dysgenesis is familial, and congenital hypothyroidism caused by organification defects is often recessively inherited. The candidate genes associated with this genetically heterogeneous disorder form two main groups: those causing thyroid gland dysgenesis and those causing dyshormonogenesis. Genes associated with thyroid gland dysgenesis include the TSH receptor in non-syndromic congenital hypothyroidism, and Gsalpha and the thyroid transcription factors (TTF-1, TTF-2, and Pax-8), associated with different complex syndromes that include congenital hypothyroidism. Among those causing dyshormonogenesis, the thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin genes were initially described, and more recently PDS (Pendred syndrome), NIS (sodium iodide symporter), and THOX2 (thyroid oxidase 2) gene defects. There is also early evidence for a third group of congenital hypothyroid conditions associated with iodothyronine transporter defects associated with severe neurological sequelae. This review focuses on the genetic aspects of primary congenital hypothyroidism.

[PMID: 17322586]
Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, Pendred syndrome is a disease that shows congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goiter, with a positive finding in the perchlorate discharge test. Pendred syndrome results from various mutations in the PDS/SLC26A4 gene that cause production of an abnormal pendrin protein. More than 90 mutations in the PDS/SLC26A4 gene have been reported throughout the world. A recent study of 26 Korean patients with a relatively high frequency (65%) of a mutated PDS/SLC26A4 gene exhibited nonsyndromic deafness and an enlarged vestibular aqueduct. We report two patients with characteristics of typical Pendred syndrome, a 26-yr-old female and a 61-yr-old male, who were both homozygous for a previously reported missense mutation, H723R (Histidine 723Arginine) in the PDS/SLC26A4 gene.

[PMID: 7852510]
We studied thyroid tissue from two siblings with Pendred's syndrome (familial goiter and congenital deafness), both with the Mondini-type inner ear malformation, goiter, and hypothyroidism. Iodine trapping and peroxidase levels were grossly normal. Thyroglobulin (Tg), the only iodoprotein found, had a normal monomer size (330 kilodaltons), but low content of hormone and iodine. Tg's expected N-terminal peptides of 26 and 18 kilodaltons, usually formed in association with iodination and thyroid hormone synthesis, were absent, but appeared after iodination in vitro. Reverse transcription of ribonucleic acid from Pendred thyroid tissue and amplification by polymerase chain reaction of specific regions encoding the most important hormonogenic sites of Tg revealed a normal complementary DNA sequence corresponding to the first 100 amino acid residues in Tg's N-terminus. However, 3 of 35 clones of the 3'-region corresponding to the Tg C-terminus exhibited a deletion of nucleotides 7860-7994; this deletion was not present in any of the 150 clones from 7 other thyroids we examined. Four Pendred clones had a 2-nucleotide deletion at positions 7870-7871, a change that would result in a premature stop codon and was found in thyroids from several other subjects as well. We conclude that the messenger ribonucleic acid encoding the 3'-region of Tg can be abnormal in Pendred's syndrome. Some, but not all, of these changes also occur in other human thyroids. Further work is necessary to show if and how these alterations relate to defective hormone synthesis and goiter.

[PMID: 20822748]
We report a clinical and genetic study of three consanguineous Tunisian families affected by Pendred syndrome. Three families from the south of Tunisia were identified as affected by Pendred syndrome. The patients and their families underwent ENT and general examination and audiovestibular and radiological tests. Molecular DNA analysis was performed by the Sfax Human Molecular Genetics Department. Forty-three patients (mean age: 21 years [2-60 years]) were affected. Tonal audiometry showed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in 87.5% of cases, and mixed hearing loss in 12.5% with bilateral high frequency sensorineural hearing loss and conductive hearing loss at lower frequencies. Deafness was severe in 21% and profound in 79% of cases. Thyroid goiter was found in 46.5% of cases. Inner ear CT scan found enlarged bilateral vestibular aqueducts in all cases. Hormone analysis was normal and perchlorate test negative in all cases. A single Pendred syndrome (PDS) gene mutation, L445W, was found. Pendred syndrome is the most frequent congenital deafness syndrome. It is characterized by great intrafamilial phenotype variability.

[PMID: 1159063]
A 52-yr-old woman and her 47-yr-old brother both had large goiters, short stature, nerve deafness, and mild intellectual impairment. Serum levels of thyroid hormones were normal (sister) on borderline low (brother), urinary 127I levels were normal, and perchlorate discharge tests were negative. After adminstration of 125I, we found normal uptakes and retention of istotope by the thyroid, normal serum half-lives for PB 125I, and absence of labelled iodotyrosines in serum or urine. Particulate fractions from both glands had peroxidase activity by in vitro tests for guaiacol oxidation and tyrosine iodination. Samples from different parts of the sister's gland showed a correlation between peroxidase activity in vitro and radioiodine uptake in vivo. We made three separate preparations of thyroglobulin from the sister and one from the brother by gel filtration on 4% agarose. These were similar to each other and to thyrolobulin samples from normal humans when examined by gel electrophoresis both before and after reduction and alkylation. However, the three thyroglobulins from the same gland differed significantly from one another in their composition of most amino acids. This finding indicates that there can be heterogeneity in the protein portion of thyroglobulin, and since the three samples of thyroglobulin were from the same individual, this heterogeneity was probably not of genetic origin. In these patients we could not demonstrate any of the well-established biochemical defects associated with familial goiter. An abnormality in thyroglobulin structure remains in distinct possibility, but we must defer conclusions until there is more known about thyroglobulin heterogeneity and its relationship to hormone biosynthesis.

[PMID: 22116361]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder defined by sensorineural deafness, goiter and a partial organification defect of iodide. It is caused by biallelic mutations in the multifunctional anion transporter pendrin/SLC26A4. In human thyroid tissue, pendrin is localized at the apical membrane of thyroid follicular cells. The clinical phenotype of patients with Pendred syndrome and the fact that pendrin can mediate iodide efflux in transfected cells suggest that this anion exchanger may be involved in mediating iodide efflux into the follicular lumen, a key step in thyroid hormone biosynthesis. This concept has, however, been questioned. This review discusses supporting evidence as well as arguments questioning a role of pendrin in mediating iodide efflux in thyrocytes.

[PMID: 11375792]
The autosomal recessive Pendred's syndrome is defined by congenital sensorineural deafness, goiter, and impaired iodide organification. It is caused by mutations in the Pendred's syndrome (PDS) gene that encodes pendrin, a chloride/iodide transporter expressed in the thyroid, the inner ear, and the kidney. To perform a detailed clinical and molecular analysis of patients with Pendred's syndrome from four patients from three unrelated Mexican families. Thyroid function tests, perchlorate test, thyroid scintigraphy, audiometry, computer tomography and magnetic resonance imaging were performed in all affected individuals. Haplotype analyses were performed using microsatellite markers flanking the PDS locus, and the PDS gene was submitted to direct sequence analysis. All patients presented with sensorineural deafness, Mondini malformations of the cochlea, an enlarged vestibular aqueduct, goiter, and a positive perchlorate test. Two patients were hypothyroid, two individuals were euthyroid. Sequence analysis revealed a complex homozygous deletion/insertion mutation at the end of exon 4 in the index patient of family 1 resulting in a premature stop codon at position 138. In family 2, the affected individuals were compound heterozygous for a splice acceptor mutation (IVS2 -1G>A) and a 1231G>C transversion substituting alanine 411 by proline (A411P). In family 3, the index patient was found to be homozygous for a transversion 412G>T in exon 4 replacing valine 138 by phenylalanine (V138F). All patients included in this study presented with the classic Pendred syndrome triad and molecular analysis revealed pendrin mutations as the underlying cause. The identification of three novel mutations, one of them of complex structure, expands the spectrum of mutations in the PDS gene and emphasizes that they display marked allelic heterogeneity.

[PMID: 10571950]
Pendred syndrome is a recessive inherited disorder that consists of developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, sensorineural hearing loss, and diffuse thyroid enlargement (goiter). This disorder may account for up to 10% of cases of hereditary deafness. The disease gene (PDS) has been mapped to chromosome 7q22-q31, and encodes a chloride-iodide transport protein. We performed mutation analysis of individual exons of the PDS gene in one Spanish family that shows intrafamilial variability of the deafness phenotype (two patients with profound and one with moderate-severe deafness). We identified a new splice-site mutation affecting intron 4 of the PDS gene, at nucleotide position 639+7. RNA analysis from lymphocytes of the affected patients showed that mutation 639+7A-->G generates a new donor splice site, leading to an mRNA with an insertion of six nucleotides from intron 4 of PDS. Since the newly created donor splice site is likely to compete with the normal one, variations of the levels of normal and aberrant transcripts of the PDS gene in the cochlea may explain the variability in the deafness presentation.

[PMID: 21745434]
To report a patient with Pendred syndrome who developed life-threatening hypokalaemia as an unpredicted consequence of implant-induced imbalance and alcohol dependency, leading to multiple cardiac arrests. Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. Case report and review of the English language literature concerning Pendred syndrome and cochlear implantation in Pendred syndrome patients. Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder which mainly affects the inner ear, thyroid and kidneys. It accounts for 10 per cent of syndromic hearing loss cases. The majority of Pendred syndrome patients are referred to cochlear implant programmes for hearing assessment and therapy. They may also have an underlying metabolic abnormality which is not clinically apparent. Providing cochlear implants to patients with Pendred syndrome demands extensive knowledge of this condition, in order to avoid potential morbidity.

[PMID: 22109890]
Thyroid hormones are essential for normal development and metabolism. Their synthesis requires transport of iodide into thyroid follicles. The mechanisms involving the apical efflux of iodide into the follicular lumen are poorly elucidated. The discovery of mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in patients with Pendred syndrome (congenital deafness, goiter, and defective iodide organification) suggested a possible role for the encoded protein, pendrin, as an apical iodide transporter. We determined whether TSH regulates pendrin abundance at the plasma membrane and whether this influences iodide efflux. Results of immunoblot and immunofluorescence experiments reveal that TSH and forskolin rapidly increase pendrin abundance at the plasma membrane through the protein kinase A pathway in PCCL-3 rat thyroid cells. The increase in pendrin membrane abundance correlates with a decrease in intracellular iodide as determined by measuring intracellular (125)iodide and can be inhibited by specific blocking of pendrin. Elimination of the putative protein kinase A phosphorylation site T717A results in a diminished translocation to the membrane in response to forskolin. These results demonstrate that pendrin translocates to the membrane in response to TSH and suggest that it may have a physiological role in apical iodide transport and thyroid hormone synthesis.

[PMID: 17365057]
Pendred syndrome, defined as the constellation of goiter, sensori-neural hearing loss, and positive perchlorate discharge test, is the most frequent cause of congenital deafness. Newly introduced diagnostic approaches to the disease are rather expensive and complicated, therefore we evaluated the value of MRI as the sole, or adjunctive diagnostic approach, and compared it with the traditional ones. Presuming the classic triad as the gold standard, we compared MRI findings in six such defined patients with six cases having goiter, hearing loss, and normal perchlorate discharge test. Our results indicated that MRI was 83.6% sensitive and 66.7% specific in patients fulfilling all three criteria (complete), while in the 'partial' group the sensitivity and specificity were 66.7% and 100% respectively. In conclusion, MRI, although impressive as an adjunctive diagnostic tool, may not replace the holistic approach, and the latter may be more convenient, cheaper, and still more accurate. However in 'partial' cases with equivocal findings, and in relatives of the patients, MRI may be a valuable diagnostic adjunct.

[PMID: 19196800]
Thyroid hormones are essential for normal development and metabolism. Thyroid hormone biosynthesis requires iodide uptake into the thyrocytes and efflux into the follicular lumen, where it is organified on selected tyrosyls of thyroglobulin. Uptake of iodide into the thyrocytes is mediated by an intrinsic membrane glycoprotein, the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS), which actively cotransports two sodium cations per each iodide anion. NIS-mediated transport of iodide is driven by the electrochemical sodium gradient generated by the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase. NIS is expressed in the thyroid, the salivary glands, gastric mucosa, and the lactating mammary gland. TSH and iodide regulate iodide accumulation by modulating NIS activity via transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. Biallelic mutations in the NIS gene lead to a congenital iodide transport defect, an autosomal recessive condition characterized by hypothyroidism, goiter, low thyroid iodide uptake, and a low saliva/plasma iodide ratio. Pendrin is an anion transporter that is predominantly expressed in the inner ear, the thyroid, and the kidney. Biallelic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene lead to Pendred syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural deafness, goiter, and impaired iodide organification. In thyroid follicular cells, pendrin is expressed at the apical membrane. Functional in vitro data and the impaired iodide organification observed in patients with Pendred syndrome support a role of pendrin as an apical iodide transporter.

[PMID: 18538122]
Pendred syndrome is a recessive autosomal disorder characterized by thyroid goiter and sensorineural hearing loss. The Pendred syndrome gene (SLC26A4) encodes a new anion exchanger named pendrin which mediates iodide transport by thyrocytes and regulates ion and fluid transport by the endolymphatic sac epithelium. Pendrin defects result in inner ear malformations, with enlargement of the endolymphatic sac and duct in association with a large vestibular aqueduct. Furthermore, patients may develop endolymphatic hydrops requiring diuretic therapy, mainly in the form of thiazides. Pendrin could also account for apical Cl(-)/ HCO3(-) exchange at level of intercalated cells of the cortical collecting duct in the kidneys, however, humans with Pendred syndrome have no symptoms attributable to renal pendrin abnormalities in basal conditions. We report the case of a child with Pendred syndrome and intercurrent endolymphatic hydrops, who developed profound hypokalemia and severe hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (potassium 1.7, chloride 70, sodium 129, HCO3 43.8, base excess +17.8 mmol/l, pH 7.52) following thiazide therapy. In subjects with Pendred syndrome thiazide therapy seems to provoke more severe Cl(-) and extracellular volume depletion. A possible explanation could be the defective action of the disrupted pendrin, which exacerbates the effects of the inhibition of C1(-) reabsorption mediated by the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (SLC12A3).

[PMID: 10637573]
Primary congenital hypothyroidism is characterized by low levels of circulating thyroid hormones and raised levels of thyrotropin at birth. It can be either permanent or transitory. Most permanent cases (80-85%) result from alterations in the formation of the thyroid gland during embryogenesis (thyroid dysgenesis), and several were shown recently to be produced by mutations in genes responsible for the development of thyroid follicular cells (TITF1, TITF2, PAX8 and TSHR). Less frequently, congenital hypothyroidism is determined by defects in thyroid hormone synthesis (hormonogenesis defects). The latter are usually associated with goiter. Recently, the molecular mechanisms of two forms of hormonogenesis defects (iodine transport defects and Pendred syndrome) were elucidated.

[PMID: 17120770]
For over 100 years after the first description of the disorder, the molecular pathology underlying the deafness and thyroid pathology in Pendred syndrome (PS) remained unknown. In 1997, early progress towards understanding the molecular basis of the disorder was made when we identified the PS gene and found it to belong to the SLC26 family of anion transporters. The realization that an anion transporter was responsible for these clinical features soon highlighted a potential role for pendrin in thyroid hormone biosynthesis. The role of pendrin in deafness, however, remained unclear. Our determination of its expression pattern in the inner ear along with the development of a mouse with a targeted disruption of the Slc26a4 gene has revealed that Slc26a4 is expressed in areas of the endolymphatic compartment known to play a role in endolymph reabsorption and that absence of this protein leads to a profound prenatal endolymphatic hydrops and destruction of many of the epithelial cells surrounding the scala media. The precise mechanisms underlying endolymph reabsorption in the inner ear are not yet known; these studies, however, provide some of the groundwork for allowing the future delineation of these processes.

[PMID: 19692489]
Mutations of SLC26A4 cause an enlarged vestibular aqueduct, nonsyndromic deafness, and deafness as part of Pendred syndrome. SLC26A4 encodes pendrin, an anion exchanger located in the cochlea, thyroid, and kidney. The goal of the present study was to determine whether developmental delays, possibly mediated by systemic or local hypothyroidism, contribute to the failure to develop hearing in mice lacking Slc26a4 (Slc26a4(-/-)). We evaluated thyroid function by voltage and pH measurements, by array-assisted gene expression analysis, and by determination of plasma thyroxine levels. Cochlear development was evaluated for signs of hypothyroidism by microscopy, in situ hybridization, and quantitative RT-PCR. No differences in plasma thyroxine levels were found in Slc26a4(-/-) and sex-matched Slc26a4(+/-) littermates between postnatal day 5 (P5) and P90. In adult Slc26a4(-/-) mice, the transepithelial potential and the pH of thyroid follicles were reduced. No differences in the expression of genes that participate in thyroid hormone synthesis or ion transport were observed at P15, when plasma thyroxine levels peaked. Scala media of the cochlea was 10-fold enlarged, bulging into and thereby displacing fibrocytes, which express Dio2 to generate a cochlear thyroid hormone peak at P7. Cochlear development, including tunnel opening, arrival of efferent innervation at outer hair cells, endochondral and intramembraneous ossification, and developmental changes in the expression of Dio2, Dio3, and Tectb were delayed by 1-4 days. These data suggest that pendrin functions as a HCO3- transporter in the thyroid, that Slc26a4(-/-) mice are systemically euthyroid, and that delays in cochlear development, possibly due to local hypothyroidism, lead to the failure to develop hearing.

[PMID: 9618167]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the association between sensorineural hearing loss and thyroid swelling or goitre and is likely to be the most common form of syndromic deafness. Within the thyroid gland of affected individuals, iodide is incompletely organified with variable effects upon thyroid hormone biosynthesis, whilst the molecular basis of the hearing loss is unknown. The PDS gene has been identified by positional cloning of chromosome 7q31, within the Pendred syndrome critical linkage interval and encodes for a putative ion transporter called pendrin. We have investigated a cohort of 56 kindreds, all with features suggestive of a diagnosis of Pendred syndrome. Molecular analysis of the PDS gene identified 47 of the 60 (78%) mutant alleles in 31 families (includes three homozygous consanguineous kindreds and one extended family segregating three mutant alleles). Moreover, four recurrent mutations accounted for 35 (74%) of PDS disease chromosomes detected and haplotype analysis would favour common founders rather than mutational hotspots within the PDS gene. Whilst these findings demonstrate molecular heterogeneity for PDS mutations associated with Pendred syndrome, this study would support the use of molecular analysis of the PDS gene in the assessment of families with congenital hearing loss.

[PMID: 10650967]
Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by congenital deafness and thyroid goiter. The thyroid disease typically develops around puberty and is associated with a mild organification defect, characterized by an inappropriate discharge of iodide upon perchlorate stimulation (a positive perchlorate discharge test). The gene (PDS) mutated in Pendred syndrome is expressed in thyroid and encodes a 780-amino acid protein (pendrin) that has recently been shown to function as an iodide/chloride transporter. We sought to establish the location of pendrin in the thyroid and to examine the regulatory network controlling its synthesis. Using peptide-specific antibodies for immunolocalization studies, pendrin was detected in a limited subset of cells within the thyroid follicles, exclusively at the apical membrane of the follicular epithelium. Interestingly, significantly greater amounts of pendrin were encountered in thyroid tissue from patients with Graves' disease. Using a cultured rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5), PDS expression was found to be significantly induced by low concentrations of thyroglobulin (TG), but not by TSH, sodium iodide, or insulin. This is different from the established effect of TG, more typically a potent suppressor of thyroid-specific gene expression. Together, these results suggest that pendrin is an apical porter of iodide in the thyroid and that the expression and function of both the apical and basal iodide porters are coordinately regulated by follicular TG.

[PMID: 8706311]
Pendred's syndrome is an association between congenital neurosensory deafness and goitre with abnormal discharge of iodide following perchlorate challenge, indicating a defect of iodide organification. Although Pendred's syndrome may cause up to 7.5% of all cases of congenital deafness, the molecular basis of the association between the hearing loss and the thyroid organification defect remains unknown. We chose to investigate the role of the thyroid peroxidase (TPO) gene as the genetic defect in Pendred's syndrome. A highly informative variable number tandem repeat (VNTR), located 1.5 kb downstream of exon 10 of the TPO gene, was used to search for genetic linkage in multiple sibships affected by Pendred's syndrome. Seven kindreds were recruited from the UK, each with at least two affected members. We have also examined a large inbred Israeli family with two affected offspring and five unaffected children. Individuals were assigned affected status based on the characteristic clinical features of Pendred's syndrome, namely the presence of congenital sensorineural hearing loss and the appearance in early life of a goitre. Additionally, at least one affected member from each sibship had a characteristic positive perchlorate discharge test (Morgans & Trotter, 1958). PCR amplification of genomic DNA at the TPO VNTR allowed assignment of genotypes to each individual and the calculation of a two-point LOD score. In six of the nine sibships analysed we found obligatory recombination between TPO and Pendred's syndrome. Non-complementation observed in affected parents with an affected offspring excluded TPO in an affected sibship with genotype sharing and supports a hypothesis of genetic homogeneity for Pendred's syndrome. In two sibships, mutation of the TPO gene as the cause of Pendred's syndrome could not be excluded. These data suggest that defects at the thyroid peroxidase locus on chromosome 2 are not the major cause of Pendred's syndrome.

[PMID: 19318451]
Goiter and deafness can be associated in some genetic syndromes, e.g. Pendred syndrome (PS) and resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). PS is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by goiter and sensorineural hearing impairment with an enlarged vestibular aqueduct bilaterally. RTH is an autosomal dominant condition of reduced tissue sensitivity to thyroid hormone in which goiter is very frequent and hearing loss occurs in about 20% of patients. OBJECTIVE, PATIENTS, AND DESIGN: The objective of this study was to identify the cause of goiter and deafness in two sisters born to healthy unrelated parents. We present their history, clinical presentation, and follow-up and report the results of molecular genetic investigations. The elder sister had an elevated TSH level at newborn screening followed by subclinical hypothyroidism, childhood-onset goiter, and bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueducts, consistent with a diagnosis of PS. Her younger sister had congenital goiter, elevated free T3 and free T4 concentrations with unsuppressed TSH, sinus tachycardia, and bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueducts. This clinical presentation was consistent with a diagnosis of RTH, in which, however, inner ear malformations are uncommon. Interestingly, molecular genetic testing showed that, whereas the elder sister is affected by PS, the younger sister has both PS (due to compound heterozygous SLC26A4 mutations) and RTH (due to a novel de novo heterozygous THRB mutation). This is the first report of the cooccurrence, in the same individual, of PS and RTH, two genetic syndromes both associated with goiter and hearing impairment.

[PMID: 10700480]
Although the textbook view of Pendred syndrome is that of an autosomal recessive condition characterized by deafness and goitre, it is increasingly clear that not all such patients present this classical clinical picture. Malformations of the inner ear, specifically enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, are common in Pendred syndrome and mutations in the PDS (Pendred Syndrome) gene have been recorded in patients presenting with deafness and vestibular aqueduct dilatation only, without other features of Pendred syndrome. Since this is the most common radiological malformation of the cochlea in deaf patients, we investigated what proportion of such cases were due to mutation of the PDS gene. We assessed 57 patients referred with radiological evidence of vestibular aqueduct enlargement, by history, clinical examination, perchlorate discharge test and molecular analysis of the PDS locus. Forty-one patients (72%) had unequivocal evidence of Pendred syndrome. The finding of a single heterozygous mutation at the PDS gene in a further eight was strongly suggestive of a critical role for pendrin, the protein product of the PDS gene, in the generation of enlarged vestibular aqueducts in at least 86% (49/57 cases) of patients with this radiological malformation. Securing the diagnosis of Pendred syndrome may be difficult, especially in the single case. Goitre is an inconstant finding, and the perchlorate discharge test, although helpful, is of diagnostic value only if abnormal. Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct should be considered as the most likely presentation of Pendred syndrome and should prompt specific investigation of that diagnostic possibility. Pendred syndrome might henceforth be recharacterized as deafness with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, which is sometimes associated with goitre.

[PMID: 23235354]
Pendrin (SLC26A4), a transporter accomplishing anion exchange, is expressed in inner ear, thyroid gland, kidneys, lung, liver and heart. Loss or reduction of function mutations of SLC26A4 underlie Pendred syndrome, a disorder invariably leading to hearing loss with enlarged vestibular aqueducts and in some patients to hypothyroidism and goiter. Renal pendrin expression is up-regulated by mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone or deoxycorticosterone (DOCA). Little is known about the impact of mineralocorticoids on pendrin expression in extrarenal tissues. The present study utilized RT-qPCR and Western blotting to quantify the transcript levels and protein abundance of Slc26a4 in murine kidney, thyroid, heart and lung prior to and following subcutaneous administration of 100 mg/kg DOCA. Slc26a4 transcript levels as compared to Gapdh transcript levels were significantly increased by DOCA treatment in kidney, heart, lung and thyroid. Accordingly pendrin protein expression was again significantly increased by DOCA treatment in kidney, heart, lung and thyroid. The observations reveal mineralocorticoid sensitivity of pendrin expression in kidney, heart, thyroid and lung.

[PMID: 20834201]
Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene, coding for the anion transporter pendrin, are responsible for Pendred syndrome, characterized by congenital sensorineural deafness and dyshormonogenic goiter. The physiological role of pendrin in the thyroid is still unclear and the lack of a thyroid phenotype in some patients with SLC26A4 mutations and in Slc26a4 (-/-) mice indicate the existence of environmental or individual modifiers able to compensate for pendrin inactivation in the thyroid. Since pendrin can transport iodide in vitro, variations in iodide supply have been claimed to account for the thyroid phenotype associated with pendrin defects. The Slc26a4 (-/-) mouse model was used to test the hypothesis that iodide supply may influence the penetrance and expressivity of SLC26A4 mutations. Slc26a4 (-/-) and (+/+) mice were fed up to 6 months on a standard or low iodine diet and were evaluated for thyroid structural abnormalities or biochemical hypothyroidism. A 27-fold iodide restriction induced similar modifications in thyroid histology, but no differences in thyroid size, T4 or TSH levels were observed between between Slc26a4 (-/-) and (+/+) mice, either in standard conditions and during iodine restriction. Iodide restriction is not able to induce a thyroid phenotype in Slc26a4 (-/-) mice. These experimental data, together with those coming from a review of familial Pendred cases leaving in regions either with low or sufficient iodide supply, support the idea that the expression of thyroid phenotype in Pendred syndrome is more powerfully influenced by individual factors than by dietary iodide.

[PMID: 19189692]
We report a young woman with genetically confirmed Pendred syndrome and discuss the current therapeutic strategies of dyshormonogenetic goitre. A small diffuse thyroid enlargement developed during infancy and although substitution therapy with L-thyroxine was adequate, it progressed and underwent multinodular transformation. Cervical ultrasound at the age of 22 years demonstrated three solid nodules and fine-needle aspiration biopsy showed a finding typical of follicular adenoma. It is known that dyshormonogenetic goitres have a tendency to grow despite appropriate treatment with L-thyroxine. Management of a patient with Pendred syndrome requires careful follow-up and regular imaging of the thyroid. Although the therapeutic approach to dyshormonogenetic goitres is still controversial, in our patient we chose total thyroidectomy as the most advantageous method to prevent the development of malignancies that may arise more frequently from dyshormonogenetic goitres than from goitres of other aetiologies.

[PMID: 8630497]
Inherited causes account for about 50% of individuals presenting with childhood (prelingual) hearing loss, of which 70% are due to mutation in numerous single genes which impair auditory function alone (non-syndromic). The remainder are associated with other developmental anomalies termed syndromic deafness. Genes responsible for syndromic forms of hearing loss include the COL4A5 gene in Alport syndrome and the PAX3 and MITF genes in Waardenburg syndrome. Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, sensorineural hearing loss and diffuse thyroid enlargement (goitre). Pendred syndrome is the most common syndromal form of deafness, yet the primary defect remains unknown. We have established a panel of 12 families with two or more affected individuals and used them to search for the location of the Pendred gene by linkage analysis. We excluded localization to four previously mapped nonsyndromic deafness loci but obtained conclusive evidence for linkage of the Pendred syndrome gene to microsatellite markers on chromosome 7q31 (D7S495 Zmax 7.32, Qmax = 0). This region contains a gene, DFNBL, for autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss. Multipoint analysis indicates that DFNB4 and Pendred syndrome co-localize to the same 5.5 centiMorgan (cM) interval flanked by D7S501 and D7S523. These data raise the possibility that Pendred syndrome is either allelic with DFNB4 or may represent an inherited contiguous gene disorder, not clinically manifest in the heterozygote.

[PMID: 20583162]
Biallelic mutations of SLC26A4 (encoding pendrin) cause Pendred syndrome (PS), an autosomal recessive genetic disorder with deafness and goiter. The mechanism underlying the development of the goiter is unknown. Here, we report clinical and molecular findings of a patient with PS. This 27-year-old woman was born to nonconsanguineous healthy parents. She was seen at our hospital due to hearing loss at age 3 years, and subsequently developed goiter at age 10 years. From age 15 years, her thyroid gland showed progressive enlargement accompanied by elevation of serum thyroglobulin reaching 10-fold the normal amount. Thyroidal iodine uptake was also increased during goiter progression ((123)I uptake at 24 hr: 20.2% at age 17 years; 69.4% at age 24 years; reference, 8-40), while serum thyrotropin (TSH) levels and iodine organification (examined by the perchrolate or thiocyanate discharge test) remained normal. We sequenced SLC26A4 using standard PCR-based technique, and found one novel (p.T537P) and one recurrent (p.H723R) mutations in a compound heterozygous state. Expression experiments using COS-7 cells showed that the two mutants were entrapped in the endoplasmic reticulum and were poorly localized at the plasma membrane. In summary, a molecularly confirmed PS patient showed goiter progression accompanied by elevated serum thyroglobulin and increased thyroidal iodine uptake, but normal serum TSH levels and normal iodine organification. This implies that some pendrin mutations may involve direct stimulation of thyroid cell proliferation with no TSH hyperstimulation and no iodine organification defect.

[PMID: 20501687]
Pendred syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene coding for pendrin, an apical Cl-/I- exchanger. To analyze intrathyroidal compensatory mechanisms when pendrin is lacking, we investigated the thyroid of a patient with Pendred syndrome. The expression of proteins involved in thyroid hormone synthesis, markers of oxidative stress (OS), cell proliferation, apoptosis, and antioxidant enzymes were analyzed. Three morphological zones were identified: nearly normal follicles with iodine-rich thyroglobulin in the colloid (zone 1.a), small follicles without iodine-rich thyroglobulin in lumina (zone 1.b), and destroyed follicles (zone 2). In zones 1.a, dual oxidase (Duox) and thyroid peroxidase (TPO) were localized at the apical pole, OS and cell apoptosis were absent, but ClC-5 expression was strongly increased. In zones 1.b, Duox and TPO were aberrantly present and increased in the cytosol and associated with high OS, apoptosis, cell proliferation, and increased expression of peroxiredoxin-5, catalase, and dehalogenase-1 but moderate ClC-5 expression. In conclusion, the absence of pendrin is accompanied by increased ClC-5 expression that may transiently compensate for apical iodide efflux. In more affected follicles, Duox and TPO are relocated in the cytosol, leading to abnormal intracellular thyroid hormone synthesis, which results in cell destruction presumably because intracellular OS cannot be buffered by antioxidant defenses.