[PMID: 28007627]
NSCLC with de novo anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase gene (ALK) rearrangements and EGFR or KRAS mutations co-occur very rarely. Outcomes with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in these patients are poorly understood. Outcomes of patients with metastatic NSCLC de novo co-alterations of ALK/EGFR or ALK/KRAS detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (ALK) and sequencing (EGFR/KRAS) from six Swiss centers were analyzed. A total of 14 patients with adenocarcinoma were identified. Five patients had ALK/EGFR co-alterations and nine had ALK/KRAS co-alterations. Six of seven patients with ALK/KRAS co-alterations (86%) were primary refractory to crizotinib. One patient has had ongoing disease stabilization for 26 months. Of the patients with ALK/EGFR co-alterations, one immediately progressed after receiving crizotinib for 1.3 months and two had a partial response for 5.7 and 7.3 months, respectively. Three of four patients with ALK/EGFR co-alterations treated with an EGFR TKI achieved one or more responses in different lines of therapy: four patients had a partial response, three with afatinib and one with osimertinib. One patient achieved a complete remission with osimertinib, and one patient was primary refractory to erlotinib. Median PFS during treatment with a first EGFR TKI was 5.8 months (range 3.0-6.9 months). De novo concurrent ALK/KRAS co-alterations were associated with resistance to ALK TKI treatment in seven out of eight patients. In patients with ALK/EGFR co-alterations, outcomes with ALK and EGFR TKIs seem inferior to what would be expected in patients with either alteration alone, but further studies are needed to clarify which patients with ALK/EGFR co-alterations may still benefit from the respective TKI.

[PMID: 25870797]
Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who harbor anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements can derive significant clinical benefit from ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Accurate patient identification is absolutely crucial for successful using ALK inhibitor treatment. However, lung cancer patients with ALK gene rearrangement after ALK inhibitor therapy eventually develop acquired resistance to treatment. In this review, the authors summarize the clinicopathologic features of ALK-rearranged NSCLC and the pros and cons of current diagnostic testing. In addition, we discuss the current diagnostic flow of ALK testing and consideration of rebiopsy sample during disease progression in patients treated by ALK inhibitors.

[PMID: 27836576]
Anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase gene (ALK) fusion is a distinct molecular subclassification of NSCLC that is targeted by anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors. We established a transgenic mouse model that expresses tumors highly resembling human NSCLC harboring echinoderm microtubule associated protein like 4 gene (EML)-ALK fusion. We aimed to test an EML4-ALK transgenic mouse model as a platform for assessing the efficacy of ALK inhibitors and examining mechanisms of acquired resistance to ALK inhibitors. Transgenic mouse lines harboring LoxP-STOP-LoxP-FLAGS-tagged human EML4-ALK (variant 1) transgene was established by using C57BL/6N mice. The transgenic mouse model with highly lung-specific, inducible expression of echinoderm microtubule associated protein like 4-ALK fusion protein was established by crossing the EML4-ALK transgenic mice with mice expressing Cre-estrogen receptor fusion protein under the control of surfactant protein C gene (SPC). Expression of EML4-ALK transgene was induced by intraperitoneally injecting mice with tamoxifen. When the lung tumor of the mice treated with the ALK inhibitor crizotinib for 2 weeks was measured, tumor shrinkage was observed. EML4-ALK tumor developed after 1 week of tamoxifen treatment. Echinoderm microtubule associated protein like 4-ALK was strongly expressed in the lung but not in other organs. ALK and FLAGS expressions were observed by immunohistochemistry. Treatment of EML4-ALK tumor-bearing mice with crizotinib for 2 weeks induced dramatic shrinkage of tumors with no signs of toxicity. Furthermore, prolonged treatment with crizotinib led to acquired resistance in tumors, resulting in regrowth and disease progression. The resistant tumor nodules revealed acquired ALK G1202R mutations. An EML4-ALK transgenic mouse model for study of drug resistance was successfully established with short duration of tumorigenesis. This model should be a strong preclinical model for testing efficacy of ALK TKIs, providing a useful tool for investigating the mechanisms of acquired resistance and pursuing novel treatment strategies in ALK-positive lung cancer.

[PMID: 21213368]
Renal Medullary Carcinoma (RMC) is an aggressive malignancy that affects young black individuals with sickle cell trait. No effective treatment is available, resulting in an ominous clinical course, with overall survival averaging less than four months. We report rearrangement of the ALK receptor tyrosine kinase in a pediatric case of RMC harboring a t(2;10)(p23;q22) translocation. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic evaluation identified a novel ALK oncoprotein in which the cytoskeletal protein vinculin (VCL) was fused to the ALK kinase domain. The resulting VCL-ALK fusion does not contain known self-association domains, but includes the talin binding domains of vinculin. We demonstrate coprecipitation of strongly tyrosine phosphorylated talins with the VCL-ALK oncoprotein, suggesting that ALK oncogenic crossphosphorylation is mediated by interactions between neighboring VCL-ALK proteins on a talin scaffold. This report widens the spectrum of ALK-related tumors and ALK fusion partners, and provides a rationale for treating RMC with targeted ALK inhibitors.

[PMID: 26503946]
In this era of more rational therapies, substantial efforts are being made to identify optimal targets. The discovery of translocations involving the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase in a subset of non-small cell lung cancers has become a paradigm for precision medicine. Notably, ALK was initially discovered as the fusion gene in anaplastic large cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, a disease predominantly of childhood. The discovery of activating kinase domain mutations of the full-length ALK receptor as the major cause of hereditary neuroblastoma, and that somatically acquired mutations and amplification events often drive the malignant process in a subset of sporadic tumors, has established ALK as a tractable molecular target across histologically diverse tumors in which ALK is a critical mediator of oncogenesis. We are now uncovering the reexpression of this developmentally regulated protein in a broader subset of pediatric cancers, providing therapeutic targeting opportunities for diseases with shared molecular etiology. This review focuses on the role of ALK in pediatric malignancies, alongside the prospects and challenges associated with the development of effective ALK-inhibition strategies.

[PMID: 27179218]
Rearrangements involving the ALK gene were identified in a variety of cancers, including paediatric tumour neuroblastoma where presence of ALK expression is also associated with adverse prognosis. Microarrays data indicate that ALK is expressed in another paediatric tumour - medulloblastoma. Therefore, we investigated if the ALK gene is mutated in medulloblastoma and performed simultaneously the molecular profiling of tumours. Tumours from sixty-four medulloblastoma patients were studied for detection of ALK alterations in exons 23 and 25 using Sanger method. The molecular subtypes of tumours were identified by detection of mutations in the CTNNB1 gene, monosomy 6 and by immunohistochemistry using a panel of representative antibodies. Among three ALK variants detected two resulted in intron variants (rs3738867, rs113866835) and the third one was a novel heterozygous variant c.3595A>T in exon 23 identified in the WNT type of tumour. It resulted in methionine to leucine substitution at codon position 1199 (M1199L) of the kinase domain of ALK protein. Results of analysis using three in silico algorithms confirmed the pathogenicity of this single nucleotide variation. The same gene alteration was detected in both patient and maternal peripheral blood leukocytes indicating an inherited type of the detected variant. Presence of ALK expression in tumour tissue was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The tumour was diagnosed as classic medulloblastoma, however with visible areas of focal anaplastic features. The patient has been disease free for 6 years since diagnosis. This is the first evidence of an inherited ALK variant in the WNT type of medulloblastoma, what altogether with presence of ALK expression may point towards involvement of the ALK gene in this type of tumours.

[PMID: 27468968]
ALK positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a T-cell lymphoma usually occurring in children and young adults. It frequently involves lymph nodes and extranodal sites and is associated with favorable prognosis. A 20-year old man was admitted for painful mass in the left axilla with overlying skin redness. Clinical presentation and US findings were highly suspicious for sarcoma. Definitive diagnosis was established cytolologically and using ancillary technologies from cytological samples. Fine needle aspiration cytology of tumor mass (lymph node conglomerate and surrounding tissue) show predominance of large, pleomorphic, atypical cells with large nuclei and vacuolised cytoplasm. Atypical cells immunocytochemically were positive for LCA, CD30, CD3, EMA, and ALK; negative for CD15 and CD56. NPM-ALK transcript was detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCT). Molecular analysis of TCRß and TCRγ genes demonstrated clonal TCR genes rearrangement. Complex karyotype with multiple numerical and structural changes was found on conventional cytogenetics. These findings excluded sarcoma and corroborated the diagnosis of ALK positive ALCL. Cutaneous involvement in ALCL can clinically mimic sarcoma, especially in cases with localized disease without B symptoms. In those cases, immunostaining, PCR, and conventional cytogenetics are helpful to exclude sarcoma. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2017;45:51-54. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

[PMID: 22084642]
Tyrosine kinases have a crucial role as key regulators of signaling pathways that influence cell differentiation and growth. Dysregulation of tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling is understood to be an important oncogenic driver. Genetic rearrangements involving the tyrosine kinase anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene occur in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), anaplastic large cell lymphomoas, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors, and other cancers. Cells with abnormal ALK signaling are sensitive to ALK inhibitors such as crizotinib. This review will highlight the discovery of the fusion between echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4) and ALK as an oncogenic driver, recognition of other ALK gene rearrangements in NSCLC, and the confirmation that crizotinib is an effective treatment for patients with ALK-positive NSCLC. Work is underway to further define the role for crizotinib in the treatment of ALK-positive lung cancer and other cancers and to investigate the molecular mechanisms for resistance to ALK inhibition with crizotinib.

[PMID: 11561161]
The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene fuses to the nucleophosmin (NPM) gene as a result of a (2;5) translocation associated with a subtype of human lymphoma (initially designated anaplastic large cell lymphoma [ALCL] or Ki-1/CD30-positive lymphoma). The immunocytochemical detection of NPM-ALK (and proteins encoded by other ALK fusion genes) has allowed the definition of a tumor entity, "ALK-positive lymphoma" (which shows only partial overlap with pathologists' diagnosis of ALCL), to be defined and is invaluable in distinguishing this disease from ALK-negative large cell lymphomas. Eight variant ALK fusion proteins have been identified. Some are expressed only in ALCL, some are found only in the nonhematopoietic neoplasm inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT), and some are present in both types of malignancy. The ALK gene is silent in adult tissues except for restricted sites within the nervous system (consequently, patients with ALK-positive lymphoma produce antibodies to the ALK protein) but is expressed in some neuroblastomas and rhabdomyosarcomas. Biochemical studies suggest an anti-apoptotic function of NPM-ALK, and this may contribute to oncogenesis. Although ALK-positive lymphomas have a generally good prognosis, new therapeutic regimens are still needed for patients whose disease is refractory to conventional treatment.

[PMID: 25407901]
The translocations of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene with the echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4) gene on chromosome 2p have been identified in non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) as oncogenic driver mutations. It has been suggested that EML4-ALK fusion is associated with the resistance in NSCLCs to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib. In contrast, ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor (ALK TKI) crizotinib has shown superior effects in combating NSCLCs with EML4-ALK. Thus, characterization of EML4-ALK fusion genes and clinical features of resulting carcinomas would be a great benefit to disease diagnosis and designing customized treatment plans. Studies have suggested that EML4-ALK translocation occurs more frequently in never-smokers with NSCLC, especially in female patients. However, it is not clear whether this is the case in male patients, too. In this study, we have determined the frequency of EML4-ALK translocation in male never-smokers with NSCLC in a cohort of Chinese patients. The clinical features associated with EML4-ALK translocation were also investigated. A cohort of 95 Chinese male never-smokers with NSCLC was enrolled in this study. EML4-ALK fusion genes were detected using one-step real time RT-PCR and DNA sequencing. We further determined the expression levels of ALK mRNA by RT-PCR and ALK protein by immunohistochemistry in these specimens. The clinical features of EML4-ALK-positive carcinomas were also determined. We have identified EML4-ALK fusion genes in 8 out of 95 carcinoma cases, accounting for 8.42% in Chinese male never-smokers with NSCLC. It is significantly higher than that in all Chinese male patients (3.44%) regardless smoking habit. It is also significantly higher than that in all Chinese smokers (8/356 or 2.25%) or in smokers worldwide (2.9%) by comparing to published data. Interestingly, EML4-ALK fusion genes are more frequently found in younger patients and associated with less-differentiated carcinomas. The frequency of EML4-ALK translocation is strongly associated with smoking habits in Chinese male patients with higher frequency in male never-smokers. EML4-ALK translocation is associated with early-onset and less-differentiated carcinomas.

[PMID: 27573755]
A vast array of oncogenic variants has been identified for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). Therefore, there is a need to better understand the role of ALK in cancer biology in order to optimise treatment strategies. This review summarises the latest research on the receptor tyrosine kinase ALK, and how this information can guide the management of patients with cancer that is ALK-positive. A variety of ALK gene alterations have been described across a range of tumour types, including point mutations, deletions and rearrangements. A wide variety of ALK fusions, in which the kinase domain of ALK and the amino-terminal portion of various protein partners are fused, occur in cancer, with echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK being the most prevalent in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Different ALK fusion proteins can mediate different signalling outputs, depending on properties such as subcellular localisation and protein stability. The ALK fusions found in tumours lack spatial and temporal regulation, which can also affect dimerisation and substrate specificity. Two ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), crizotinib and ceritinib, are currently approved in Europe for use in ALK-positive NSCLC and several others are in development. These ALK TKIs bind slightly differently within the ATP-binding pocket of the ALK kinase domain and are associated with the emergence of different resistance mutation patterns during therapy. This emphasises the need to tailor the sequence of ALK TKIs according to the ALK signature of each patient. Research into the oncogenic functions of ALK, and fast paced development of ALK inhibitors, has substantially improved outcomes for patients with ALK-positive NSCLC. Limited data are available surrounding the physiological ligand-stimulated activation of ALK signalling and further research is needed. Understanding the role of ALK in tumour biology is key to further optimising therapeutic strategies for ALK-positive disease.

[PMID: 26811689]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement lung cancer responds to ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors. It is known that many cases ultimately acquired resistance to crizotinib. However, a case of primary resistance is rare. We present a case of harboring exon 19 deletion in epidermal growth factor receptor in ALK rearranged lung adenocarcinoma, who experienced a partial tumor response to icotinib after failure with crizotinib therapy and chemotherapy. Considering the partial response, we conclude that it is important to find the cause of resistance to crizotinib. We detected gene mutations with plasma by the next-generation sequencing; the next-generation sequencing demonstrates an attractive system to identify mutations improving the outcome of patients with a deadly disease.

[PMID: 25727400]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a tyrosine kinase receptor involved in both solid and hematological tumors. About 80% of ALK-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) cases are characterized by the t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation, encoding for the aberrant fusion protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-ALK, whereas 5% of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients carry the inv(2)(p21;p23) rearrangement, encoding for the echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK fusion. The ALK/c-MET/ROS inhibitor crizotinib successfully improved the treatment of ALK-driven diseases. However, several cases of resistance appeared in NSCLC patients, and ALK amino acid substitutions were identified as a leading cause of resistance to crizotinib. Second-generation ALK inhibitors have been developed in order to overcome crizotinib resistance. In this work, we profiled in vitro the activity of crizotinib, AP26113, ASP3026, alectinib, and ceritinib against six mutated forms of ALK associated with clinical resistance to crizotinib (C1156Y, L1196M, L1152R, G1202R, G1269A, and S1206Y) and provide a classification of mutants according to their level of sensitivity/resistance to the drugs. Since the biological activity of ALK mutations extends beyond the specific type of fusion, both NPM-ALK- and EML4-ALK-positive cellular models were used. Our data revealed that most mutants may be targeted by using different inhibitors. One relevant exception is represented by the G1202R substitution, which was highly resistant to all drugs (>10-fold increased IC50 compared to wild type) and may represent the most challenging mutation to overcome. These results provide a prediction of cross-resistance of known crizotinib-resistant mutations against all second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) clinically available, and therefore could be a useful tool to help clinicians in the management of crizotinib-resistance cases.

[PMID: 27892978]
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States and worldwide. As systemic therapies improve, patients with lung cancer live longer and thus are at increased risk for brain metastases. Understanding how prognosis varies across this heterogeneous patient population is essential to individualize care and design future clinical trials. To update the current Diagnosis-Specific Graded Prognostic Assessment (DS-GPA) for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and brain metastases. The DS-GPA is based on data from patients diagnosed between 1985 and 2005, and we set out to update it by incorporating more recently reported gene and molecular alteration data for patients with NSCLC and brain metastases. This new index is called the Lung-molGPA. This is a multi-institutional retrospective database analysis of 2186 patients diagnosed between 2006 and 2014 with NSCLC and newly diagnosed brain metastases. The multivariable analyses took place between December 2015 and May 2016, and all prognostic factors were weighted for significance by hazard ratios. Significant factors were included in the updated Lung-molGPA prognostic index. The main outcome was survival. Multiple Cox regression was used to select and weight prognostic factors in proportion to their hazard ratios. Log rank tests were used to compare adjacent classes and to compare overall survival for adenocarcinoma vs nonadenocarcinoma groups. The original DS-GPA was based on 4 factors found in 1833 patients with NSCLC and brain metastases diagnosed between 1985 and 2005: patient age, Karnofsky Performance Status, extracranial metastases, and number of brain metastases. The patients studied for the creation of the DS-GPA had a median survival of 7 months from the time of initial treatment of brain metastases. To design the updated Lung-molGPA, we analyzed data from 2186 patients from 2006 through 2014 with NSCLC and newly diagnosed brain metastases (1521 adenocarcinoma and 665 nonadenocarcinoma). Significant prognostic factors included the original 4 factors used in the DS-GPA index plus 2 new factors: EGFR and ALK alterations in patients with adenocarcinoma (mutation status was not routinely tested for nonadenocarcinoma). The overall median survival for the cohort in the present study was 12 months, and those with NSCLC-adenocarcinoma and Lung-molGPA scores of 3.5 to 4.0 had a median survival of nearly 4 years. In recent years, patient survival and physicians' ability to predict survival in NSCLC with brain metastases has improved significantly. The updated Lung-molGPA incorporating gene alteration data into the DS-GPA is a user-friendly tool that may facilitate clinical decision making and appropriate stratification of future clinical trials.

[PMID: 21613408]
Aberrant forms of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of multiple human cancers, where ALK represents a rational therapeutic target in these settings. In this study, we report the identification and biological characterization of X-376 and X-396, two potent and highly specific ALK small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). In Ambit kinome screens, cell growth inhibition studies, and surrogate kinase assays, X-376 and X-396 were more potent inhibitors of ALK but less potent inhibitors of MET compared to PF-02341066 (PF-1066), an ALK/MET dual TKI currently in clinical trials. Both X-376 and X-396 displayed potent antitumor activity in vivo with favorable pharmacokinetic and toxicity profiles. Similar levels of drug sensitivity were displayed by the three most common ALK fusion proteins in lung cancer (EML4-ALK variants E13;A20, E20;A20, and E6b;A20) as well as a KIF5B-ALK fusion protein. Moreover, X-396 could potently inhibit ALK kinases engineered with two point mutations associated with acquired resistance to PF-1066, L1196M, and C1156Y, when engineered into an E13;A20 fusion variant. Finally, X-396 displayed synergistic growth inhibitory activity when combined with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. Our findings offer preclinical proof-of-concept for use of these novel agents to improve therapeutic outcomes of patients with mutant ALK-driven malignancies.

[PMID: 22184391]
The aim of this study is to investigate anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) protein expression and underlying genetic aberrations in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), with special attention to clinical and prognostic implications. A total of 189 paraffin-embedded RMS tumor specimens from 145 patients were collected on tissue microarray. ALK protein expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. ALK gene (2p23) copy number and translocations were determined by in situ hybridization. cDNA sequencing of the receptor tyrosine kinase domain of the ALK gene was assessed in 43 samples. Strong cytoplasmic ALK protein expression was more frequently observed in alveolar RMS (ARMS) than in embryonal RMS (ERMS) (81% v 32%, respectively; P < .001). ALK gene copy number gain was detected in the vast majority of ARMS (88%), compared with 52% of ERMS (P < .001). ALK copy number correlated with protein expression in primary tumors (n = 107). We identified one point mutation (2%) and seven tumors harboring whole exon deletions (16%). In ERMS, specific ALK gain in the primary tumor correlated with metastatic disease (100% in metastatic disease v 29% in nonmetastatic disease; P = .004) and poor disease-specific survival (5-year disease-specific survival: 62% v 82% for nonspecific or no gain; P = .046). Because ALK aberrations on genomic and protein levels are frequently found in RMSs, in particular ARMS, and are associated with disease progression and outcome in ERMS, ALK may play a role in tumor biology and may provide a potential therapeutic target for these tumors. Future research should aim at the oncogenic role of ALK and the potential effect of ALK inhibitors in RMS.

[PMID: 23104988]
Neuroblastoma is a childhood extracranial solid tumour that is associated with a number of genetic changes. Included in these genetic alterations are mutations in the kinase domain of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which have been found in both somatic and familial neuroblastoma. In order to treat patients accordingly requires characterisation of these mutations in terms of their response to ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Here, we report the identification and characterisation of two novel neuroblastoma ALK mutations (A1099T and R1464STOP), which we have investigated together with several previously reported but uncharacterised ALK mutations (T1087I, D1091N, T1151M, M1166R, F1174I and A1234T). In order to understand the potential role of these ALK mutations in neuroblastoma progression, we have employed cell culture-based systems together with the model organism Drosophila as a readout for ligand-independent activity. Mutation of ALK at position 1174 (F1174I) generates a gain-of-function receptor capable of activating intracellular targets such as ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase) and STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) in a ligand-independent manner. Analysis of these previously uncharacterised ALK mutants and comparison with ALK(F1174) mutants suggests that ALK mutations observed in neuroblastoma fall into three classes. These classes are: (i) gain-of-function ligand-independent mutations such as ALK(F1174l), (ii) kinase-dead ALK mutants, e.g. ALK(I1250T) (Schönherr et al., 2011a) and (iii) ALK mutations that are ligand-dependent in nature. Irrespective of the nature of the observed ALK mutants, in every case the activity of the mutant ALK receptors could be abrogated by the ALK inhibitor crizotinib (Xalkori/PF-02341066), albeit with differing levels of sensitivity.

[PMID: 22681779]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive, anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALK+ ALCL) is a T cell lymphoma defined by the presence of chromosomal translocations involving the ALK tyrosine kinase gene. These translocations generate fusion proteins (e.g. NPM-ALK) with constitutive tyrosine kinase activity, which activate numerous signalling pathways important for ALK+ ALCL pathogenesis. The molecular chaperone heat shock protein-90 (Hsp90) plays a critical role in allowing NPM-ALK and other signalling proteins to function in this lymphoma. Co-chaperone proteins are important for helping Hsp90 fold proteins and for directing Hsp90 to specific clients; however the importance of co-chaperone proteins in ALK+ ALCL has not been investigated. Our preliminary findings suggested that expression of the immunophilin co-chaperone, Cyclophilin 40 (Cyp40), is up-regulated in ALK+ ALCL by JunB, a transcription factor activated by NPM-ALK signalling. In this study we examined the regulation of the immunophilin family of co-chaperones by NPM-ALK and JunB, and investigated whether the immunophilin co-chaperones promote the viability of ALK+ ALCL cell lines. NPM-ALK and JunB were knocked-down in ALK+ ALCL cell lines with siRNA, and the effect on the expression of the three immunophilin co-chaperones: Cyp40, FK506-binding protein (FKBP) 51, and FKBP52 examined. Furthermore, the effect of knock-down of the immunophilin co-chaperones, either individually or in combination, on the viability of ALK+ ALCL cell lines and NPM-ALK levels and activity was also examined. We found that NPM-ALK promoted the transcription of Cyp40 and FKBP52, but only Cyp40 transcription was promoted by JunB. We also observed reduced viability of ALK+ ALCL cell lines treated with Cyp40 siRNA, but not with siRNAs directed against FKBP52 or FKBP51. Finally, we demonstrate that the decrease in the viability of ALK+ ALCL cell lines treated with Cyp40 siRNA does not appear to be due to a decrease in NPM-ALK levels or the ability of this oncoprotein to signal. This is the first study demonstrating that the expression of immunophilin family co-chaperones is promoted by an oncogenic tyrosine kinase. Moreover, this is the first report establishing an important role for Cyp40 in lymphoma.

[PMID: 21205076]
Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid cancers among children. Prognosis of advanced neuroblastoma is still poor despite the recent advances in chemo/radiotherapies. In view of improving the clinical outcome of advanced neuroblastoma, it is important to identify the key molecules responsible for the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma and to develop effective drugs that target these molecules. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase, initially identified through the analysis of a specific translocation associated with a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Recently it was demonstrated that ALK is frequently mutated in sporadic cases with advanced neuroblastoma. Moreover, germline mutations of ALK were shown to be responsible for the majority of hereditary neuroblastoma. ALK mutants found in neuroblastoma show constitutive active kinase activity and oncogenic potentials. Inhibition of ALK in neuroblastoma cell lines carrying amplified or mutated ALK alleles results in compromised downstream signaling and cell growth, indicating potential roles of small molecule ALK inhibitors in the therapeutics of neuroblastoma carrying mutated ALK kinases.

[PMID: 26395848]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is sensitive to treatment with an ALK-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (-TKI). However, the benefit of sequential treatment with a 2nd ALK-TKI in patients who fail a 1st ALK-TKI has been poorly addressed. We collected the data of 69 advanced ALK-positive NSCLCs who were treated with one or more ALK-TKIs at three Italian institutions. The clinical outcome of treatment with an ALK-TKI and the patterns of treatment upon failing a 1st ALK-TKI were recorded. Objective response rate (ORR) and median progression-free survival (PFS) on a 1st ALK-TKI (mostly crizotinib) were 60.9% and 12 months, respectively. Of the 50 patients who progressed on a 1st ALK-TKI, 22 were further treated with a 2nd ALK-TKI (either ceritinib or alectinib), for whom an ORR of 86.4% and median PFS of 7 months, respectively, were reported. Conversely, 13 patients underwent rapid clinical/radiographic disease progression leading to death shortly after discontinuation of the 1st ALK-TKI, 7 patients were managed with a 1st ALK-TKI beyond progression, and 8 patients transitioned to other systemic treatments (mostly chemotherapy). Post-progression survival (PPS) significantly favored the 22 patients who were sequentially treated with a 2nd ALK-TKI over those who transitioned to other systemic treatments (P=0.03), but not versus those who were treated with a 1st ALK-TKI beyond progression (P=0.89). Sequential treatment with a 2nd ALK-TKI is effective in patients who fail a 1st ALK-TKI. Continuous ALK-inhibition upon failing a 1st ALK-TKI may be associated with improved clinical outcome.

[PMID: 21829174]
The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a tyrosine kinase receptor that is involved in the pathogenesis of different types of human cancers, including neuroblastoma (NB). In NB, ALK overexpression, or point mutations, are associated with poor prognosis and advanced stage disease. Inhibition of ALK kinase activity by small-molecule inhibitors in lung cancers carrying ALK translocations has shown therapeutic potential. However, secondary mutations may occur that, generate tumor resistance to ALK inhibitors. To overcome resistance to ALK inhibitors in NB, we adopted an alternative RNA interference (RNAi)-based therapeutic strategy that is able to knockdown ALK, regardless of its genetic status [mutated, amplified, wild-type (WT)]. NB cell lines, transduced by lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA), showed reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis when ALK was knocked down. In mice, a nanodelivery system for ALK-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA), based on the conjugation of antibodies directed against the NB-selective marker GD(2) to liposomes, showed strong ALK knockdown in vivo in NB cells, which resulted in cell growth arrest, apoptosis, and prolonged survival. ALK knockdown was associated with marked reductions in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion, blood vessel density, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) expression in vivo, suggesting a role for ALK in NB-induced neoangiogenesis and tumor invasion, confirming this gene as a fundamental oncogene in NB.

[PMID: 18923525]
Neuroblastoma, an embryonal tumour of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system, accounts for approximately 15% of all deaths due to childhood cancer. High-risk neuroblastomas are rapidly progressive; even with intensive myeloablative chemotherapy, relapse is common and almost uniformly fatal. Here we report the detection of previously unknown mutations in the ALK gene, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, in 8% of primary neuroblastomas. Five non-synonymous sequence variations were identified in the kinase domain of ALK, of which three were somatic and two were germ line. The most frequent mutation, F1174L, was also identified in three different neuroblastoma cell lines. ALK complementary DNAs encoding the F1174L and R1275Q variants, but not the wild-type ALK cDNA, transformed interleukin-3-dependent murine haematopoietic Ba/F3 cells to cytokine-independent growth. Ba/F3 cells expressing these mutations were sensitive to the small-molecule inhibitor of ALK, TAE684 (ref. 4). Furthermore, two human neuroblastoma cell lines harbouring the F1174L mutation were also sensitive to the inhibitor. Cytotoxicity was associated with increased amounts of apoptosis as measured by TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL). Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of ALK expression in neuroblastoma cell lines with the F1174L mutation also resulted in apoptosis and impaired cell proliferation. Thus, activating alleles of the ALK receptor tyrosine kinase are present in primary neuroblastoma tumours and in established neuroblastoma cell lines, and confer sensitivity to ALK inhibition with small molecules, providing a molecular rationale for targeted therapy of this disease.

[PMID: 20961208]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that belongs to the insulin receptor superfamily. Aberrant ALK activity has been implicated in the oncogenesis of human cancers as a fusion protein in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, systemic histiocytosis and NSCLC or through mutations in the full length protein in hereditary familial neuroblastoma. Thus, abrogation of ALK signaling through direct kinase inhibition has become an attractive therapeutic intervention point for a subset of genetically defined human cancers. This manuscript provides a comprehensive review of the patent literature pertaining to ALK inhibitors and outlines their potential as anticancer therapeutic agents. The reader will gain an understanding of the major structural classes of ALK inhibitors and insights into the future of this class of drugs. Multiple small-molecule ALK inhibitors have been reported with diverse chemical architecture, potency, kinase selectivity profiles and activity against potential resistance. The breadth of inhibitors combined with the recent discoveries of the involvement of ALK in lung, breast and colorectal cancers has kept the field advancing at a rapid pace.

[PMID: 25351247]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is an important molecular target in neuroblastoma. Although tyrosine kinase inhibitors abrogating ALK activity are currently in clinical use for the treatment of ALK-positive (ALK(+)) disease, monotherapy with ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors may not be an adequate solution for ALK(+) neuroblastoma patients. Increased expression of the gene encoding the transcription factor MYCN is common in neuroblastomas and correlates with poor prognosis. We found that the kinase ERK5 [also known as big mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 1 (BMK1)] is activated by ALK through a pathway mediated by phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), AKT, MAPK kinase kinase 3 (MEKK3), and MAPK kinase 5 (MEK5). ALK-induced transcription of MYCN and stimulation of cell proliferation required ERK5. Pharmacological or RNA interference-mediated inhibition of ERK5 suppressed the proliferation of neuroblastoma cells in culture and enhanced the antitumor efficacy of the ALK inhibitor crizotinib in both cells and xenograft models. Together, our results indicate that ERK5 mediates ALK-induced transcription of MYCN and proliferation of neuroblastoma, suggesting that targeting both ERK5 and ALK may be beneficial in neuroblastoma patients.

[PMID: 17611412]
ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase) is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, initially discovered as part of the NPM-ALK fusion protein, resulting from a chromosomal rearrangement frequently associated with anaplastic large cell lymphomas. The native ALK protein is normally expressed in the developing and, at a weaker level, adult nervous system. We recently demonstrated that ALK is a novel dependence receptor. As such, in the absence of ligand, the ALK receptor is kinase inactive and its expression results in enhanced apoptosis, whereas kinase activation, due to a ligand or constitutive as in NPM-ALK, decreases apoptosis. Unligated/kinase unactivated ALK receptor facilitates apoptosis via its own cleavage by caspases, a phenomenon allowing the exposure of a proapoptotic juxta-membrane intra-cellular domain. This review summarizes the biological significance of the ALK receptor in cancer and development, in perspective with its dependence receptor function. The dual function of ALK in the physiology of development is illustrated in the visual system of Drosophila. In this part of the nervous system, ALK in the presence of ligand appears essential for axonal guidance, whereas in the absence of ligand, ALK expression can lead to developmental neuronal apoptosis. ALK is also found expressed in neural crest-derived tumors such as human neuroblastomas or glioblastomas but its role is not fully elucidated. However, an excessive or constitutive ALK tyrosine kinase activation can lead to deregulation of cell proliferation and survival, therefore to human cancers such as lymphomas and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors. Our observations could have important implications in the therapy of ALK-positive tumors harboring the chimeric or wild type ALK protein.

[PMID: 18070884]
NPM/ALK is an oncogenic fusion protein expressed in approximately 50% of anaplastic large cell lymphoma cases. It derives from the t(2;5)(p23;q35) chromosomal translocation that fuses the catalytic domain of the tyrosine kinase, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), with the dimerization domain of the ubiquitously expressed nucleophosmin (NPM) protein. Dimerization of the ALK kinase domain leads to its autophosphorylation and constitutive activation. Activated NPM/ALK stimulates downstream survival and proliferation signaling pathways leading to malignant transformation. Herein, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of autoactivation of the catalytic domain of ALK. Because kinases are typically regulated by autophosphorylation of their activation loops, we systematically mutated (Tyr --> Phe) three potential autophosphorylation sites contained in the "YXXXYY" motif of the ALK activation loop, and determined the effect of these mutations on the catalytic activity and biological function of NPM/ALK. We observed that mutation of both the second and third tyrosine residues (YFF mutant) did not affect the kinase activity or transforming ability of NPM/ALK. In contrast, mutation of the first and second (FFY), first and third (FYF), or all three (FFF) tyrosine residues impaired both kinase activity and transforming ability of NPM/ALK. Furthermore, a DFF mutant, in which the aspartic residue introduces a negative charge similar to a phosphorylated tyrosine, possessed catalytic activity similar to the YFF mutant. Together, our findings indicate that phosphorylation of the first tyrosine of the YXXXYY motif is necessary for the autoactivation of the ALK kinase domain and the transforming activity of NPM/ALK.

[PMID: 27217763]
Rearrangements in ALK gene and EML4 gene were first described in 2007. This genomic aberration is found in about 2%-8% of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Crizotinib was the first ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor licensed for the treatment of metastatic ALK-positive NSCLC based on a randomized Phase III trial. Despite the initial treatment response of crizotinib, disease progression inevitably develops after approximately 10 months of therapy. Different resistance mechanisms have recently been described. One relevant mechanism of resistance is the development of mutations in ALK. Novel ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been developed to overcome these mutations. Ceritinib is an oral second-generation ALK inhibitor showing clinical activity not only in crizotinib-resistant ALK-positive NSCLC but also in treatment-naïve ALK-positive disease. In this paper, preclinical and clinical data of ceritinib are reviewed, and its role in the clinical setting is put into perspective.

[PMID: 26294238]
Published data on the clinical efficacy, safety, dosage and administration, and costs of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors crizotinib and ceritinib in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are reviewed and compared. The ALK protein functions as a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase; rearrangements of the ALK gene are associated with the development of NSCLC with adenocarcinoma histology. Crizotinib is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved in 2011 as a first-line therapy for patients with metastatic ALK mutation-driven NSCLC. Significantly improved response rates and progression-free survival (PFS) have been reported with the use of crizotinib therapy versus standard chemotherapy, but mutations conferring resistance to treatment develop in most cases. The second-generation ALK inhibitor ceritinib was approved in 2014 for the treatment of ALK-mutated NSCLC in patients who are intolerant or develop resistance to crizotinib. In a clinical trial of ceritinib involving 130 patients with ALK-positive NSCLC, the majority of whom had experienced disease progression during crizotinib use, patients receiving at least 400 mg of ceritinib daily had an overall response rate of 56% and median PFS of seven months. Adverse effects commonly reported with the use of either drug include visual disturbances, gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., diarrhea), and liver enzyme abnormalities. The tyrosine kinase inhibitors crizotinib and ceritinib provide an effective treatment approach for patients with ALK-mutated NSCLC. Efficacy data for both crizotinib and ceritinib indicate improved response rates and PFS with the use of either drug as an alternative to standard chemotherapy.

[PMID: 27899405]
Results from a phase I/II trial indicate that the investigational ALK inhibitor brigatinib is active in patients with ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer. Patients who had previously received crizotinib-as well as those who hadn't-responded to the drug, which was also active in patients with brain metastases.

[PMID: 20979469]
Oncogenic fusion genes consisting of EML4 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) are present in a subgroup of non-small-cell lung cancers, representing 2 to 7% of such tumors. We explored the therapeutic efficacy of inhibiting ALK in such tumors in an early-phase clinical trial of crizotinib (PF-02341066), an orally available small-molecule inhibitor of the ALK tyrosine kinase. After screening tumor samples from approximately 1500 patients with non-small-cell lung cancer for the presence of ALK rearrangements, we identified 82 patients with advanced ALK-positive disease who were eligible for the clinical trial. Most of the patients had received previous treatment. These patients were enrolled in an expanded cohort study instituted after phase 1 dose escalation had established a recommended crizotinib dose of 250 mg twice daily in 28-day cycles. Patients were assessed for adverse events and response to therapy. Patients with ALK rearrangements tended to be younger than those without the rearrangements, and most of the patients had little or no exposure to tobacco and had adenocarcinomas. At a mean treatment duration of 6.4 months, the overall response rate was 57% (47 of 82 patients, with 46 confirmed partial responses and 1 confirmed complete response); 27 patients (33%) had stable disease. A total of 63 of 82 patients (77%) were continuing to receive crizotinib at the time of data cutoff, and the estimated probability of 6-month progression-free survival was 72%, with no median for the study reached. The drug resulted in grade 1 or 2 (mild) gastrointestinal side effects. The inhibition of ALK in lung tumors with the ALK rearrangement resulted in tumor shrinkage or stable disease in most patients. (Funded by Pfizer and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00585195.).

[PMID: 25979929]
The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase was initially discovered as a component of the fusion protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-ALK in anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL). Genomic alterations in ALK, including rearrangements, point mutations, and genomic amplification, have now been identified in several malignancies, including lymphoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), neuroblastoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and others. Importantly, ALK serves as a validated therapeutic target in these diseases. Several ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), including crizotinib, ceritinib, and alectinib, have been developed, and some of them have already been approved for clinical use. These ALK inhibitors have all shown remarkable clinical outcomes in ALK-rearranged NSCLC. Unfortunately, as is the case for other kinase inhibitors in clinical use, sensitive tumors inevitably relapse due to acquired resistance. This review focuses on the discovery, function, and therapeutic targeting of ALK, with a particular focus on ALK-rearranged NSCLC.

[PMID: 23499906]
Phosphorylation of proteins on tyrosine residues is regulated by the activities of protein tyrosine kinases and protein tyrosine phosphatases. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) essentially and transiently expressed during development of the central and peripheral nervous systems. ALK has been identified as a major neuroblastoma predisposition gene and activating mutations have been identified in a subset of sporadic neuroblastoma tumors. We previously established that the mutated receptors were essentially retained in the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi compartments due to their constitutive activity. Intriguingly we demonstrated a stronger phosphorylation for the minor pool of receptor addressed to the plasma membrane. We decided to investigate the potential involvement of tyrosine phosphatase in dephosphorylation of this intracellular pool. In this study we first showed that general inhibition of tyrosine phosphatases resulted in a dramatic increase of the tyrosine phosphorylation of the wild type but also of the mutated receptors. This increase not only required the intrinsic kinase activity of the ALK receptor but also involved the Src tyrosine kinase family. Second we provided strong evidences that the endoplasmic reticulum associated phosphatase PTP1B is key player in the control of ALK phosphorylation. Our data shed a new light on the biological significance of the basal phosphorylation levels of both wild type and mutated ALK receptors and could be essential to further understand their roles in malignancies.

[PMID: 25759656]
Orbital metastasis of lung cancer is rare. It often causes visual disorder. To date, there are only a few case reports. Crizotinib is an anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase inhibitor that leads to responses in most patients with ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. Visual disorder is one of the popular adverse events of crizotinib, but the symptom almost decreases over time. We report a case of orbital metastasis as the disease progression of ALK-positive lung cancer treated with crizotinib. It should be kept in mind that orbital metastasis can be the disease progression of lung adenocarcinoma with ALK translocation treated with crizotinib. When physicians encounter a patient receiving crizotinib with visual disorder, we must distinguish between adverse events and orbital metastasis.

[PMID: 27646667]
Among patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, coexistence of EGFR mutation and ALK rearrangement is rare. We describe the clinical features of two patients with this double anomaly. A 62-year-old Caucasian non-smoking woman was diagnosed with cT4N0M0 lung adenocarcinoma. Initial biopsy showed EGFR mutation and ALK rearrangement. She received cisplatin-gemcitabine, followed by 17 months of gemcitabine. Owing to progression, she received erlotinib for 14 months, then paclitaxel for 6 months and finally crizotinib. A partial response was achieved and maintained for 24 months. A 45-year-old Caucasian woman, light smoker, was diagnosed with cT2N3M0 lung adenocarcinoma. Only EGFR mutation was found on initial analysis. She underwent treatment with cisplatin-gemcitabine and thoracic radiotherapy. Progression occurred after 8 months and afatinbib was started. Eight months later, progression was observed with a neoplasic pleural effusion in which tumor cells expressing ALK rearrangement were found. A new FISH analysis was performed on the initial tumor but did not find this rearrangement. Despite a third line of crizotinib, the patient died one month later. The literature shows 45 other cases of these two abnormalities, observed either from the start or during follow-up. EGFR's TKI were almost always given before ALK's TKI. Therapeutic strategy needs to be clarified in cases of double alteration. With regard to the second patient, appearance of ALK rearrangement may constitute a resistance mechanism to EGFR's TKI.

[PMID: 25601484]
Recent advances in the understanding of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) biology have revealed a number of 'targetable' genetic alterations that underlie cancer growth and survival in specific patients subgroups. The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangement identifies a population of NSCLCs in whom dysregulation of ALK-tyrosine kinase (-TK) leads to uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells, thus providing the basis for the therapeutic use of ALK-TK inhibitors (-TKIs) in ALK-rearranged (-positive) disease. Crizotinib was the first ALK-TKI to undergo clinical development in ALK-positive advanced NSCLC, in which it has been shown to greatly outperform the best available chemotherapy regimen in either second- or first-line setting. More recently, the novel second-generation ALK-TKI ceritinib has been shown to be highly active in either crizotinib-pretreated or -naïve population. Nevertheless, as mechanisms of resistance to crizotinib and ALK-TKIs in general are being progressively elucidated, the treatment landscape of ALK-positive NSCLC is expected to evolve rapidly. In the present review we will briefly discuss the current knowledge of ALK-positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Also, we will touch upon new developments on drugs/combination regimens aimed at inhibiting the ALK-TK, in an attempt to delineate how treatment of ALK-positive disease may change in the next future.

[PMID: 26076736]
Rearrangements of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene originally discovered nearly 20 years ago in the context of anaplastic large cell lymphoma were identified as oncogenic drivers in a subset of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) in 2007. These ALK gene rearrangements are present in 3-5 % of NSCLC patients, typically younger, never or light smokers with adenocarcinomas. Crizotinib is a first-in-class ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor with significant activity in ALK-positive NSCLC that received accelerated US Food and Drug Administration approval for treatment of ALK-positive NSCLC in 2011, just 4 years after identification of ALK rearrangements in this setting. Subsequently, two phase III trials have shown crizotinib to have a tolerable toxicity profile and to be superior to standard chemotherapy for the first- or second-line treatment of advanced ALK-positive lung cancer and numerous countries have approved its use. Despite initial responses, acquired resistance to crizotinib invariably leads to disease progression. Mechanisms of resistance have been described to include ALK tyrosine kinase mutations, activation of bypass signalling pathways and pharmacokinetic failure of crizotinib. Several next-generation ALK inhibitors, including ceritinib and alectinib, are in clinical development and show efficacy in both the crizotinib naïve and crizotinib refractory settings. Ongoing clinical trials will identify the optimal strategy to incorporate these novel agents in the treatment of patients with ALK-positive NSCLC.

[PMID: 21288922]
Several decades of cancer research have revealed a pivotal role for tyrosine kinases as key regulators of signaling pathways, controlling cell growth and differentiation. Deregulation of tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling occurs frequently in cancer and is believed to drive the initiation and progression of disease. Chromosomal rearrangements involving the tyrosine kinase anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) occur in a variety of human malignancies including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), anaplastic large cell lymphomas, and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors. The aberrant activation of ALK signaling leads to "oncogene addiction" and marked sensitivity to ALK inhibitors such as crizotinib (PF-02341066). This review focuses on ALK rearrangements in NSCLC, starting with the discovery of the EML4-ALK fusion oncogene, and culminating in the recent validation of ALK as a therapeutic target in patients with ALK-rearranged NSCLC. Current efforts seek to expand the role of ALK kinase inhibition in lung and other cancers and to address the molecular basis for the development of resistance.

[PMID: 22998583]
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), a tyrosine kinase receptor, has been initially identified through its involvement in chromosomal translocations associated with anaplastic large cell lymphoma. However, recent evidence that aberrant ALK activity is also involved in an expanding number of tumor types, such as other lymphomas, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, neuroblastomas and some carcinomas, including non-small cell lung carcinomas, is boosting research progress in ALK-targeted therapies. The first aim of this review is to describe current understandings about the ALK tyrosine kinase and its implication in the oncogenesis of human cancers as a fusion protein or through mutations. The second goal is to discuss its interest as a therapeutic target and to provide a review of the literature regarding ALK inhibitors. Mechanisms of acquired resistance are also reviewed. Several ALK inhibitors have recently been developed, offering new treatment options in tumors driven by abnormal ALK signaling. However, as observed with other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, resistance has emerged in patients treated with these agents. The complexity of mechanisms of acquired resistance recently described suggests that other therapeutic options, including combination of ALK and other kinases targeted drugs, will be required in the future.