[PMID: 28042777]
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a hard to treat malignancy arising from the mesothelial surface of the pleura. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are considered a promising therapeutic strategy in many hardto- treat malignancies. In this review, we are trying to provide an in depth coverage of the prognostic value of immune checkpoints aberrations as well as discuss the different novel therapeutic strategies implementing these agents in the management of MPM.

[PMID: 28007619]
Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a highly aggressive tumor associated with asbestos exposure. There are few effective treatment options for mesothelioma, and patients have a very poor prognosis with a median survival of < 12 months from diagnosis. Biomarkers have been proposed as a cost-effective means of cancer management, and the search for a mesothelioma biomarker has been ongoing for the last 30 years. Many traditional soluble (glyco)protein biomarkers have been evaluated over this time, and an ever-increasing list of new biomarkers, including messenger RNA, DNA, microRNA, and antibodies, is being reported from biomarker discovery projects. To date, soluble mesothelin is the only tumor biomarker to receive US Food and Drug Administration approval for clinical use in mesothelioma. Mesothelin is a glycoprotein normally expressed on the surface of mesothelial cells, and in the cancerous state it can be present in circulation. Mesothelin has a limited expression on normal, nonmalignant tissue and is thus an attractive therapeutic target for mesothelin-positive tumors. In this review we will focus on the discovery and clinical usages of mesothelin and provide an update on other mesothelioma biomarkers and show how such biomarker studies might impact on the management of this deadly tumor in the future.

[PMID: 27431778]
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare and aggressive malignant disease affecting the mesothelium, commonly associated to asbestos exposure. Therapeutic actions are limited due to the late stage at which most patients are diagnosed and the intrinsic chemo-resistance of the tumor. The recommended systemic therapy for MPM is cisplatin/pemetrexed regimen with a mean overall survival of about 12months and a median progression free survival of less than 6months. Considering that the incidence of this tumor is expected to increase in the next decade and that its prognosis is poor, novel therapeutic approaches are urgently needed. For some tumors, such as lung cancer and breast cancer, druggable oncogenic alterations have been identified and targeted therapy is an important option for these patients. For MPM, clinical guidelines do not recommend biological targeted therapy, mainly because of poor target definition or inappropriate trial design. Further studies are required for a full comprehension of the molecular pathogenesis of MPM and for the development of new target agents. This review updates pre-clinical and clinical data on the efficacy of targeted therapy and immune checkpoint inhibition in the treatment of mesothelioma. Finally, future perspectives in this deadly disease are also discussed.