[PMID: 31483516]
Bacteriocins, the ribosomally produced antimicrobial peptides of bacteria, represent an untapped source of promising antibiotic alternatives. However, bacteriocins display diverse mechanisms of action, a narrow spectrum of activity, and inherent challenges in natural product isolation making in vitro verification of putative bacteriocins difficult. A subset of bacteriocins exert their antimicrobial effects through favorable biophysical interactions with the bacterial membrane mediated by the charge, hydrophobicity, and conformation of the peptide. We have developed a pipeline for bacteriocin-derived compound design and testing that combines sequence-free prediction of bacteriocins using machine learning and a simple biophysical trait filter to generate 20 amino acid peptides that can be synthesized and evaluated for activity. We generated 28,895 total 20-mer candidate peptides and scored them for charge, α-helicity, and hydrophobic moment. Of those, we selected 16 sequences for synthesis and evaluated their antimicrobial, cytotoxicity, and hemolytic activities. Peptides with the overall highest scores for our biophysical parameters exhibited significant antimicrobial activity against Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Our combined method incorporates machine learning and biophysical-based minimal region determination to create an original approach to swiftly discover bacteriocin candidates amenable to rapid synthesis and evaluation for therapeutic use.

[PMID: 31794868]
Many enterococcal strains produce bacteriocins, which could be useful as natural food preservatives through inhibition of pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms. There is little knowledge of the distribution and spectrum of bacteriocin activity and the distribution of bacteriocin-encoding genes in enterococci isolated from dogs. Therefore, we subjected 160 enterococcal isolates (E. faecium n=92, E. faecalis n=35, E. hirae n=28, E. casseliflavus n=3, E. mundtii n=2) from 105 samples of dog faeces to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection of genes for enterocin A, P, B, L50A, L50B, AS-48, and bac31 and to screening for bacteriocin activity. The results showed the presence of at least one of the tested genes in 54/160 isolates, with E. faecium the most common gene-possessing species. The most frequently occurring gene for production of enterocin A was observed in combination with enterocin P and B. Bacteriocin activity was observed in 76/160 isolates against at least one of 5 indicator bacteria from the genus Listeria, Enterococcus, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus. Four selected strains (IK25, Bri, I/Dz, P10) were active mostly against different species of Enterococcus (in the range 400-25 600 AU/mL) and Listeria sp. (800-12 800 AU/mL) but no Gram-negative bacteria were inhibited. Protein character, thermostability (up to 121°C) and stability at different pH values (3.0-10.0) were confirmed for crude bacteriocins of these four strains. The antimicrobial substance of E. faecium IK25 strain was identified as enterocin B using molecular weight detection and the presence of genes.

[PMID: 31705720]
The plant pathogen, Pseudomonas syringae (Ps), together with related Ps species, infects and attacks a wide range of agronomically important crops, including tomato, kiwifruit, pepper, olive and soybean, causing economic losses. Currently, chemicals and introduced resistance genes are used to protect plants against these pathogens but have limited success and may have adverse environmental impacts. Consequently, there is a pressing need to develop alternative strategies to combat bacterial disease in crops. One such strategy involves using narrow-spectrum protein antibiotics (so-called bacteriocins), which diverse bacteria use to compete against closely related species. Here, we demonstrate that one bacteriocin, putidacin L1 (PL1), can be expressed in an active form at high levels in Arabidopsis and in Nicotiana benthamiana in planta to provide effective resistance against diverse pathovars of Ps. Furthermore, we find that Ps strains that mutate to acquire tolerance to PL1 lose their O-antigen, exhibit reduced motility and still cannot induce disease symptoms in PL1-transgenic Arabidopsis. Our results provide proof-of-principle that the transgene-mediated expression of a bacteriocin in planta can provide effective disease resistance to bacterial pathogens. Thus, the expression of bacteriocins in crops might offer an effective strategy for managing bacterial disease, in the same way that the genetic modification of crops to express insecticidal proteins has proven to be an extremely successful strategy for pest management. Crucially, nearly all genera of bacteria, including many plant pathogenic species, produce bacteriocins, providing an extensive source of these antimicrobial agents.