[PMID: 18775331]
Stress granules aid cell survival in response to environmental stressors by acting as sites of translational repression. We report an unanticipated link between stress granules and the serine/threonine kinase RSK2. In stressed breast cells, endogenous RSK2 colocalizes in granules with TIA-1 and poly(A)-binding protein 1, and the sequestration of RSK2 and TIA-1 exhibits codependency. The RSK2 N-terminal kinase domain controls the direct interaction with the prion-related domain of TIA-1. Silencing RSK2 decreases cell survival in response to stress. Mitogen releases RSK2 from the stress granules and permits its nuclear import via a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling sequence in the C-terminal domain. Nuclear accumulation is dependent on TIA-1. Surprisingly, nuclear localization of RSK2 is sufficient to enhance proliferation through induction of cyclin D1, in the absence of other active signaling pathways. Hence, RSK2 is a pivotal factor linking the stress response to survival and proliferation.

[PMID: 24981173]
Tia1/Pub1 is a stress granule component carrying a Q/N-rich prion domain. We provide direct evidence that Tia1 forms a prion in yeast. Moreover, Tia1/Pub1 acts cooperatively with release factor Sup35/eRF3 to establish a two-protein self-propagating state. This two-protein prion driven by the Q/N-rich prion domains of Sup35 and Tia1/Pub1 can be visualized as distinctive line structures along tubulin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, we find that tubulin-associated complex containing Pub1 and Sup35 oligomers normally exists in yeast, and its assembly depends on prion domains of Pub1 and Sup35. This Sup35/Pub1 complex, which also contains TUB1 mRNA and components of translation machinery, is important for the integrity of the tubulin cytoskeleton: PUB1 disruption and Sup35 depletion from the complex lead to cytoskeletal defects. We propose that the complex is implicated in protein synthesis at the site of microtubule assembly. Thus our study identifies the role for prion domains in the assembly of multiprotein complexes.

[PMID: 15371533]
TIA-1 is an RNA binding protein that promotes the assembly of stress granules (SGs), discrete cytoplasmic inclusions into which stalled translation initiation complexes are dynamically recruited in cells subjected to environmental stress. The RNA recognition motifs of TIA-1 are linked to a glutamine-rich prion-related domain (PRD). Truncation mutants lacking the PRD domain do not induce spontaneous SGs and are not recruited to arsenite-induced SGs, whereas the PRD forms aggregates that are recruited to SGs in low-level-expressing cells but prevent SG assembly in high-level-expressing cells. The PRD of TIA-1 exhibits many characteristics of prions: concentration-dependent aggregation that is inhibited by the molecular chaperone heat shock protein (HSP)70; resistance to protease digestion; sequestration of HSP27, HSP40, and HSP70; and induction of HSP70, a feedback regulator of PRD disaggregation. Substitution of the PRD with the aggregation domain of a yeast prion, SUP35-NM, reconstitutes SG assembly, confirming that a prion domain can mediate the assembly of SGs. Mouse embryomic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking TIA-1 exhibit impaired ability to form SGs, although they exhibit normal phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF)2alpha in response to arsenite. Our results reveal that prion-like aggregation of TIA-1 regulates SG formation downstream of eIF2alpha phosphorylation in response to stress.