[PMID: 23610393]
Immunoresponsive gene 1 (Irg1) is highly expressed in mammalian macrophages during inflammation, but its biological function has not yet been elucidated. Here, we identify Irg1 as the gene coding for an enzyme producing itaconic acid (also known as methylenesuccinic acid) through the decarboxylation of cis-aconitate, a tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediate. Using a gain-and-loss-of-function approach in both mouse and human immune cells, we found Irg1 expression levels correlating with the amounts of itaconic acid, a metabolite previously proposed to have an antimicrobial effect. We purified IRG1 protein and identified its cis-aconitate decarboxylating activity in an enzymatic assay. Itaconic acid is an organic compound that inhibits isocitrate lyase, the key enzyme of the glyoxylate shunt, a pathway essential for bacterial growth under specific conditions. Here we show that itaconic acid inhibits the growth of bacteria expressing isocitrate lyase, such as Salmonella enterica and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Furthermore, Irg1 gene silencing in macrophages resulted in significantly decreased intracellular itaconic acid levels as well as significantly reduced antimicrobial activity during bacterial infections. Taken together, our results demonstrate that IRG1 links cellular metabolism with immune defense by catalyzing itaconic acid production.

[PMID: 25209111]
Salmonella typhimurium is a bacterial pathogen that poses a great threat to humans and animals. In order to discover hosts' responses to S. typhimurium infection, we collected and analyzed biofluids and organ tissues from mice which had ingested S. typhimurium. We employed (1)H NMR spectroscopy coupled with multivariate data analysis and immunological techniques. The results indicate that infection leads to a severe impact on mice spleen and ileum, which are characterized by splenomegaly and edematous villi, respectively. We found that increased levels of itaconic acid were correlated with the presence of splenomegaly during infection and may play an important role in Salmonella-containing vacuole acidification. In addition, metabonomic analyses of urine displayed the development of salmonellosis in mice, which is characterized by dynamic changes in energy metabolism. Furthermore, we found that the presence of S. typhimurium activated an anti-oxidative response in infected mice. We also observed changes in the gut microbial co-metabolites (hippurate, TMAO, TMA, methylamine). This investigation sheds much needed light on the host-pathogen interactions of S. typhimurium, providing further information to deepen our understanding of the long co-evolution process between hosts and infective bacteria.

[PMID: 25064235]
Current early pregnancy screening tools to identify women at risk of developing gestational diabetes mellitus lack both specificity and sensitivity. As a result, the foetus and mother are often subjected to insult during disease progression, prior to diagnosis and treatment in later pregnancy. Metabolomics is an analytical approach, which allows for appraisal of small molecular mass compounds in a biofluid. The aim of this pilot study was to investigate the relationship between the early gestation serum metabolite profile and the subsequent development of gestational diabetes mellitus in the search for early pregnancy biomarkers and potential metabolic mechanisms. Our nested case-control study analysed maternal serum at 20 weeks' gestation, obtained from the New Zealand cohort of the Screening for Pregnancy Endpoints study. Metabolomic profiling was performed using gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry, and metabolites were identified using R software and an in-house mass spectral library. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 21.0. Forty-eight metabolites were identified in the serum samples. Itaconic acid (P = 0.0003), with a false discovery rate of 0.012, was found to be significantly more abundant in women who subsequently developed gestational diabetes mellitus, when compared to controls with uncomplicated pregnancies. The current pilot study found that itaconic acid may have potential as a novel biomarker in early pregnancy to predict the subsequent development of gestational diabetes mellitus. However, the findings from this pilot study require validation with a larger, diverse population before translation into the clinical setting.