[PMID: 33828555]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disease characterized by multiple cellular and molecular dysfunctions of the innate and adaptive immunity. Cytotoxic function of NK cells is compromised in patients with SLE. Herein, we characterized the phenotypic alterations of SLE NK cells in a comprehensive manner to further delineate the mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic dysfunction of SLE NK cells and identify novel potential therapeutic targets. Therefore, we examined PBMC from SLE patients and matched healthy controls by single-cell mass cytometry to assess the phenotype of NK cells. In addition, we evaluated the cell function of NK cells (degranulation and cytokine production) and the killing of B cell subpopulations in a B cell-NK cell <i>in vitro</i> co-culture model. We found that SLE NK cells expressed higher levels of CD38 and were not able to adequately upregulate SLAMF1 and SLAMF7 following activation. In addition, ligation of SLAMF7 with elotuzumab or of CD38 with daratumumab on SLE NK cells enhanced degranulation of both healthy and SLE NK cells and primed them to kill circulating plasma cells in an <i>in vitro</i> co-culture system. Overall, our data indicated that dysregulated expression of CD38, SLAMF1 and SLAMF7 on SLE NK cells is associated with an altered interplay between SLE NK cells and plasma cells, thus suggesting their contribution to the accumulation of (auto)antibody producing cells. Accordingly, targeting SLAMF7 and CD38 may represent novel therapeutic approaches in SLE by enhancing NK cell function and promoting elimination of circulating plasma cell.

[PMID: 32937047]
Daratumumab, a human monoclonal antibody that targets CD38, depletes plasma cells and is approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Long-lived plasma cells are implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus because they secrete autoantibodies, but they are unresponsive to standard immunosuppression. We describe the use of daratumumab that induced substantial clinical responses in two patients with life-threatening lupus, with the clinical responses sustained by maintenance therapy with belimumab, an antibody to B-cell activating factor. Significant depletion of long-lived plasma cells, reduction of interferon type I activity, and down-regulation of T-cell transcripts associated with chronic inflammation were documented. (Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and others.).

[PMID: 29720240]
Plasmablasts and plasma cells play a key role in many autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This study was undertaken to evaluate the potential of targeting CD38 as a plasma cell/plasmablast depletion mechanism by daratumumab in the treatment of patients with RA and SLE. RNA-sequencing analysis of synovial biopsies from various stages of RA disease progression, flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from patients with RA or SLE and healthy donors, immunohistochemistry assessment (IHC) of synovial biopsies from patients with early RA, and ex vivo immune cell depletion assays using daratumumab (an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody) were used to assess CD38 as a therapeutic target. We demonstrated that the plasma cell/plasmablast-related genes CD38, XBP1, IRF4, PRDM1, IGJ and TNFSF13B are significantly up-regulated in synovial biopsies from patients with arthralgia, undifferentiated arthritis (UA), early RA and established RA as compared to healthy controls and control patients with osteoarthritis. In addition, the highest CD38 expression was observed on plasma cells and plasmablasts compared to natural killer (NK) cells, classical dendritic cells (DCs), plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and T cells, in blood from healthy controls and patients with SLE and RA. Furthermore, IHC showed CD38 staining in the same region as CD3 and CD138 staining in synovial tissue biopsies from patients with early RA. Most importantly, our data show for the first time that daratumumab effectively depletes plasma cells/plasmablasts in PBMC from patients with SLE and RA in a dose-dependent manner ex vivo. These results indicate that CD38 may be a potential target for RA disease interception and daratumumab should be evaluated clinically for the treatment of both RA and SLE.