[PMID: 30222019]
Multidrug-resistant P-glycoprotein 3 (MDR3) is a phospholipid translocator encoded by the ABCB4 gene located on chromosome 7. MDR3 mediates the translocation of phosphatidylcholine across the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte into bile. Severe MDR3 deficiency typically occurs during childhood with progressive cholestasis evolving to cirrhosis and liver failure, requiring liver transplantation. In this article, we report 2 pediatric cases of severe MDR3 deficiency with paucity of interlobular bile ducts. Both underwent living donor liver transplantation at our center for decompensated liver disease and portal hypertension. We diagnosed severe MDR3 deficiency in both the cases with negative MDR3 immunostaining in the explanted liver. Genetic studies revealed homozygous deletion single base pair deletion in exon 24 of the ABCB4 gene in the second child. The patients are on regular follow-up after liver transplant and are doing well. Our report highlights that cholangiopathy in MDR3 deficiency can lead to ductopenia in pediatric livers.

[PMID: 30079523]
The multiple drug resistance 3 (MDR3) protein is a canalicular phospholipid translocator involved in the bile secretion and encoded by the ABCB4 gene. Its deficiency is related to a large spectrum of liver diseases. Taking into account the increased evidence about the involvement of synonymous variants in inherited diseases, this study aims to explore the putative effects of silent genetic variants on the ABCB4 expression. We performed an exhaustive computational approach using ESE finder, RegRNA 2.0, MFOLD, SNPfold, and %MinMax software added to the measurement of the Relative Synonymous Codon Usage. This analysis included 216 synonymous variants distributed throughout the ABCB4 gene. Results have shown that 11 synonymous coding SNPs decrease the ESE activity, while 8 of them change the codon frequency. Besides, the c.24C>T variation, located 21 nucleotides downstream the start A (Adenine) U (Uracil) G (Glutamine) AUG causes an increase in the local stability. Moreover, the computational analysis of the 3'UTR region showed that six of the eight variants located in this region affected the Wild Type (WT) pattern of the miRNA targets sites and/or their proper display. The 26 sSNPs retained as putatively functional possessed a very low allele frequency, supporting their pathogenicity. In conclusion, the obtained results suggest that some synonymous SNPs in the ABCB4 gene, considered up to now as neutral, may be involved in the MDR3 deficiency.

[PMID: 29895698]
The ATP-binding cassette transporter ABCB4/MDR3 is critical for biliary phosphatidylcholine (PC) excretion at the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. Defective <i>ABCB4</i> gene expression and protein function result in various cholestatic liver and bile duct injuries. Thyroid hormone receptor (THR) is a major regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism; we explored its potential role in <i>ABCB4</i> regulation. Thyroid hormone T3 stimulation to human hepatocyte models showed direct transcriptional activation of <i>ABCB4</i> in a dose- and time-dependent manner. To determine whether THRβ1 (the main THR isoform of the liver) is involved in regulation, we tested THRβ1-specific agonists (e.g., GC-1, KB-141); these agonists resulted in greater stimulation than the native hormone. KB-141 activated hepatic ABCB44 expression in mice, which enhanced biliary PC secretion in vivo. We also identified THR response elements 6 kb upstream of the <i>ABCB4</i> locus that were conserved in humans and mice. Thus, T3-via THRβ1 as a novel transcriptional activator regulates <i>ABCB4</i> to increase ABCB4 protein levels at the canalicular membrane and promote PC secretion into bile. These findings may have important implications for understanding thyroid hormone function as a potential modifier of bile duct homeostasis and provide pharmacologic opportunities to improve liver function in hepatobiliary diseases caused by low <i>ABCB4</i> expression.