[PMID: 3425783]
The literature is divided as to the necessity of an intact posterior cruciate ligament for functional stability. Presented here is a prospective study of isolated posterior cruciate injuries seen in the acute stage in 13 patients, 6 males and 7 females. The diagnosis of posterior cruciate ligament tear was made clinically and confirmed by arthroscopy. The average age at injury was 22 years. The athletic activity at injury was varied. Hyperflexion was the most common mechanism of injury, followed by pretibial trauma in the hyperflexed knee or in the "dashboard" injury. There were seven complete midsubstance tears and five partial tears. Direct visualization of the posterior cruciate ligament was not attained in one patient. All patients were treated nonoperatively on a physiotherapy routine. Average followup was 2.6 years. Patients were clinically examined and subjected to KT-1000 and Cybex testing. All patients were able to return to their previous activity and experienced no limitations with their injured knees. Using Hughston's criteria, subjective and functional ratings were all good. However, only 3 rated good and 10 fair when assessed objectively. We conclude that acceptable functional stability in these patients does not necessarily require absolute static stability. Nonoperative treatment of the isolated posterior cruciate ligament midsubstance injury may be a viable alternative to the difficult repair/reconstruction procedure.

[PMID: 20306414]
Dislocations of the knee are relatively uncommon injuries. However, the incidence of this injury appears to be increasing. Knee dislocations are most often high velocity blunt injuries, with motor vehicle accidents being a frequent etiology. Other causes include falls from height, athletic injuries, farming and industrial accidents, and even low velocity mechanisms such as a misstep into a hole. Likewise, minor trauma in the morbidly obese is increasingly recognized as a mechanism of knee dislocation. Multiple forms of dislocation exist, with the common factor being disruption of the tibiofemoral articulation. Dislocation can occur in a variety of directions depending on the mechanism of injury. The most common dislocation is anterior, which may be seen in hyperextension injuries such as martial arts kicking. The "dashboard injury" of motor vehicle accidents can result in a posterior dislocation of the knee. Lateral and rotary dislocations are less common. Knee dislocation is more commonly diagnosed in men, with a mean age of 23 to 31 years old. This is the very patient population encountered by Special Operations Forces (SOF) healthcare providers. Given the mechanisms of injury noted above, it is reasonable to conclude that knee dislocations may be seen in a young, active SOF patient population, particularly those engaged in parachuting, fast-roping/rappelling, driving at high speeds during military operations, and mixed martial arts.

[PMID: 10623985]
Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) injuries have a reported incidence of between 3 and 37%, depending on the clinical setting. The most common mechanism of injury in motor vehicle accidents is a dashboard injury or direct force to the proximal anterior tibia. Sports related injuries result from hyperflexion of the knee with the foot typically plantarflexed. The latter mechanism is the most common cause of isolated PCL injuries, while in the trauma population as many as 95% of patients with knee injuries have combined ligamentous damage. Improved knowledge at an anatomical, biomechanical and clinical level has provided the orthopaedist with a more defined treatment algorithm. Isolated, partial PCL injuries (grades I and II) can best be treated nonoperatively while complete injuries (grade III) may require operative treatment based on clinical symptoms. All combined ligamentous injuries usually respond best with surgical management.