[PMID: 31709696]
Degranulation of mast cells (MCs) releases several mediators such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), chymase, tryptase, histamine, and cytokines, which all have important roles in the severity of dengue infection. We aimed to investigate the role of MCs in severity of dengue. We searched for relevant studies in 10 databases on 15 August 2016. Meta-analysis (MA) was conducted by R version 3.5.0. We included 24 studies. in vivo and in vitro studies showed higher MC products released from infected mice/cells with dengue virus. In addition, when administering MC stabilizers or antihistaminic drugs, there was a decrease in vascular/capillary permeability. In human and at early stages, studies revealed an insignificant difference in VEGF levels in dengue fever (DF) versus dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) (standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.145; 95% confidence interval [CI], -0.348-0.638). Meanwhile, at acute stages and compared with healthy controls, high heterogeneity with an inconclusive difference in VEGF levels were noted in DF and DHF. However, pooled serum and plasma levels of VEGF were increased significantly in dengue shock syndrome (DSS) versus healthy controls (SMD 0.65; 95% CI, 0.3-0.95). There were also significantly higher chymase levels in DHF patients compared with DF during the acute phase (MD -6.531; 95% CI, -12.2 to -0.9). VEGF and chymase levels are mediators in dengue pathogenesis. However, limited data were available to support their role in severe dengue cases. Further studies are needed to evaluate the function of other mediators in dengue severity.

[PMID: 31858758]
Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) is a subset of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) with bone marrow (BM) involvement and an IgM monoclonal gammopathy of any level. We aimed to identify the clinical, laboratory, and BM findings of patients with WM and to evaluate the usefulness of CD154 for the diagnosis and prognosis of WM. We reviewed the medical records and BM studies and/or flow cytometric immunotyping of 31 patients with untreated WM. Semiquantitative immunohistochemistry (CD20, CD138, tryptase, and CD154) of BM was performed. Only six patients presented with symptoms of hyperviscosity syndrome. Eleven patients had solid cancer and/or another hematologic malignancy. Mast cells (MC) increased in all samples, with some in close contact with tumor cells. Tryptase-positive MC (17.1/ high-power fields [HPF], 1.2-72.0/HPF) and CD154-positive MC (8.6/HPF, 0.1-31.1/HPF) were observed. The high CD154-positive MC (≥8.6/HPF) group showed a lower overall five-year survival rate than the low CD154-positive MC (<8.6/HPF) group (71.9% vs. 100.0%; <i>P</i>=0.012). Flow cytometric immunophenotyping of BM aspirates showed increased B lymphocytes and plasma cells with a normal phenotype (CD138⁺/CD38⁺/CD19⁺/CD45⁺/CD56⁻). Approximately one third of WM patients showed other malignancies and all patients had increased MC. Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometric immunophenotyping are useful for diagnosing WM, and increased CD154-positive MC can indicate poor prognosis.

[PMID: 31853339]
Mast cells (MCs) are known to participate in a variety of patho-physiological processes depending largely on the intragranular mediators and the production of cytokines and chemokines during degranulation. Recently, extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been implicated important functions for MCs, but the components of MC-derived EVs have not yet been well-characterized. In this study, we aimed to identify signatures of proteins, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and microRNAs (miRNAs) in EVs derived from resting (Rest-EV) and degranulated (Sti-EV) MCs by differential ultracentrifugation. Using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics technology and RNA sequencing, we identified a total of 1988 proteins, 397 lncRNAs, and 272 miRNAs in Rest-EV and Sti-EV. The proteins include common EVs markers (cytoskeletal proteins), MCs markers (FcεRI and tryptase), and some preformed MCs mediators (lysosomal enzymes) as well. The global expression profiles of lncRNAs and miRNAs identified, for the first time, from Rest-EV and Sti-EV, strongly suggest a potential regulatory function of MC-derived EVs. We have also performed Western blotting and qRT-PCR analysis to further verify some of the proteins, lncRNAs, and miRNAs identified from Rest-EV and Sti-EV. Our findings will help to elucidate the functions of MC-derived EVs, and provide a reference dataset for future translational studies involving MC-derived EVs.