[PMID: 23126680]
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been detected in nearly every cell type and found to be fundamentally involved in many biological processes. The characterization of lncRNAs has immense potential to advance our comprehensive understanding of cellular processes and gene regulation, along with implications for the treatment of human disease. The recent ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) study reported 9,640 lncRNA loci in the human genome, which corresponds to around half the number of protein-coding genes. Because of this sheer number and their functional diversity, it is crucial to identify a pool of potentially relevant lncRNAs early on in a given study. In this review, we evaluate the methods for isolating lncRNAs by immunoprecipitation and review the advantages, disadvantages, and applications of three widely used approaches - microarray, tiling array, and RNA-seq - for identifying lncRNAs involved in gene regulation. We also look at ways in which data from publicly available databases such as ENCODE can support the study of lncRNAs.

[PMID: 23846593]
The advent of high-throughput genome scale technologies has enabled us to unravel a large amount of the previously unknown transcriptionally active regions of the genome. Recent genome-wide studies have provided annotations of a large repertoire of various classes of noncoding transcripts. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) form a major proportion of these novel annotated noncoding transcripts, and presently known to be involved in a number of functionally distinct biological processes. Over 18,000 transcripts are presently annotated as lncRNA, and encompass previously annotated classes of noncoding transcripts including large intergenic noncoding RNA, antisense RNA and processed pseudogenes. There is a significant gap in the resources providing a stable annotation, cross-referencing and biologically relevant information. lncRNome has been envisioned with the aim of filling this gap by integrating annotations on a wide variety of biologically significant information into a comprehensive knowledgebase. To the best of our knowledge, lncRNome is one of the largest and most comprehensive resources for lncRNAs. Database URL: http://genome.igib.res.in/lncRNome.

[PMID: 23369519]
Over 10,000 long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been identified in the human genome. Some have been well characterized and known to participate in various stages of gene regulation. In the post-transcriptional process, another class of well-known small non-coding RNA, or microRNA (miRNA), is very active in inhibiting mRNA. Though similar features between mRNA and lincRNA have been revealed in several recent studies, and a few isolated miRNA-lincRNA relationships have been observed. Despite these advances, the comprehensive miRNA regulation pattern of lincRNA has not been clarified. In this study, we investigated the possible interaction between the two classes of non-coding RNAs. Instead of using the existing long non-coding database, we employed an ab initio method to annotate lincRNAs expressed in a group of normal breast tissues and breast tumors. Approximately 90 lincRNAs show strong reverse expression correlation with miRNAs, which have at least one predicted target site presented. These target sites are statistically more conserved than their neighboring genetic regions and other predicted target sites. Several miRNAs that target to these lincRNAs are known to play an essential role in breast cancer. Similar to inhibiting mRNAs, miRNAs show potential in promoting the degeneration of lincRNAs. Breast-cancer-related miRNAs may influence their target lincRNAs resulting in differential expression in normal and malignant breast tissues. This implies the miRNA regulation of lincRNAs may be involved in the regulatory process in tumor cells.