[PMID: 29129088]
The poor prognosis for patients with esophagogastric cancers (EGC) has resulted in an increased focus on the use of targeted agents in this disease. Targets include epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), Her2, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), MET, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and claudin 18.2 (CLDN18.2). Trastuzumab, an anti-Her2 antibody, was approved by the U.S. FDA in 2010 as first-line therapy in combination with chemotherapy for Her2-positive disease. Since then, strategies targeting Her2 that have been successful in Her2-positive breast cancer, have failed in EGC. The one remaining study, the phase III Jacob study with pertuzumab, has yet to be presented. The anti-VEGF receptor 2 antibody, ramucirumab has been investigated as second-line therapy in 2 phase III trials, which resulted in improved survival, with subsequent FDA approval of ramucirumab in the second-line setting. Therapies targeting EGFR have been evaluated in a number of phase III studies, all of which have been negative. Phase III investigation of an mTOR inhibitor did not improve survival, although biomarker studies are awaited which may identify subgroups of patients that may benefit from its use. The results of the trials targeting MET in EGC have been disappointing, raising doubts about the usefulness of further testing agents that inhibit the MET pathway. PARP inhibition with olaparib, warrants further investigation, possibly in combination with other targeted therapies or immune checkpoint inhibition and in a biomarker-selected population. The identification of CLDN18.2 and its targeting with claudiximab is very promising and will be further investigated in a phase III study.

[PMID: 30660828]
Olaparib is a PARP inhibitor (PARPi). For patients bearing BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, olaparib is approved to treat ovarian cancer and in clinical trials to treat breast and pancreatic cancers. In BRCA2-defective patients, PARPi inhibits DNA single-strand break repair, while BRCA2 mutations hamper double-strand break repair. Recently, we identified a series of triazole derivatives that mimic BRCA2 mutations by disrupting the Rad51-BRCA2 interaction and thus double-strand break repair. Here, we have computationally designed, synthesized, and tested over 40 novel derivatives. Additionally, we designed and conducted novel biological assays to characterize how they disrupt the Rad51-BRCA2 interaction and inhibit double-strand break repair. These compounds synergized with olaparib to target pancreatic cancer cells with functional BRCA2. This supports the idea that small organic molecules can mimic genetic mutations to improve the profile of anticancer drugs for precision medicine. Moreover, this paradigm could be exploited in other genetic pathways to discover innovative anticancer targets and drug candidates.

[PMID: 30486888]
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) prevent single-stranded DNA repair. Olaparib is a PARPi approved for the treatment of BRCA mutant ovarian and breast carcinoma. Emerging clinical data suggest a benefit of combining olaparib with immunotherapy in prostate cancer patients both with and without somatic BRCA mutations. We examined if olaparib, when combined with IgG<sub>1</sub> antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)-mediating monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) cetuximab (anti-EGFR), or avelumab (anti-PD-L1), would increase tumor cell sensitivity to killing by natural killer (NK) cells independently of BRCA status or mAb target upregulation. BRCA mutant and BRCA wildtype (WT) prostate carcinoma cell lines were pretreated with olaparib and then exposed to NK cells in the presence or absence of cetuximab or avelumab. NK-mediated killing was significantly increased in both cell lines and was further increased using the ADCC-mediating mAbs. Pre-exposure of NK cells to recombinant IL-15/IL-15Rα further increased the lysis of olaparib treated tumor cells. In addition, olaparib treated tumor cells were killed to a significantly greater degree by engineered high-affinity NK cells (haNK). We show here for the first time that (a) olaparib significantly increased tumor cell sensitivity to NK killing and ADCC in both BRCA WT and BRCA mutant prostate carcinoma cells, independent of PD-L1 or EGFR modulation; (b) mechanistically, treatment with olaparib upregulated death receptor TRAIL-R2; and (c) olaparib significantly enhanced NK killing of additional tumor types, including breast, non-small cell lung carcinoma, and chordoma. These studies support the combined use of NK- and ADCC-mediating agents with correctly timed PARP inhibition.