[PMID: 29416314]
Cystinosis is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder leading to defective transport of cystine out of lysosomes. Subsequent cystine crystal accumulation can occur in various tissues, including the ocular surface. This review explores the efficacy of cysteamine hydrochloride eye drops in the treatment of corneal cystine crystal accumulation and its safety profile.

[PMID: 29421779]
Cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder resulting from defective lysosomal transport of cystine due to mutations in the cystinosin lysosomal cystine transporter (CTNS) gene. The clinical phenotype of nephropathic cystinosis is characterized by renal tubular Fanconi syndrome and development of end-stage renal disease during the first decade. Although metabolic acidosis is the classically prominent finding of the disease, a few cases may present with hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis mimicking Bartter syndrome. Bartter-like presentation may lead to delay in diagnosis and initiation of specific treatment for cystinosis. We report a case of a 6-year-old girl initially presenting with the features of Bartter syndrome that was diagnosed 2 years later with nephropathic cystinosis and a novel CTNS mutation.

[PMID: 29467429]
Cystinosin, a lysosomal transporter is involved in the efflux of cystine from the lysosome to the cytosol. Mutations in the human cystinosin gene (CTNS) cause cystinosis, a recessive autosomal disorder. Studies on cystinosin have been limited by the absence of a robust genetic screen. In the present study we have developed a dual strategy for evaluating cystinosin function that is amenable to rapid genetic analysis. We show that human cystinosin expressed in this yeast confers growth on cystine when the protein is mistargeted to the plasma membrane by the deletion of the C-terminal targeting signal, GYQDL. We also screened a vacuolar protein sorting deletion library, and subsequently created multiple vps deletion mutants for kinetic studies. The double deletion, vps1Δvps17Δ, greatly enhanced uptake. This enabled validation by kinetic studies, including first studies on the WT CTNS protein (that contained the GYQDL motif). Using this screen we isolated several gain of function mutants, G131S/D, G309S/D, A137V, G197R, S270T, L274F and S312N showing enhanced growth on low concentrations of cystine. Kinetic analysis yielded insights into the role of the residues (including one of the patient mutations, G197R). The results indicate that the screen could be effectively used for interrogating and understanding the CTNS protein.