[PMID: 27137957]
Hair pulling disorder (HPD; trichotillomania) is thought to be associated with significant psychiatric comorbidity and functional impairment. However, few methodologically rigorous studies of HPD have been conducted, rendering such conclusions tenuous. The following study examined comorbidity and psychosocial functioning in a well-characterized sample of adults with HPD (N=85) who met DSM-IV criteria, had at least moderate hair pulling severity, and participated in a clinical trial. Results revealed that 38.8% of individuals with HPD had another current psychiatric diagnosis and 78.8% had another lifetime (present and/or past) psychiatric diagnosis. Specifically, HPD showed substantial overlap with depressive, anxiety, addictive, and other body-focused repetitive behavior disorders. The relationships between certain comorbidity patterns, hair pulling severity, current mood and anxiety symptoms, and quality of life were also examined. Results showed that current depressive symptoms were the only predictor of quality of life deficits. Implications of these findings for the conceptualization and treatment of HPD are discussed.

[PMID: 26001984]
Trichotillomania (hair pulling disorder, HPD) is characterized by significant psychological distress, childhood-onset, and, in adults, certain cognitive deficits such as inhibitory control. A total absence of such literature exists within pediatric HPD samples, including research investigating neurocognitive aspects of disparate pulling-styles. The present study aims to address these gaps in the literature. Youth with HPD and healthy controls (N = 45) were compared on an automated neurocognitive task--stop-signal task (SST)--assessing inhibitory control. Youth with HPD (n = 17), controlling for age and attention issues, were found to perform better on the stop-signal reaction time compared to controls (n = 28). No significant relationships between performance on the SST and HPD severity, distress/impairment, or pulling-styles were noted. Findings from the current study suggest that children with HPD may not exhibit deficits in motor inhibition as compared to controls when the effects of age and attentional problems are controlled.

[PMID: 26580849]
No neurocognitive examinations of pediatric trichotillomania (hair pulling disorder; HPD) have taken place. As a result, science's understanding of the underlying pathophysiology associated with HPD in youths is greatly lacking. The present study seeks to begin to address this gap in the literature via examination of executive functioning in a stimulant-free sample of children with HPD. Sixteen and 23 children between 9 and 17 years of age meeting DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for HPD or classified as a healthy control, respectively, were recruited (N = 39) to complete structured interviews, self-reports, and a subset of tests from the Cambridge Automatic Neurocognitive Test Assessment Battery (CANTAB) assessing cognitive flexibility/reversal learning (intradimensional/extradimensional; IED), working memory (spatial span; SSP), and planning and organization (Stocking of Cambridge; SOC). Hierarchical regression analyses indicated that, after controlling for appropriate covariates, diagnostic status predicted impaired performance on both the IED (reversal learning only) and SOC (planning and organization) but failed to predict cognitive flexibility or working memory capacity. Correlational analyses revealed that pulling severity was strongly related to working memory capacity, while disparate relationships between pulling styles (automatic, focused pulling) were evident with respect to working memory and planning and organization. Children with HPD performed more poorly on tasks of executive functioning as compared to controls. Correlational analyses suggest potentially distinct pathophysiology underlying automatic and focused pulling warranting further research. Limitations and future areas of inquiry are discussed.