[PMID: 28041835]
Cell sheets (CS) from c-kit+ cardiac stem cell (CSC) hold a potential for application in regenerative medicine. However, manufacture of CS may require thermoresponsive dishes, which increases cost and puts one in dependence on specific materials. Alternative approaches were established recently and we conducted a short study to compare approaches for detachment of CS from c-kit+ CSC. Our in-house developed method using chelation by Versene solution was compared to UpCell™ thermoresponsive plates in terms of CSC proliferation, viability, gap junction formation and engraftment in a model of myocardial infarction. Use of Versene solution instead of thermoresponsive dishes resulted in comparable CS thickness (approximately 100mcm), cell proliferation rate and no signs of apoptosis detected in both types of constructs. However, we observed a minor reduction of gap junction count in Versene-treated CS. At day 30 after delivery to infarcted myocardium both types of CS retained at the site of transplantation and contained comparable amounts of proliferating cells indicating engraftment. Thus, we may conclude that detachment of CS from c-kit+ CSC using Versene solution followed by mechanical treatment is an alternative to thermoresponsive plates allowing use of routinely available materials to generate constructs for cardiac repair.

[PMID: 29244941]
The purpose of this research consisted in monitoring of brightness temperature of the suspension of follicular thyroid carcinoma cells during the necrosis of these cells in superhigh frequency (SHF) range. The monitoring of the change in the ratio between brightness temperatures TSHF and TIR values during the necrosis of these cells. The object of study was follicular thyroid carcinoma cells suspension prepared with use of Versene solution and 0.25% trypsin solution. The cells were precipitated by centrifugation and re-suspended in culture medium. The measurements of brightness temperatures were carried out with use of radiothermoimeter. SHF range was 3.4-4.2 GHz, and infrared (IR) range was 8-13 mm. The temperature of the suspension was maintained at 37.5°С. It was found that upon the necrosis in the suspension of cells, an increase in brightness temperature in 3.4-4.2 GHz range (SHF range) occurs, while brightness temperature of the medium in the IR range does not change. The monitoring of necrosis of follicular thyroid carcinoma cells was carried out by SHF-radiothermometry. It was shown that during the necrosis the change of non-equilibrium state of cell medium occurs, that results in the change in the ratio between TSHF and TIR. During the necrosis, the brightness temperature in SHF range (TSHF) increases.

[PMID: 8266579]
Original modification of the harvest procedure, hypotonic treatment and slide-making techniques were used to obtain prometaphase spreads of good quality fitted to G-banding or to FISH. Human blood cultures were synchronized with a methotrexate block during synthesis, and following this with a thymidine release. Cells were then proceeded into prometaphase and early metaphase and were quickly harvested without exposure to colcemid. Following incubation in a mixture of 0.56% KCl and 1% sodium citrate (1:1) for 20-23 min at room temperature, cells were fixed in 4 changes of fixative made of 3 parts of absolute methanol and 1 part of glacial acetic acid. Three or four 100-105 microliters volume of a suspension of fixed cells were blew with a strength through pasteur pipette tip from a distance 5-6 cm onto chilled superclean slides wetted by water. These slides were then quickly flame dried. Prior to staining, prometaphase bearing spreads were held in thermostat overnight at 37 degrees C. Prometaphases were G-banded with the aid of a modified technique elaborated in the Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital (Sweden). The slides were incubated for 1-4 min at room temperature in 0.01 versene solution, containing 0.011% w/v trypsin (Difco), 0.4 mg/ml D-glucose, 0.17 mg/ml KCl, 1.7 mg/ml NaCl. Following a 15 sec incubation in a solution containing 1 mg/ml D-glucose, 0.4 mg/ml KCl, 8 mg/ml NaCl, G-banding was completed by staining the slides with 2% Giemsa (Merck) in pH 6.8 phosphate buffer for 4-5 min.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)