[PMID: 23794183]
There is a great interest in reliable ways to obtain absolute protein abundances at a proteome-wide scale. To this end, label-free LC-MS/MS quantification methods have been proposed where all identified proteins are assigned an estimated abundance. Several variants of this quantification approach have been presented, based on either the number of spectral counts per protein or MS1 peak intensities. Equipped with several datasets representing real biological environments, containing a high number of accurately quantified reference proteins, we evaluate five popular low-cost and easily implemented quantification methods (Absolute Protein Expression, Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index, Intensity-Based Absolute Quantification Index, Top3, and MeanInt). Our results demonstrate considerably improved abundance estimates upon implementing accurately quantified reference proteins; that is, using spiked in stable isotope labeled standard peptides or a standard protein mix, to generate a properly calibrated quantification model. We show that only the Top3 method is directly proportional to protein abundance over the full quantification range and is the preferred method in the absence of reference protein measurements. Additionally, we demonstrate that spectral count based quantification methods are associated with higher errors than MS1 peak intensity based methods. Furthermore, we investigate the impact of miscleaved, modified, and shared peptides as well as protein size and the number of employed reference proteins on quantification accuracy.

[PMID: 22771841]
Three different label-free proteome quantification methods--APEX, emPAI and iBAQ--were evaluated to measure proteome-wide protein concentrations in the cell. All the methods were applied to a sample from Escherichia coli chemostat culture. A Pearson squared correlation of approximately 0.6 among the three quantification methods was demonstrated. Importantly, the sum of quantified proteins by iBAQ and emPAI corresponded with the Lowry total protein quantification, demonstrating applicability of label-free methods for an accurate calculation of protein concentrations at the proteome level. The iBAQ method showed the best correlation between biological replicates, a normal distribution among all protein abundances, and the lowest variation among ribosomal protein abundances, which are expected to have equal amounts. Absolute quantitative proteome data enabled us to evaluate metabolic cost for protein synthesis and apparent catalytic activities of enzymes by integration with flux analysis. All the methods demonstrated similar ATP costs for protein synthesis for different cellular processes and that costs for expressing biomass synthesis related proteins were higher than those for energy generation. Importantly, catalytic activities of energy metabolism enzymes were an order or two higher than those of monomer synthesis. Interestingly, a staircase-like protein expression was demonstrated for most of the transcription units.

[PMID: 23981693]
Chicken eggshell mineralization is a prominent model for biomineralization not only because of its importance for avian reproduction but also because of the commercial interest associated with eggshell quality. An analysis and comparison of the protein constituents of eggshells of several species would contribute to a better understanding of the shell mineralization process. The recent publication of the turkey genome sequence now provides a basis for the in-depth analysis of the turkey eggshell proteome. Proteomic analysis of turkey acid-soluble and acid-insoluble organic eggshell matrix yielded 697 identified proteins/protein groups. However, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) results indicated that the 47 most abundant identified proteins already constituted 95% of the total turkey eggshell matrix proteome. Forty-four of these proteins were also identified in chicken eggshell matrix previously. Despite these similarities there were important and unexpected differences. While ovocleidin-116 and ovocalyxin-36 were major proteins constituting approximately 37% of the identified proteome, other members of the group of so-called eggshell-specific proteins were not identified. Thus ovocalyxin-21 and ovocalyxin-32 were missing among matrix proteins. Conversely, major turkey eggshell proteins were not detected in chicken, such as the bone protein periostin, the mammalian counterpart of which is involved in many aspects of bone metabolism and which represented 10-11% of the total identified proteome. Even members of the same avian family show important differences in eggshell matrix composition and more studies on the proteome and the transcriptome level will be necessary to identify a common toolkit of eggshell mineralization and to work out species differences among functional eggshell protein sets and their role in eggshell production.