[PMID: 23026909]
This unit describes the ChIP-exo methodology, which combines chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with lambda exonuclease digestion followed by high-throughput sequencing. ChIP-exo allows identification of a nearly complete set of the binding locations of DNA-binding proteins at near-single-nucleotide resolution with almost no background. The process is initiated by cross-linking DNA and associated proteins. Chromatin is then isolated from nuclei and subjected to sonication. Subsequently, an antibody against the desired protein is used to immunoprecipitate specific DNA-protein complexes. ChIP DNA is purified, sequencing adaptors are ligated, and the adaptor-ligated DNA is then digested by lambda exonuclease, generating 25- to 50-nucleotide fragments for high-throughput sequencing. The sequences of the fragments are mapped back to the reference genome to determine the binding locations. The 5' ends of DNA fragments on the forward and reverse strands indicate the left and right boundaries of the DNA-protein binding regions, respectively.

[PMID: 28060339]
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is an indispensable tool in the fields of epigenetics and gene regulation that isolates specific protein-DNA interactions. ChIP coupled to high throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) is commonly used to determine the genomic location of proteins that interact with chromatin. However, ChIP-seq is hampered by relatively low mapping resolution of several hundred base pairs and high background signal. The ChIP-exo method is a refined version of ChIP-seq that substantially improves upon both resolution and noise. The key distinction of the ChIP-exo methodology is the incorporation of lambda exonuclease digestion in the library preparation workflow to effectively footprint the left and right 5' DNA borders of the protein-DNA crosslink site. The ChIP-exo libraries are then subjected to high throughput sequencing. The resulting data can be leveraged to provide unique and ultra-high resolution insights into the functional organization of the genome. Here, we describe the ChIP-exo method that we have optimized and streamlined for mammalian systems and next-generation sequencing-by-synthesis platform.

[PMID: 26404150]
DNA-binding proteins play a crucial role in all living organisms by interacting with various DNA sequences across the genome. While several methods have been used to study the interaction between DNA and proteins in vitro, chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) has become the standard technique for identifying the genome-wide location of DNA-binding proteins in vivo. However, the resolution of standard ChIP-seq methodology is limited by the DNA fragmentation process and presence of contaminating DNA. A significant improvement of the ChIP-seq technique results from the addition of an exonuclease treatment during the immunoprecipitation step (ChIP-exo) that lowers background noise and more importantly increases the identification of binding sites to a level near to single-base resolution by effectively footprinting DNA-bound proteins. By doing so, ChIP-exo offers new opportunities for a better characterization of the complex and fascinating architecture that resides in DNA-proteins interactions and provides new insights for the comprehension of important molecular mechanisms.