[PMID: 28544809]
CyberKnife<sup>®</sup> is a robotic stereotactic radiotherapy system. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness and the safety of CyberKnife<sup>®</sup> on treating head and neck paragangliomas and to report our results. Between March 2009 and June 2014, 12 patients with head and neck paragangliomas have been referred to our clinic: in three cases had jugular paragangliomas, five cases had carotid body paragangliomas and three cases had tympanic paragangliomas. One patient had bilateral neck paragangliomas (right neck; carotid body paraganglioma, left neck; jugular pargangliomas). All of them received fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy with CyberKnife<sup>®</sup> up to a total median dose of 24 Gy (reference isodose 67-90%). The median tumor volume was 35.5 cc (range, 5.3-113.8 cc). The median follow up was 30 months (range, 0-66 months). Local tumor control was assessed according to RECIST criteria on follow-up imaging studies. There were no acute or late toxicity related with stereotactic radiotherapy after treatment. No local tumor progression was observed on magnetic resonance imaging and none of our patients showed progressive clinical status. Seven tumors shrinked in size (54%). Five tumors (46%) had stable size during follow up. Local control rate was 100%. Stereotactic radiotherapy is a good alternative to surgery for the treatment of head and neck paragangliomas coming up with a clear benefit of acute and late side effects. CyberKnife<sup>®</sup> seems to be a safe and efficient system treating head and neck paragangliomas.

[PMID: 28298046]
OBJECTIVE Cavernous sinus hemangiomas (CSHs) are rare benign vascular tumors that arise from the dural venous sinuses lateral to the sella. Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has emerged as a principal alternative to microresection for small- and medium-sized CSHs. Resection is a reasonable option for large (3-4 cm in diameter) and giant (> 4 cm in diameter) CSHs. However, management of giant CSHs remains a challenge for neurosurgeons because of the high rates of morbidity and even death that stem from uncontrollable and massive hemorrhage during surgery. The authors report here the results of their study on the use of hypofractionated SRS (H-SRS) to treat giant CSH. METHODS Between January 2008 and April 2014, 31 patients with a giant CSH (tumor volume > 40 cm<sup>3</sup>, > 4 cm in diameter) treated using CyberKnife radiosurgery were enrolled in a cohort study. Clinical status and targeted reduction of tumor volume were evaluated by means of serial MRI. The diagnosis for 27 patients was determined on the basis of typical imaging features. In 4 patients, the diagnosis of CSH was confirmed histopathologically. The median CSH volume was 64.4 cm<sup>3</sup> (range 40.9-145.3 cm<sup>3</sup>). Three or 4 sessions of CyberKnife radiosurgery were used with a prescription dose based on the intent to cover the entire tumor with a higher dose while ensuring dose limitation to the visual pathways and brainstem. The median marginal dose to the tumor was 21 Gy (range 19.5-21 Gy) in 3 fractions for 11 patients and 22 Gy (range 18-22 Gy) in 4 fractions for 20 patients. RESULTS The median duration of follow-up was 30 months (range 6-78 months) for all patients. Follow-up MRI scans revealed a median tumor volume reduction of 88.1% (62.3%-99.4%) at last examination compared with the pretreatment volume. Ten patients developed new or aggravated temporary headache and 5 experienced vomiting during the treatment; these acute symptoms were relieved completely after steroid administration. Among the 30 patients with symptoms observed before treatment, 19 achieved complete symptomatic remission, and 11 had partial remission. One patient reported seizures, which were controlled after antiepileptic drug administration. No radiation-induced neurological deficits or delayed complications were reported during the follow-up period. CONCLUSIONS Hypofractionated SRS was an effective and safe modality for treating giant CSH. Considering the risks involved with microsurgery, it is possible that H-SRS might be able to serve as a definitive primary treatment option for giant CSH.

[PMID: 28849326]
CyberKnife® stereotactic radiosurgery is a new treatment option for uveal melanoma. This review outlines the technique of robot-assisted CyberKnife® therapy, as well as the pros and cons in the treatment of uveal melanoma. The study provides a PubMed literature review and own preliminary clinical experiences. CyberKnife® therapy for choroidal and ciliary body melanomas shows comparable results concerning local tumor control and overall survival matching those of conventional therapies. With only low complication rates, a high level of quality of life can be conserved by possible preservation of visual acuity as well as the ocular globe. Stereotactic radiosurgery using CyberKnife® seems to be an efficient and safe therapeutic option for malignant melanomas affecting the choroid and ciliary body. Comparative studies with conventional radiation strategies are now a high priority.