[PMID: 25707381]
Since its isolation in 1970, and discovery of its potent inhibitory activity on T-cell proliferation, cyclosporin A (CsA) has been shown to play a significant role in diverse fields of biology. Furthermore, chemical modification of CsA has led to analogs with distinct biological activities associated with its protein receptor family, cyclophilins. This review systematically collates the synthetic chemistry performed at each of the eleven amino acids, and provides examples of the utility of such transformations. The various modifications of CsA are traced from early, modest chemistry performed at the unique Bmt residue, through the remarkable use of a polyanion enolate that can be stereoselectively manipulated, and onto application of more recently developed olefin metathesis chemistry to prepare new CsA derivatives with unexpected biological activity. The myriad biological activities of CsA and its synthetic derivatives have inspired the development of new approaches to modify the CsA ring. In turn, these new CsA derivatives have served as tools in the discovery of new roles for cyclophilins. This review provides information on the types of cyclosporin derivatives that are available to the many biologists working in this field, and should be of value to the medicinal chemist trying to discover drugs based on CsA. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Proline-directed foldases: Cell signaling catalysts and drug targets.

[PMID: 2477715]
The structurally novel macrolide FK506 (refs 1,2) has recently been demonstrated to have potent immunosuppressive activity at concentrations several hundredfold lower than cyclosporin A (CsA). Cyclosporin A, a cyclic peptide, has found widespread clinical use in the prevention of graft rejection following bone marrow and organ transplantation. The mechanisms of immunosuppression mediated by FK506 and CsA appear to be remarkably similar, suggesting that these unrelated structures act on a common receptor or on similar molecular targets, perhaps the CsA receptor, cyclophilin, which has recently been shown by Fischer et al. and Takahashi et al. to have cis-trans peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity. We have prepared an FK506 affinity matrix and purified a binding protein for FK506 from bovine thymus and from human spleen. This FK506-binding protein (FKBP) has a relative molecular mass (Mr) of approximately 14,000(14K), a pI of 8.8-8.9, and does not cross-react with antisera against cyclophilin. The first 40 N-terminal residues of the bovine and 16 residues of the human FKBP were determined; the 16-residue fragments are identical to each other and unrelated to any known sequences. This protein catalyses the cis-trans isomerization of the proline amide in a tetrapeptide substrate and FK506 inhibits the action of this new isomerase. The FKBP and cyclophilin appear to be members of an emerging class of novel proteins that regulate T cell activation and other metabolic processes, perhaps by the recognition (and possibly the isomerization) of proline-containing epitopes in target proteins.

[PMID: 3043797]
Cyclosporine mediates its immunosuppressive effect by preventing the synthesis of lymphokine mRNA during the process of T lymphocyte activation. Although the detailed molecular mechanism by which CsA achieves this effect is unknown, two proteins have been identified as putative intracellular CsA-receptor proteins. One of these, calmodulin, is an important Ca++-binding protein and enzyme cofactor and the other, cyclophilin, is a novel protein that is reported to have protein kinase activity. In this study the CsA-binding capacity of both these proteins has been assessed using CsA-coated ELISA plates and CsA-affinity gel matrices. CsA binding was shown by cyclophilin whereas no CsA-calmodulin binding could be detected under identical conditions. However, it was not possible to demonstrate any cyclophilin-associated protein kinase activity. Jurkat cells were probed for the presence of CsA-binding proteins using the CsA-affinity gel matrix; a 17 KD protein, most probably cyclophilin, was identified as the major CsA-binding protein. In addition, a previously unidentified CsA-binding 45 KD phosphoprotein was precipitated from 32P-labeled Jurkat cells. These results would support cyclophilin as the major, if not only, intracellular receptor protein for CsA. However, the relationship between binding of CsA to cyclophilin and/or the 45 KD phosphoprotein and the immunosuppressive effects of CsA is still unknown.