[PMID: 15371550]
Chromatin modulation at various cis-acting elements is critical for V(D)J recombination during T and B cell development. MARbeta, a matrix-associated region (MAR) located upstream of the T cell receptor beta (TCRbeta) enhancer (Ebeta), serves a crucial role in silencing Ebeta-mediated TCR activation. By DNaseI hypersensitivity assays, we show here that overexpression of the MAR binding proteins SMAR1 and Cux/CDP modulate the chromatin structure at MARbeta. We further demonstrate that the silencer function of MARbeta is mediated independently by SMAR1 and Cux/CDP as judged by their ability to repress Ebeta-dependent reporter gene expression. Moreover, the repressor activity of SMAR1 is strongly enhanced in the presence of Cux/CDP. These two proteins physically interact with each other and colocalize within the perinuclear region through a SMAR1 domain required for repression. The repression domain of SMAR1 is separate from the MARbeta binding domain and contains a nuclear localization signal and an arginine-serine (RS)-rich domain, characteristic of pre-mRNA splicing regulators. Our data suggest that at the double positive stage of T cell development, cis-acting MARbeta elements recruit the strong negative regulators Cux and SMAR1 to control Ebeta-mediated recombination and transcription.

[PMID: 16034473]
Gene expression changes in CD4 + Vbeta8+ T cells energized by in vivo exposure to staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) bacterial superantigen compared to CD4 + Vbeta8+ non-energic T cells were assessed using DNA microarrays containing 5184 murine complementary DNAs. Anergy in splenic T cells of SEB-immunized BALB/c mice was verified by dramatically reduced proliferative capacity and an 8 x overexpression of GRAIL mRNA in CD4 + Vbeta8+ T cells taken from mice 7 days after injection. At an Associative t-test threshold of P<0.0005, 96 genes were overexpressed or detected only in anergic T cells, while 256 genes were suppressed or not detected in anergic T cells. Six of eight differential expressions tested using real-time quantitative PCR were validated. Message for B-Raf was detected only in non-anergic cells, while expression of the TCR signaling modulator Slap (Src-like adapter protein) and the TCR zeta-chain specific phosphatase Ptpn3 was enhanced. Modulation of multiple genes suggests downregulation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and enhanced Notch signaling in the anergic cells. Consistent with previous reports in a non-superantigen in vivo anergy model, mRNA for CD18 and the transcription factor Satb1 (special AT-rich-binding protein 1) was increased in SEB-energized T cells. This is the first report of global transcriptional changes in CD4+ T cells made anergic by superantigen exposure.

[PMID: 21841785]
Regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells) are essential for self-tolerance and immune homeostasis. Lack of effector T cell (T(eff) cell) function and gain of suppressive activity by T(reg) cells are dependent on the transcriptional program induced by Foxp3. Here we report that repression of SATB1, a genome organizer that regulates chromatin structure and gene expression, was crucial for the phenotype and function of T(reg) cells. Foxp3, acting as a transcriptional repressor, directly suppressed the SATB1 locus and indirectly suppressed it through the induction of microRNAs that bound the SATB1 3' untranslated region. Release of SATB1 from the control of Foxp3 in T(reg) cells caused loss of suppressive function, establishment of transcriptional T(eff) cell programs and induction of T(eff) cell cytokines. Our data support the proposal that inhibition of SATB1-mediated modulation of global chromatin remodeling is pivotal for maintaining T(reg) cell functionality.