[PMID: 29208350]
Endothelial cells (ECs) play an important role in neovascularisation, but are too limited in number for adequate therapeutic applications. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have the potential to differentiate into endothelial lineage cells, which makes them attractive candidates for therapeutic angiogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate efficient differentiation of MSCs into ECs by inducing medium in vitro. MSCs were isolated from bone marrow by density gradient centrifugation. The characterisation of the MSCs was determined by their cluster of differentiation (CD) marker profile. Inducing medium containing vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), insulin like growth factor (IGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), ascorbic acid, and heparin was applied to differentiate the MSCs into ECs. Endothelial differentiation was quantitatively evaluated using flow cytometry. Real time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to analyse mRNA expression of endothelial markers. Tube formation assay was further performed to examine the functional status of the differentiated MSCs. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that CD31<sup>+</sup> and CD34<sup>+</sup> cells increased steadily from 12% at 3 days, to 40% at 7 days, and to 60% at 14 days. Immunofluorescence staining further confirmed the expression of CD31 and CD34. qRT-PCR showed that expression of von Willebrand factor (vWF), vascular endothelial cadherin (VE-cadherin) and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) were significantly higher in the induced MSCs group compared with the uninduced MSCs group. The functional behavior of the differentiated cells was tested by tube formation assay in vitro on matrigel. Induced MSCs were capable of developing capillary networks, and progressive formation of vessel like structures was associated with increased EC population. These results provide a method to efficiently promote differentiation of MSCs into ECs in vitro for potential application in the treatment of peripheral arterial disease.

[PMID: 29243545]
Objective To evaluate the role of macrophage infiltration in the differentiation process of ureteral polyps and cancers. Methods This retrospective immunohistochemical study analysed archival samples of pathologically-confirmed specimens of low- and high-grade ureteral cancer, ureteral papilloma and ureteral polyps. The samples were immunohistochemically stained for cluster of differentiation (CD)4, CD8, CD16, CD25, CD56 and CD68 using immunofluorescence in order to identify different T-lymphocyte populations and macrophages. Results A total of 70 specimens were included in the analysis: 21 specimens of ureteral cancer, 17 specimens of ureteral papilloma, and 32 specimens of ureteral polyps. The largest proportion of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells was observed in the low-grade ureteral cancer group and almost none were observed in ureteral papillomas. The largest proportion of CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocytes was observed in the ureteral polyps. The largest proportion of CD56+ natural killer cells was detected in the ureteral polyps, with very low levels observed in the other three groups. The largest proportion of CD16+CD68+ macrophages was observed in the high-grade ureteral cancer group, which was significantly higher than that observed in the ureteral papillomas. Conclusions This study revealed that CD16+CD68+ macrophages appear to participate in ureteral neoplastic transformation.

[PMID: 11381193]
The precision of immunological characterization of leukemias was improved by a certain number of technical innovations, particularly hybridoma production and standardization, resulting in monoclonal antibodies and definition of recognised cellular antigens (designated by CD: Cluster of Differentiation). The aim of this work was to determine the immunophenotyping profile of patients with leukemia, by means of a flow cytometric method: 66 blood samples coming from leukemic persons in the Sahel region were studied by flow cytometry, using about thirty monoclonal antibodies all marked with a fluorochrome, in one or two colour systems to assess their distribution according to type (lymphoid B or T / myeloid) and age, and to search for possible co-expressions of markers of different lineages. The marked preponderance of childhood B-ALL in our series is, at least partly, attributable to the age distribution of the Tunisian population. In agreement with studies from other countries, the majority of AML cases occurred among adults. A high proportion of AML cases in our series co-expressed markers of other lineages. Overall, accurate classification of acute leukemias was possible from a simple peripheral blood sample in 62 of 66 cases (93.9%).