[PMID: 31040920]
Vitamin K serves as an essential co-factor in the γ-carboxylation of glutamate to γ-carboxyglutamate (GLA), a post-translational modification mediated by gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (GGCX) and vitamin K oxidoreductases (VKORC1 or VKORC1L1). While both phylloquinone (K1) and menaquinone (K2) support the synthesis of GLA-modified proteins, studies assessing K1 and/or K2 effects in cancer cells have reported minimal effects of K1 and anti-proliferative or pro-apoptotic effects of K2. qPCR results indicated highest expression of <i>GGCX</i>, <i>VKORC1</i>, and <i>VKORC1L1</i> in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines, Hs578T, MDA-MB-231 and SUM159PT, and in advanced stage disease. To assess differential effects of vitamin K, TNBC cells were cultured in media supplemented with K1 or K2. K1 treatment increased cell growth, and enhanced stemness and GLA-modified protein expression in TNBC lysates. Alternatively, lysates from cells exposed to vehicle, K2, or the VKOR antagonist, warfarin, did not express GLA-modified proteins. Further, K2 exposure reduced stemness and elicited anti-proliferative effects. These studies show that TNBC cells express a functional vitamin K pathway and that K1 and K2 exert distinct phenotypic effects. Clarification of the mechanisms by which K1 and K2 induce these effects may lead to relevant therapeutic strategies for manipulating this pathway in TNBC patients.

[PMID: 33037248]
Glutamic acid is an alpha-amino acid used by all living beings in protein biosynthesis. One of the important glutamic acid modifications is post-translationally modified 4-carboxyglutamate. It has a significant role in blood coagulation. 4-carboxyglumates are required for the binding of calcium ions. On the contrary, this modification can also cause different diseases such as bone resorption, osteoporosis, papilloma, and plaque atherosclerosis. Considering its importance, it is necessary to predict the occurrence of glutamic acid carboxylation in amino acid stretches. As there is no computational based prediction model available to identify 4-carboxyglutamate modification, this study is, therefore, designed to predict 4-carboxyglutamate sites with a less computational cost. A machine learning model is devised with a Multilayered Perceptron (MLP) classifier using Chou's 5-step rule. It may help in learning statistical moments and based on this learning, the prediction is to be made accurately either it is 4-carboxyglutamate residue site or detected residue site having no 4-carboxyglutamate. Prediction accuracy of the proposed model is 94% using an independent set test, while obtained prediction accuracy is 99% by self-consistency tests.

[PMID: 29856932]
Vitamin K (VK) is an essential cofactor for the post-translational conversion of peptide-bound glutamate to γ-carboxyglutamate. The resultant vitamin K-dependent proteins are known or postulated to possess a variety of biological functions, chiefly in the maintenance of hemostasis. The vitamin K cycle is a cellular pathway that drives γ-carboxylation and recycling of VK via γ-carboxyglutamyl carboxylase (GGCX) and vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR), respectively. In this review, we show how novel molecular biological approaches are providing new insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms caused by rare mutations of both GGCX and VKOR. We also discuss how other protein regulators influence the intermediary metabolism of VK, first through intestinal absorption and second through a pathway that converts some dietary phylloquinone to menadione, which is prenylated to menaquinone-4 (MK-4) in target tissues by UBIAD1. The contribution of MK-4 synthesis to VK functions is yet to be revealed.