[PMID: 27596390]
Mushrooms have unique sensory properties and nutritional values as well as health benefits due to their bioactive compounds, especially beta-glucans. Well-known edible and medicinal mushroom species as well as uncommon or unknown species representing interesting sources of bioactive beta-glucans have been widely studied. Commercially cultivated and wild growing mushrooms were analysed for their beta-glucan contents. Enzymatic determinations of all glucans, alpha-glucans and beta-glucans in 39 mushrooms species were performed, leading to very remarkable results. Many wild growing species present high beta-glucan contents, especially Bracket fungi. The well-known cultivated species Agaricus bisporus, Lentinula edodes and Cantharellus cibarius as well as most screened wild growing species show higher glucan contents in their stipes than caps.

[PMID: 26304449]
Seventeen edible mushrooms commercially available in Korea were analysed for their umami taste compounds (5'-nucleotides: AMP, GMP, IMP, UMP, XMP; free amino acids: aspartic, glutamic acid) and subjected to human sensory evaluation and electronic tongue measurements. Amanita virgineoides featured the highest total 5'-nucleotide content (36.9 ± 1.50 mg/g), while monosodium glutamate-like components (42.4 ± 6.90 mg/g) were highest in Agaricus bisporus. The equivalent umami concentration (EUC) ranged from 1.51 ± 0.42 to 3890 ± 833 mg MSG/g dry weight; most mushrooms exhibited a high umami taste. Pleurotus ostreatus scored the highest in the human sensory evaluation, while Flammulina velutipes obtained the maximum score in the electronic tongue measurement. The EUC and the sensory score from the electronic tongue test were highly correlated, and also showed significant correlation with the human sensory evaluation score. These results suggest that the electronic tongue is suitable to determine the characteristic umami taste of mushrooms.

[PMID: 27389675]
BACKGROUND Fractionated plasma separation and absorption (FPSA) is an extracorporeal liver support method that detoxifies accumulated toxins. There are limited data of its use in the treatment of Amanita phalloides intoxication. The objective of this study was to investigate whether FPSA before liver transplantation improves patients' short-term post liver transplantation survival in Amanita phalloides poisoning. MATERIAL AND METHODS The study population consisted of ten patients who had liver transplantation (LT) due to acute liver failure (ALF) caused by Amanita phalloides poisoning. Six patients were treated with FPSA before liver transplantation. All the patients who were started on FPSA were also placed on the liver transplantation list according to emergent liver transplantation criteria. RESULTS Patients treated with FPSA were in a more severe clinical condition presenting in higher mean MELD, total bilirubin, INR and ammonia along with more frequent hypoglycemia and hepatic encephalopathy grade 3/4. FPSA group had longer mean waiting time on the recipient list (3.5 vs. 1.25 days) but inferior thirty-day survival rate (16.5% vs. 100%). CONCLUSIONS When conservative medical modalities are ineffective, the only treatment for Amanita phalloides poisoning is a liver transplant. Although FPSA treated patients had inferior post-LT survival, FPSA was found to prolong the pre surgical waiting time for critically ill patients, consequently giving a chance of life-saving procedure.