[PMID: 21300291]
PolyA polymerase (PAP) adds a polyA tail onto the 3'-end of RNAs without a nucleic acid template, using adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP) as a substrate. The mechanism for the substrate selection by eubacterial PAP remains obscure. Structural and biochemical studies of Escherichia coli PAP (EcPAP) revealed that the shape and size of the nucleobase-interacting pocket of EcPAP are maintained by an intra-molecular hydrogen-network, making it suitable for the accommodation of only ATP, using a single amino acid, Arg(197). The pocket structure is sustained by interactions between the catalytic domain and the RNA-binding domain. EcPAP has a flexible basic C-terminal region that contributes to optimal RNA translocation for processive adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) incorporations onto the 3'-end of RNAs. A comparison of the EcPAP structure with those of other template-independent RNA polymerases suggests that structural changes of domain(s) outside the conserved catalytic core domain altered the substrate specificities of the template-independent RNA polymerases.

[PMID: 20174964]
Poly(A)polymerase-alpha (PAPOLA) has been the most extensively investigated mammalian polyadenylating enzyme, mainly in regard to its multifaceted post-translational regulation. The possibility of translational regulation of this enzyme was addressed. The transcription start site was mapped and two uORFs, highly conserved among several species, were identified in the 211-bp long, GC-rich, 5' UTR of the PAPOLA mRNA. Mutation of the 5' proximal AUG resulted in increased translational efficiency of the adjacent coding sequence, whereas no significant effect was observed after mutation of the second AUG. These observations imply that translational regulation is among the conserved mechanisms regulating PAPOLA expression.

[PMID: 15909992]
Polyadenylate polymerase (PAP) catalyzes the synthesis of 3'-polyadenylate tails onto mRNA. A comprehensive steady-state kinetic analysis of PAP was conducted which included initial velocity studies of the forward and reverse reactions, inhibition studies, and the use of alternative substrates. The reaction (A(n) + ATP <--> A(n+1) + PP(i)) is adequately described by a rapid equilibrium random mechanism. Several thermodynamic parameters for the reaction were determined or calculated, including the overall equilibrium constant (K(eq) = 84) and the apparent equilibrium constant of the internal step (K(int) = 4) which involves the rate-determining interconversion of central complexes. A large (100-fold) difference in Vmax accounts for nucleotide specificity (ATP vs CTP), despite an only 3-fold difference in Km. Comparison of the sulfur elemental effect on Vmax for ATP and CTP suggests that the chemical step is rate-determining for both reactions. Comparison of the sulfur elemental effect on Vmax/Km revealed differences in the mechanism by which either nucleotide is incorporated. Consistent with these data, an induced fit mechanism for nucleotide specificity is proposed whereby PAP couples a uniform binding mechanism, which selects for ATP, with a ground-state destabilization mechanism, which serves to accelerate the velocity for the correct substrate.