[PMID: 32667692]
Circular RNAs (circRNA) have been reported as regulators involved in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but their mechanism of activity remains unknown. This study performed quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction to determine if circNFATC3 was downregulated in 46 paired HCC tissues and cell lines. 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, apoptotic, and transwell assay proved that circNFATC3 can inhibit hepatoma cell proliferation, apoptosis, and migration/invasion in vitro. Mouse xenograft assay demonstrated that circNFATC3 suppressed tumor size and weight and reduced lung metastasis in vivo, and vice versa. The RNA-seq results showed that NFATC3 itself was the most significantly differentially expressed gene when circNFATC3 was manipulated, and bioinformatics and luciferase reporter assays verified circNFATC3 regulated the expression of NFATC3 by interacting with the hsa-miR-548I. Additionally, it was also indicated that the level of NFATC3 was downregulated in HCC patients also and was significantly correlated with the staging and prognosis of HCC. Moreover, both circNFATC3 and NFATC3 were shown to inhibit the phosphorylation of JNK, c-Jun, AKT, and mTOR signaling pathways. Overall, the circNFATC3 can sponge miR-548I to protect NFATC3 itself, then it regulates hepatoma cell function via the JNK, c-Jun, AKT, and mTOR signaling pathways, and the circNFATC3 can be a tumor-repressor on HCC.

[PMID: 32889059]
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new class of non-coding RNA with a stable structure formed by special loop splicing. Research increasingly suggests that circRNAs play a vital role in the pathogenesis and progression of various diseases. However, the roles of circRNAs in osteoblast differentiation under microgravity remain largely unknown. Here, we investigated the roles and mechanobiological response of circRNAs in osteoblasts under simulated microgravity. Differential circRNA and mRNA expression profiles of MC3T3-E1 cells during exposure to microgravity were screened by RNA transcriptome sequencing technology (RNA-seq). The selected RNAs were validated using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were applied for gene function analyses. A total of 427 circRNAs and 1912 mRNAs were differentially expressed along with osteogenic differentiation in the simulated microgravity group (SMG) compared to the control group (CON). Of these, 232 circRNAs and 991 mRNAs were upregulated, whereas 95 circRNAs and 921 mRNAs were downregulated (fold change ≥ 2, p < 0.05). The results showed that the parental genes of circRNAs and mRNAs were mainly enriched in anatomical structure morphogenesis, anchoring junction and protein binding. KEGG analysis results showed that the differentially expressed mRNAs were enriched in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, focal adhesion, and Ras signalling pathway. Subsequently, 9 core regulatory genes, including 6 mRNAs and 3 circRNAs, were identified based on their possible function in osteoblast differentiation. Based on this analysis, circ_014154 was selected as the target circRNA, which likely plays important roles in osteogenic differentiation processes under microgravity. The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network showed that circRNAs might act as miRNA sponges to regulate osteoblast differentiation. By presenting a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of genes and circRNAs in simulated microgravity, the present study will provide a novel view of circRNAs in the regulation of osteogenic differentiation and bone formation.

[PMID: 33112505]
Recent technological advances in RNA sequencing and analysis have allowed an increasingly thorough investigation of a previously unexplored class of transcripts, circular (circ)RNAs. Accumulating evidence suggests that circRNAs have unique functions which often rely on their association with microRNAs and RNA-binding proteins. Through these interactions, circRNAs have been implicated in major cellular processes and hence in the pathophysiology of a range of diseases. Here, we provide guidelines to consider when developing studies on circRNAs, including detecting and selecting the circRNAs, identifying their binding partners and sites of interaction, modulating circRNA levels, assessing copy numbers and stoichiometry, and addressing other points unique to circRNA analysis. This article is categorized under: Regulatory RNAs/RNAi/Riboswitches > Regulatory RNAs.