[PMID: 11810275]
Leukemic cells of a patient diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) showed a complex BCR-ABL1 rearrangement hidden within a normal appearing karyotype. Previous molecular studies had established that the 3' BCR had recombined at a novel site within the variable region of the immunoglobulin lambda locus ( IGL). A segment of DNA mapping very close to the site of the IGL/3' BCR recombination recognized a previously undescribed insertion polymorphism. A combination of molecular hybridization studies and long-range polymerase chain reaction was used to isolate a 6-kb full-length long interspersed nuclear element (LINE or L1), here designated L1(IGL), which occupies 19% of alleles in the general population. Although unclonable, DNA sequence analysis by a primer walking approach established that L1(IGL) has features characteristic of an actively retrotransposing element. The L1(IGL) element has a 5' untranslated region, two open reading frames (ORF-1 and ORF-2), a 3' untranslated region and terminates in a poly-A tail. We compared the DNA sequence and the predicted amino acid sequence of L1(IGL) with a consensus sequence compiled from seven reported active L1 elements. This analysis indicated that L1(IGL) has high potential for involvement in as yet undetermined somatically and constitutionally acquired disease, not only through recombination mechanisms, but also through retrotransposition events. This full-length L1 element maps close within the IGLlocus to L1.2, one of only nine active L1 elements that have been reported so far. L1(IGL) and L1.2 map within a wider and well-recognized region of genomic instability on chromosome 22.

[PMID: 21916613]
A typical eukaryotic genome harbors a rich variety of repetitive elements. The most abundant are retrotransposons, mobile retroelements that utilize reverse transcriptase and an RNA intermediate to relocate to a new location within the cellular genomes. A vast majority of the repetitive mammalian genome content has originated from the retrotransposition of SINE (100-300 bp short interspersed nuclear elements that are derived from the structural 7SL RNA or tRNA), LINE (7kb long interspersed nuclear element), and LTR (2-3 kb long terminal repeats) transposable element superfamilies. Broadly labeled as "evolutionary junkyard" or "fossils", this enigmatic "dark matter" of the genome possesses many yet to be discovered properties.

[PMID: 21637438]
The retrotransposon known as long interspersed nuclear element-1 (L1) is 6 kb long, although most L1s in mammalian and other eukaryotic cells are truncated. L1 contains two open reading frames, ORF1 and ORF2, that code for an RNA-binding protein and a protein with endonuclease and reverse transcriptase activities, respectively. In this work, we examined the effects of full length L1-ORF2 and ORF2 fragments on green fluorescent protein gene (GFP) expression when inserted into the pEGFP-C1 vector downstream of GFP. All of the ORF2 fragments in sense orientation inhibited GFP expression more than when in antisense orientation, which suggests that small ORF2 fragments contribute to the distinct inhibitory effects of this ORF on gene expression. These results provide the first evidence that different 280-bp fragments have distinct effects on the termination of gene transcription, and that when inserted in the antisense direction, fragment 280-9 (the 3' end fragment of ORF2) induces premature termination of transcription that is consistent with the effect of ORF2.