[PMID: 27836978]
Does a novel homozygous NOBOX truncating variant, identified in whole exome sequencing (WES) of patients with primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), cause defective transcriptional activation of multiple oocyte-related genes? A novel homozygous truncating mutation of NOBOX was confirmed to exhibit a loss-of-function effect using well-defined molecular and functional analyses. Several NOBOX mutations have been reported to be associated with POI but all of them are heterozygous mutations. This is a cross sectional study in 96 patients diagnosed with POI and 211 women not diagnosed with POI in China. Blood samples collected from the participants were subjected to whole exome sequencing. Full-length transcript of NOBOX was cloned directly from human fetal ovary (FO). Functional analysis was performed for a NOBOX sequence variant associated with POI. One novel homozygous truncating variant, chr7:144098161delC, in the NOBOX gene was found in a POI patient. The truncating variant showed a severe defect in transcriptional activation of GDF9 a well-known target NOBOX. Furthermore, using real-time quantitative PCR analysis, we found many oocyte-related genes were expressed at lower level in truncating variant cells than in control cells. In addition, we found that the truncated NOBOX lost its ability to induce the G2/M arrest.Notably, our results confirmed that the 1725 bp NOBOX transcript is expressed in human FO and is the only functional isoform in transcriptional activation assays. Although the in vitro assays demonstrated the loss-of-function effect of truncating mutation on NOBOX transcriptional activation, further studies are needed to validate its long-term effects on folliculogenesis and POI. This is the first homozygous mutation of NOBOX associated with POI showing a loss-of-function effect using well-defined molecular and functional analyses. These results will aid both researchers and clinicians in understanding the molecular pathology of NOBOX and POI to develop diagnostic assays or therapeutic approaches. Research funding is provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China [2012CB944704; 2012CB966702], the National Natural Science Foundation of China [Grant number: 31171429] and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology. The authors declare no conflict of interest.

[PMID: 26059840]
Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a distressing cause of infertility in young women. POI is heterogeneous with only a few causative genes having been discovered so far. Our objective was to determine the genetic cause of POI in a consanguineous Lebanese family with two affected sisters presenting with primary amenorrhoea and an absence of any pubertal development. Multipoint parametric linkage analysis was performed. Whole-exome sequencing was done on the proband. Linkage analysis identified a locus on chromosome 7 where exome sequencing successfully identified a homozygous two base pair duplication (c.1947_48dupCT), leading to a truncated protein p.(Y650Sfs*22) in the STAG3 gene, confirming it as the cause of POI in this family. Exome sequencing combined with linkage analyses offers a powerful tool to efficiently find novel genetic causes of rare, heterogeneous disorders, even in small single families. This is only the second report of a STAG3 variant; the first STAG3 variant was recently described in a phenotypically similar family with extreme POI. Identification of an additional family highlights the importance of STAG3 in POI pathogenesis and suggests it should be evaluated in families affected with POI.

[PMID: 30006057]
Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by primary or secondary amenorrhea, infertility, low estradiol levels, and increased gonadotropin levels. Most cases of POI remain unsolved even after exhaustive investigation. Here, we performed a targeted massively parallel sequencing to identify the genetic diagnosis of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) in a Brazilian patient. An adopted 21-year-old Brazilian woman with isolated POI was selected. A custom SureSelect<sup>XT</sup> DNA target enrichment panel was designed and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer. The variants were confirmed using Sanger sequencing. Two rare heterozygous pathogenic variants in the STAG3 gene were identified in our patient. An unpublished 1-bp duplication c.291dupC (p.Asn98Glnfs*2) and one stop codon variant c.1950C > A (p.Tyr650*) were identified in the STAG3 gene. Both undescribed heterozygous variants were absent in the public databases [1000Genomes, Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server (NHLBI/EVS), database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP), Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD)], and Online Archive of Brazilian Mutations (ABraOM) databases. Moreover, neither heterozygous variants were found in 400 alleles from fertile Brazilian women screened by Sanger sequencing. The parents' DNA was not available to segregate these variants. Our results suggested that POI is caused by pathogenic compound heterozygous variants in the STAG3 gene, supporting the key role of the STAG3 gene in the etiology of primary ovarian insufficiency.