[PMID: 34608503]
Atherosclerosis and related cardiovascular diseases pose severe threats to human health worldwide. There is evidence to suggest that at least 50% of foam cells in atheromas are derived from vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs); the first step in this process involves migration to human atherosclerotic lesions. Long non‑coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been found to play significant roles in diverse biological processes. The present study aimed to investigate the role of lncRNAs in VSMCs. The expression of lncRNAs or mRNAs was detected using reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The Gene Expression Omnibus datasets in the NCBI portal were searched using the key words 'Atherosclerosis AND tissue AND <i>Homo sapiens</i>' and the GSE12288 dataset. Gene expression in circulating leukocytes was measured to identify patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) or controls, and used to analyze the correlation coefficient and expression profiles. The protein level of ATP‑binding cassette sub‑family G member 1 (ABCG1) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)3 was determined using immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis. The analysis of mouse aortic roots was performed using Masson's and Oil Red O staining. The expression of lncRNA AL355711, ABCG1 and MMP3 was found to be higher in human atherosclerotic plaques or in patients with atherosclerotic CAD. The correlation analysis revealed that ABCG1 may be involved in the regulation between lncRNA AL355711 and MMP3 in atherosclerotic CAD. The knockdown of lncRNA AL355711 inhibited ABCG1 transcription and smooth muscle cell migration. In addition, lncRNA AL355711 was found to regulate MMP3 expression through the ABCG1 pathway. The expression of ABCG1 and MMP3 was found to be high in an animal model of atherosclerosis. The results indicated that lncRNA AL355711 promoted VSMC migration and atherosclerosis partly via the ABCG1/MMP3 pathway. On the whole, the present study demonstrates that the inhibition of lncRNA AL355711 may serve as a novel therapeutic target for atherosclerosis. lncRNA AL355711 in circulating leukocytes may be a novel biomarker for atherosclerotic CAD.

[PMID: 32725886]
Cholesterol metabolism is tightly regulated at the cellular level. This study was to measure the expression levels of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) and G1 (ABCG1), scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) and class A (SRA), and CD36 mRNAs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in response to 100-km ultramarathon event and determine any correlation between these ABC transporters/scavenger receptor expression levels and plasma cholesterol homeostasis. Twenty-six participants were enrolled. Blood was drawn from each individual 1 week prior, immediately after, and 24 hours after the race. The expression levels of ABCA1, ABCG1, SR-BI, SRA and CD36 in PBMCs were measured by using real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Plasma triglyceride levels were significantly increased immediately after the race and dropped at 24-hour post-race compared with pre-race values. The 100-km ultramarathon boosted high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels and decreased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels 24-hour post-race. The expression levels of ABCA1, ABCG1 and SR-BI were markedly decreased, whereas that of CD36 was slightly but significantly upregulated in runners' PBMCs immediately after the race. Ultramarathon resulted in immediate large-scale stimulation of inflammatory cytokines with increased plasma interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha levels. Moreover, by using in vitro models with human monocytic cell lines, incubation of runners' plasma immediately after the race significantly downregulated ABCA1 and ABCG1, and upregulated CD36 expression in these cells. ABCA1, ABCG1 and CD36 gene expressions in PBMCS might be associated with endurance exercise-induced plasma cholesterol homeostasis and systemic inflammatory response.

[PMID: 34461069]
ABCG1 is an ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter that removes excess cholesterol from peripheral tissues. Despite its role in preventing lipid accumulation and the development of cardiovascular and metabolic disease, the mechanism underpinning ABCG1-mediated cholesterol transport is unknown. Here we report a cryo-EM structure of human ABCG1 at 4 Å resolution in an inward-open state, featuring sterol-like density in the binding cavity. Structural comparison with the multidrug transporter ABCG2 and the sterol transporter ABCG5/G8 reveals the basis of mechanistic differences and distinct substrate specificity. Benzamil and taurocholate inhibited the ATPase activity of liposome-reconstituted ABCG1, whereas the ABCG2 inhibitor Ko143 did not. Based on the structural insights into ABCG1, we propose a mechanism for ABCG1-mediated cholesterol transport.