[PMID: 23940102]
The Liebenberg syndrome was first described in 1973 in a five- generation family. A sixth generation was added in 2001, and in 2009 a hitherto unknown branch of the same family with similar anomalies extended the family tree significantly. This article describes the clinical findings and illustrates the abnormalities with radiographs and three-dimensional computed tomography scans. We discuss the genetic abnormality that causes Liebenberg syndrome, the genomic rearrangement at the PITX1 locus on chromosome 5.The structural variations seem to result in an ectopic expression of paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 1 (PITX1) in the forelimb causing a partial arm-to-leg transformation in these patients.

[PMID: 23395106]
We report a case of Liebenberg syndrome in a 6-year-old girl, including the clinical, radiological, angiographic, and operative findings. We note that the forearm and hand malformations have similarities to leg and foot anatomy. Our observations may help provide insight into the etiology of this unusual condition.

[PMID: 23587911]
Liebenberg syndrome (MIM 186550) is a very rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by three main features: dysplasia of all of the bony components of the elbow joint, abnormalities in the shape of carpal bones, and brachydactyly. In this paper, we report a Saudi Arabian family with Liebenberg syndrome. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) revealed a 275-kb deletion within the cytogenetic band 5q31.1 which contains the H2AFY gene and 190,428bp of its downstream region. The deleted region is upstream to the PITX1 gene. The radiological features in the upper limbs of all affected members of the family were almost identical to the phenotype in the mouse model with ectopic expression of Pitx1 in the forelimbs. We therefore re-define the phenotype of Liebenberg syndrome as a transformation of the upper limbs to reflect lower limb characteristics and speculate that the area of deletion contains a regulatory sequence that suppresses the expression of PITX1 in the upper limb buds.