[PMID: 29872491]
Either angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin receptor 1 blocker (ARB) attenuates cardiac remodeling. However, the overall molecular modulation of the reversing remodeling process in response to the ACEI or ARB treatment is not yet well determined. In this study, we examined whether gene expressions are modulated by ACEI (temocapril), ARB (olmesartan) or both in a murine model with transverse aortic constriction (TAC) and confirm whether periostin is a target gene of olmesartan in mice with myocardial infarction (MI). We detected 109 genes that were significantly up-regulated in TAC mice and a majority of these were down-regulated in response to temocapril, olmesartan or their combination which significantly attenuated cardiac remodeling at one or four weeks. Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated that olmesartan, temocapril or their combination down-regulated the expression of periostin. In MI mice treated with olmesartan for 4 weeks, the left ventricular end-diastolic and systolic dimensions measured with echocardiography were lower, whereas maximum rate of rise and fall rate of LV pressure (±dp/dt max) were greater, and Azan-staining cardiac fibrotic area was smaller. Furthermore, periostin was upregulated in response to MI, whereas olmesartan blocked this upregulation. Post-MI fibrosis was smaller in periostin knockout adult mice than in wildtype mice, while glycogen synthase kinase 3β was increased and cyclin D1 was decreased in periostin knockout mice. These findings indicate that periostin is a target gene of ARB and olmesartan reverses cardiac remodeling at least partially through the downregulation of periostin.

[PMID: 29414040]
Olmesartan (OL) is the pharmacologically active metabolite of Olmesartan medoxomil (OM), an FDA-approved angiotensin II receptor antagonist for administrating cardiovascular diseases. The drug has been found to have potential effects on diverse protein kinase signaling involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, either by directly inhibiting the hub kinases or by indirectly modulating marginal members in the signaling pathways. In the present study, we computationally model the kinase-chemical Interaction Profile between six OL-related chemicals (i.e. OL, OM, Valsartan [VL], Losartan [LS], Candesartan [CD] and Telmisartan [TL]) and 23 human protein kinases in atherosclerosis. The profile is analyzed systematically at molecular level to identify unexpected kinase targets for OL. There is a good consistence between co-citation frequency and affinity scoring for the chemical association with kinase candidates; the OL and its analogs VL and LS exhibit a similar binding profile to the atherosclerosis kinase spectrum. It is suggested that the Ser/Thr-specific kinases PI3Kα and ROCK1 are potential druggable targets of OL for atherosclerosis therapy. As a paradigm, kinase assays reveal that the inhibitory potency of OL and Y-27632 (positive control) on ROCK1 is determined at micromolar level, while the OM (negative control) possesses no detectable activity for the kinase.

[PMID: 30217371]
Two post hoc analyses in self-identified black and white patients with hypertension evaluated the angiotensin II receptor blocker azilsartan medoxomil (AZL-M) and the fixed-dose combination of AZL-M with chlorthalidone (AZL-M/CLD) versus the ARB olmesartan (OLM) and the OLM fixed-dose combination with hydrochlorothiazide (OLM/HCTZ). One analysis pooled 1,610 patients from two 6-week randomized controlled trials to compare once daily AZL-M 40 mg, AZL-M 80 mg, OLM 40 mg, and placebo. The second analysis included 1,020 patients from a 12-week randomized controlled trial to compare once daily AZL-M/CLD 40/25 mg, AZL-M/CLD 80/25 mg, and OLM/HCTZ 40/25 mg. Efficacy end points were 24-hour mean ambulatory and clinic systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SPB/DBP) and the percentage of patients achieving clinic SBP/DBP targets. Treatment with AZL-M 80 mg lowered mean clinic SBP by 12.5 mm Hg (p <0.01 vs OLM), treatment with AZL-M/CLD 40 mg/25 mg lowered mean ambulatory SBP by 31.0 mm Hg and mean clinic SBP by 39.3 mm Hg (both p <0.05 vs OLM/HCTZ), and treatment with AZL-M/CLD 80 mg/25 mg lowered mean ambulatory SBP by 34.4 mm Hg (p <0.01 vs OLM/HCTZ) and mean clinic SBP by 39.2 mm Hg (p <0.05 vs OLM/HCTZ). Target BP goals were achieved more frequently with AZL-M versus OLM and with AZL-M/CLD versus OLM/HCTZ. In conclusion, in both black and white patients, BP was lowered more effectively with AZL-M versus OLM and with AZL-M/CLD versus OLM/HCTZ. The AZL-M/CLD 40 mg/25 mg combination resulted in a statistically significant reduction in BP in both black and white patients.