[PMID: 8723065]
Lynch syndrome, or hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), is an autosomal-dominant disease accounting for approximately 1-5% of all colorectal cancer cases. Due to the lack of pathognomonic morphological or biomolecular markers, HNPCC has traditionally posed unique problems to clinicians and geneticists alike, both in terms of diagnosis and clinical management. Recently, novel insight into the pathogenesis of this syndrome has been provided by the identification of its molecular basis. In HNPCC families, germline mutations in any of four genes encoding proteins of a specialized DNA repair system, the mismatch repair, predispose to cancer development. Mutations in mismatch repair genes lead to an overall increase of the mutation rate and are associated with a phenotype of length instability of microsatellite loci. The present report summarizes the clinicopathological aspects of HNPCC and reviews the most recent molecular and biochemical findings.

[PMID: 21459714]
The HNPCC syndrome (hereditary non polyposis colon cancer) or Lynch syndrome stands for an autosomic dominant condition leading to the most prevalent hereditary colo-rectal cancers (CCR). MMR (mismatch repair)'s genes are involved in carcinogenesis as they play a role in ADNA mismatch repair. Microsatellite instability (MSI+ phenotype) induced by germline mutations is characteristic of such tumors and is necessary to assert the diagnosis. The HNPCC syndrome is associated with a significant increased risk of CCR altogether with endometrium, upper urinary tract and small bowel carcinomas as well as ovarian, biliary system and gastric cancers although of lesser extent. It is of importance to diagnose HNPCC syndrome prior to the treatment starts because it may influence patient's (as well as her/his relatives) disease management (type of surgery, surveillance and screening exams). New French recommendations, developed in 2009, about prophylactic colo-rectal and gynecologic surgeries and monitoring update latest ones published on 2004.

[PMID: 9244653]
Mutations of tumor suppressor genes, of the mismatch DNA repair system, and of the TGF-beta-II-receptor are the main causes for a higher risk of colorectal cancer. Among mutations of the Ape gene, which characterize the clinical manifestation of the familial polyposis (FAP), point mutations are dominating which create new stop codons or arise from deletions or insertions of nucleotides causing frame shifts. Because the binding site of beta-catenin is localized in the C-terminus of the Ape protein, disturbances result in the cellular signal transfer from its loss. Consequently, the interactions of the usually formed Ape-beta-catenin complex with the cytoskeleton and the cadherin system in the plasma membrane as well as the translocation of beta-catenin into the nucleus cannot be realized. Mutations in the genes of the mismatch DNA repair system and of the TGF-beta-II-receptor, the main defects of the HNPCC (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer), are exclusively identified in sequences of microsatellites. Because the majority of Apc gene mutations is also localized in repetitive motifs even in CpG islands primary disturbances are to postulate in the methylation pattern of the genes producing germline and somatic mutations. Generally, complexly connected reactions are involved in this cascade of colorectal cancer genesis. This fact explains the relatively late clinical manifestation of the disease and offers the possibility to identify carriers with an increased risk of colorectal cancer development in order to integrate them into a programme of control and preventive medicine. Beside the known treatment by surgery and cytostatics, inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis gain therapeutic significance. Cancerogenesis can be efficiently suppressed by inhibition of the COX-2-induction (cyclo-oxygenase-2). There is a lack of clinical experience for a decision whether a high intraluminal level of butyrate in the large intestine can delay colorectal carcinogenesis.