[PMID: 11731451]
As the only class I helix-loop-helix transcription factor in Drosophila, Daughterless (Da) has generally been regarded as a ubiquitously expressed binding partner for other developmentally regulated bHLH transcription factors. From analysis of a novel tissue-specific allele, da(lyh), we show that da expression is not constitutive, but is dynamically regulated. This transcriptional regulation includes somatic ovary-specific activation, autoregulation and negative regulation. Unexpectedly, the diverse functions of da may require that expression levels be tightly controlled in a cell and/or tissue-specific manner. Our analysis of da(lyh) identifies it as the first springer insertion that functions as an insulating element, with its disruptive activity mediated by the product of a fourth chromosome gene, Suppressor of lyh [Su(lyh)].

[PMID: 8217842]
The daughterless (da) gene in Drosophila functions in the regulation of at least three significant developmental pathways: sex determination, neurogenesis and oogenesis. As a member of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of DNA binding proteins, the da gene product appears to act as a transcription factor. Based on the genetic and molecular characterization of da, it has been proposed that the da protein (Da) functions as a generic member of this family, serving throughout development as a necessary binding partner for an assortment of other HLH proteins. As a result of temporally and/or spatially restricted expression, these binding partners would provide some regulatory specificity to the functional transcription complex. In order to participate in this way in the regulation of multiple genes, Da must be expressed in numerous times and places during development. Using anti-Da antibodies, we validate two predictions of this scenario of Da function: (1) Da protein is not only nuclear localized, but also associated with chromosomes in vivo; and (2) Da protein is widely distributed, both spatially and temporally, throughout development. With regard to the essential role of maternal da+ in progeny sex determination, little, if any, Da protein is synthesized in the maternal germline. This suggests that the female-specific germline function of da+ is provided to the zygote as maternally synthesized RNA that becomes translated early in embryogenesis.

[PMID: 8149916]
The daughterless (da) gene in Drosophila encodes a broadly expressed transcriptional regulator whose specific functions in the control of sex determination and neurogenesis have been extensively examined. We describe here a third major developmental role for this regulatory gene: follicle formation during oogenesis. A survey of da RNA and protein distribution during oogenesis reveals a multiphasic expression pattern that includes both germline and soma. Whereas the germline expression reflects da's role in progeny sex determination, the somatic ovary expression of da correlates with the gene's role during egg chamber morphogenesis. Severe, but viable, hypomorphic da mutant genotypes exhibit dramatic defects during oogenesis, including aberrantly defined follicles and loss of interfollicular stalks. The follicular defects observed in da mutant ovaries are qualitatively very similar to those described in Notch (N) or Delta (Dl) mutant ovaries. Moreover, in the ovary da- alleles exhibit dominant synergistic interactions with N or Dl mutations. We propose that all three of these genes function in the same regulatory pathway to control follicle formation.