[PMID: 23328413]
Molecular Recognition Features (MoRFs) are defined as short, intrinsically disordered regions in proteins that undergo disorder-to-order transition upon binding to their partners. As their name suggests, they are implicated in molecular recognition, which serves as the initial step for protein-protein interactions. Membrane proteins constitute approximately 30% of fully sequenced proteomes and are responsible for a wide variety of cellular functions. The aim of the current study was to identify and analyze MoRFs in membrane proteins. Two datasets of MoRFs, transmembrane and peripheral membrane protein MoRFs, were constructed from the Protein Data Bank, and sequence, structural and functional analysis was performed. Characterization of our datasets revealed their unique compositional biases and membrane protein MoRFs were categorized depending on their secondary structure after the interaction with their partners. Moreover, the position of transmembrane protein MoRFs in relation with the protein's topology was determined. Further studies were focused on functional analyses of MoRF-containing proteins and MoRFs' partners, associating them with protein binding, regulation and cell signaling, indicating half of them as putative hubs in protein-protein interaction networks. In conclusion, we provide insights into the disorder-based protein-protein interactions involving membrane proteins.

[PMID: 23894139]
Molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are small, intrinsically disordered regions in proteins that undergo a disorder-to-order transition on binding to their partners. MoRFs are involved in protein-protein interactions and may function as the initial step in molecular recognition. The aim of this work was to collect, organize and store all membrane proteins that contain MoRFs. Membrane proteins constitute ∼30% of fully sequenced proteomes and are responsible for a wide variety of cellular functions. MoRFs were classified according to their secondary structure, after interacting with their partners. We identified MoRFs in transmembrane and peripheral membrane proteins. The position of transmembrane protein MoRFs was determined in relation to a protein's topology. All information was stored in a publicly available mySQL database with a user-friendly web interface. A Jmol applet is integrated for visualization of the structures. mpMoRFsDB provides valuable information related to disorder-based protein-protein interactions in membrane proteins. http://bioinformatics.biol.uoa.gr/mpMoRFsDB

[PMID: 24093637]
Molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are short binding regions located in longer intrinsically disordered protein regions. Although these short regions lack a stable structure in the natural state, they readily undergo disorder-to-order transitions upon binding to their partner molecules. MoRFs play critical roles in the molecular interaction network of a cell, and are associated with many human genetic diseases. Therefore, identification of MoRFs is an important step in understanding functional aspects of these proteins and in finding applications in drug design. Here, we propose a novel method for identifying MoRFs, named as MFSPSSMpred (Masked, Filtered and Smoothed Position-Specific Scoring Matrix-based Predictor). Firstly, a masking method is used to calculate the average local conservation scores of residues within a masking-window length in the position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM). Then, the scores below the average are filtered out. Finally, a smoothing method is used to incorporate the features of flanking regions for each residue to prepare the feature sets for prediction. Our method employs no predicted results from other classifiers as input, i.e., all features used in this method are extracted from the PSSM of sequence only. Experimental results show that, comparing with other methods tested on the same datasets, our method achieves the best performance: achieving 0.004~0.079 higher AUC than other methods when tested on TEST419, and achieving 0.045~0.212 higher AUC than other methods when tested on TEST2012. In addition, when tested on an independent membrane proteins-related dataset, MFSPSSMpred significantly outperformed the existing predictor MoRFpred. This study suggests that: 1) amino acid composition and physicochemical properties in the flanking regions of MoRFs are very different from those in the general non-MoRF regions; 2) MoRFs contain both highly conserved residues and highly variable residues and, on the whole, are highly locally conserved; and 3) combining contextual information with local conservation information of residues facilitates the prediction of MoRFs.