[PMID: 16887967]
IFN-alpha exercises multiple immune modulatory and antiviral activities and has been suggested to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) release IFN-alpha upon TLR7 and TLR9 ligation. With respect to the nine times higher incidence of SLE in women and the clinical use of synthetic TLR ligands as novel immune adjuvants, we analyzed IFN-alpha and TNF-alpha production in healthy human individuals. Blood samples were incubated with synthetic TLR7 and TLR9 ligands. In three independent groups (n(1) = 120, n(2) = 101, and n(3) = 123), analysis revealed a capacity of female PBLs to produce significantly higher IFN-alpha levels after TLR7 stimulation (p(1) < 0.0000001, p(2) < 0.0000001, and p(3) < 0.0001) compared with male PBLs. In contrast, no sex differences were evident after TLR9 stimulation. TNF-alpha production after TLR7 stimulation and also total pDC numbers were not different between females and males. X-inactivation escape of the TLR7 gene was investigated in monoclonal B cell lines and, independently, in pDCs after cell sorting and single-cell picking, indicating regular silencing of one TLR7 allele in females. Additionally, exogenous 17beta-estrogen and estrogen receptor antagonism did not indicate a significant role on TLR7-induced IFN-alpha production. Our data reveal for the first time a profound sex-dependent pathway of TLR7-induced IFN-alpha with higher production in females. These findings may explain the higher prevalence of SLE in females and the reported decreased therapeutic efficacy of synthetic TLR7 ligands in male individuals.

[PMID: 29374079]
Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) is critical to the induction of antiviral immunity, but TLR7 dosage is also a key pathogenic factor in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease with strong female bias. SLE prevalence is also elevated in individuals with Klinefelter syndrome, who carry one or more supernumerary X chromosomes, suggesting that the X chromosome complement contributes to SLE susceptibility. TLR7 is encoded by an X chromosome locus, and we examined here whether the <i>TLR7</i> gene evades silencing by X chromosome inactivation in immune cells from women and Klinefelter syndrome males. Single-cell analyses of <i>TLR7</i> allelic expression demonstrated that substantial fractions of primary B lymphocytes, monocytes, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells not only in women but also in Klinefelter syndrome males express <i>TLR7</i> on both X chromosomes. Biallelic B lymphocytes from women displayed greater <i>TLR7</i> transcriptional expression than the monoallelic cells, correlated with higher TLR7 protein expression in female than in male leukocyte populations. Biallelic B cells were preferentially enriched during the TLR7-driven proliferation of CD27<sup>+</sup> plasma cells. In addition, biallelic cells showed a greater than twofold increase over monoallelic cells in the propensity to immunoglobulin G class switch during the TLR7-driven, T cell-dependent differentiation of naive B lymphocytes into immunoglobulin-secreting cells. <i>TLR7</i> escape from X inactivation endows the B cell compartment with added responsiveness to TLR7 ligands. This finding supports the hypothesis that enhanced TLR7 expression owing to biallelism contributes to the higher risk of developing SLE and other autoimmune disorders in women and in men with Klinefelter syndrome.

[PMID: 30276444]
Women develop stronger immune responses than men, with positive effects on the resistance to viral or bacterial infections but magnifying also the susceptibility to autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In SLE, the dosage of the endosomal Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) is crucial. Murine models have shown that TLR7 overexpression suffices to induce spontaneous lupus-like disease. Conversely, suppressing TLR7 in lupus-prone mice abolishes SLE development. TLR7 is encoded by a gene on the X chromosome gene, denoted TLR7 in humans and Tlr7 in the mouse, and expressed in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), monocytes/macrophages, and B cells. The receptor recognizes single-stranded RNA, and its engagement promotes B cell maturation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and antibodies. In female mammals, each cell randomly inactivates one of its two X chromosomes to equalize gene dosage with XY males. However, 15 to 23% of X-linked human genes escape X chromosome inactivation so that both alleles can be expressed simultaneously. It has been hypothesized that biallelic expression of X-linked genes could occur in female immune cells, hence fostering harmful autoreactive and inflammatory responses. We review here the current knowledge of the role of TLR7 in SLE, and recent evidence demonstrating that TLR7 escapes from X chromosome inactivation in pDCs, monocytes, and B lymphocytes from women and Klinefelter syndrome men. Female B cells where TLR7 is thus biallelically expressed display higher TLR7-driven functional responses, connecting the presence of two X chromosomes with the enhanced immunity of women and their increased susceptibility to TLR7-dependent autoimmune syndromes.