[PMID: 17666061]
Previously, autosomal dominant catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT [1]) was mapped to chromosome 1q42-43 with identification of pathogenic mutations in RYR2. Autosomal recessive CPVT (2) was mapped to chromosome 1p13-21, leading to the identification of mutations in CASQ2. In this study, we aimed to elucidate clinical phenotypes of a new variant of CPVT (3) in an inbred Arab family and also delineate the chromosomal location of the gene causing CPVT (3). In a highly inbred family, clinical symptoms of CPVT appeared early in childhood (7-12 years) and in three of the four cases, the first appearance of symptoms turned into a fatal outcome. Parents of the affected children were first-degree cousins and without any symptoms. Segregation analysis suggested an autosomal recessive inheritance. A genome-wide search using polymorphic DNA markers mapped the disease locus to a 25-Mb interval on chromosome 7p14-p22. A maximal multipoint LOD score of 3.17 was obtained at marker D7S493. Sequencing of putative candidate genes, SP4, NPY, FKBP9, FKBP14, PDE1C, and TBX20, in and around this locus, did not reveal any mutation. We have identified a novel highly malignant autosomal recessive form of CPVT and mapped this disorder to a 25-Mb interval on chromosome 7p14-p22.

[PMID: 18052993]
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a rare arrythmogenic disease characterized by exercise--or stress--induced ventricular tachyarrythmias, syncope, or sudden death, usually in the pediatric age group. Familial occurrence has been noted in about 30% of cases. Inheritance may be autosomal dominant or recessive, usually with high penetrance. The causative genes have been mapped to chromosome 1. Mutations of the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RyR2) have been identified in autosomal dominant pedigrees, while calsequestrin gene (CASQ2) mutations are seen in recessive cases. Due to its potential lethal outcome, exclusion or confirmation of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in children with physical and emotional syncope is mandatory. We report a case of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in a three-year-old child only diagnosed by genetic mapping.

[PMID: 15336972]
Ryanodine receptor (RyR), a homotetrameric Ca2+ release channel, is one of the main actors in the generation of Ca2+ signals that trigger muscle contraction. Three genes encode three isoforms of RyRs, which have tissue-restricted distribution. RyR1 and RyR2 are typical of muscle cells, with RyR1 originally considered the skeletal muscle type and RyR2 the cardiac type. However, RyR1 and RyR2 have recently been found in numerous other cell types, including, for instance, peripheral B and T lymphocytes. In contrast, RyR3 is widely distributed among cells. RyR1 and RyR2 are localized in a specialized portion of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), the terminal cisternae, which is the portion of the SR Ca2+ store that releases Ca2+ to control the process of muscle contraction. A specific role for RyR3 has not yet been established: probably, its co-expression with the other RyR isoforms contributes to qualitatively modulate Ca2+-dependent processes in muscle cells and in neurons. Several mutations in the genes encoding RyR1 and RyR2 have been identified in autosomal dominant diseases of skeletal and cardiac muscle, such as malignant hyperthermia (MH), central core disease (CCD), catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2). More recently, CCD cases with recessive inheritance have also been described. MH is a pharmacogenetic disease, but the others manifest as congenital myopathies. Even if their clinical phenotypes are well established, particularly in skeletal muscle, the molecular mechanisms that generate the conditions are not clear. A number of studies on cellular models have attempted to elucidate the molecular defects associated with the different mutations, but the problem of understanding how mutations in the same gene generate such an array of diverse pathological traits and diseases of widely different degrees of severity is still open. This review will consider the molecular and cellular effects of RyR mutations, summarizing recent data in the literature on Ca2+ dysregulation, which may lead to a better understanding of the functioning of RyRs.