[PMID: 29609813]
The use of gold nanoparticle (GNP) and other metal nanoparticle (MNP) radiosensitisers to enhance radiotherapy offers the potential of improved treatment outcomes. Originally intended for use with X-ray therapy, the possibility of enhanced hadron therapy is desirable due to the superior sparing of healthy tissue in hadron therapy compared to conventional X-ray therapy. While MNPs were not expected to be effective radiosensitisers for hadron therapy due to the limited Z dependence of interactions, recent experimental measurements have contradicted this expectation. Key experimental measurements and Monte Carlo simulations of MNP radiosensitisation for hadron irradiation are reviewed in the current work. Numerous experimental measurements have found a large radiosensitisation effect due to MNPs for proton and carbon ion irradiation. Experiments have also indicated that the radiosensitisation is due in large part to enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Simulations have found a large radial dose and ROS enhancement on the nanoscale around a single MNP. However, the short range of the dose enhancement is insufficient for a large macroscale dose enhancement or enhanced biological effect in a cell model considering dose to the nucleus from GNPs in the cytoplasm (a distribution observed in most experiments).

[PMID: 28884707]
The use of hadron beams, especially proton beams, in cancer radiotherapy has expanded rapidly in the past two decades. To fully realize the advantages of hadron therapy over traditional x-ray and gamma-ray therapy requires accurate positioning of the Bragg peak throughout the tumor being treated. A half century ago, suggestions had already been made to use protons themselves to develop images of tumors and surrounding tissue, to be used for treatment planning. The recent global expansion of hadron therapy, coupled with modern advances in computation and particle detection, has led several collaborations around the world to develop prototype detector systems and associated reconstruction codes for proton computed tomography (pCT), as well as more simple proton radiography, with the ultimate intent to use such systems in clinical treatment planning and verification. Recent imaging results of phantoms in hospital proton beams are encouraging, but many technical and programmatic challenges remain to be overcome before pCT scanners will be introduced into clinics. This review introduces hadron therapy and the perceived advantages of pCT and proton radiography for treatment planning, reviews its historical development, and discusses the physics related to proton imaging, the associated experimental and computation issues, the technologies used to attack the problem, contemporary efforts in detector and computational development, and the current status and outlook.

[PMID: 29625810]
The European Network for Light Ion Hadron Therapy (ENLIGHT) was established in 2002 following various European particle therapy network initiatives during the 1980s and 1990s (e.g. EORTC task group, EULIMA/PIMMS accelerator design). ENLIGHT started its work on major topics related to hadron therapy (HT), such as patient selection, clinical trials, technology, radiobiology, imaging and health economics. It was initiated through CERN and ESTRO and dealt with various disciplines such as (medical) physics and engineering, radiation biology and radiation oncology. ENLIGHT was funded until 2005 through the EC FP5 programme. A regular annual meeting structure was started in 2002 and continues until today bringing together the various disciplines and projects and institutions in the field of HT at different European places for regular exchange of information on best practices and research and development. Starting in 2006 ENLIGHT coordination was continued through CERN in collaboration with ESTRO and other partners involved in HT. Major projects within the EC FP7 programme (2008-2014) were launched for R&D and transnational access (ULICE, ENVISION) and education and training networks (Marie Curie ITNs: PARTNER, ENTERVISION). These projects were instrumental for the strengthening of the field of hadron therapy. With the start of 4 European carbon ion and proton centres and the upcoming numerous European proton therapy centres, the future scope of ENLIGHT will focus on strengthening current and developing European particle therapy research, multidisciplinary education and training and general R&D in technology and biology with annual meetings and a continuously strong CERN support. Collaboration with the European Particle Therapy Network (EPTN) and other similar networks will be pursued.