[PMID: 23200860]
STARD10, a member of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR)-related lipid transfer (START) protein family, is highly expressed in the liver and has been shown to transfer phosphatidylcholine. Therefore it has been assumed that STARD10 may function in the secretion of phospholipids into the bile. To help elucidate the physiological role of STARD10, we produced Stard10 knockout mice (Stard10(-/-)) and studied their phenotype. Neither liver content nor biliary secretion of phosphatidylcholine was altered in Stard10(-/-) mice. Unexpectedly, the biliary secretion of bile acids from the liver and the level of taurine-conjugated bile acids in the bile were significantly higher in Stard10(-/-) mice than wild type (WT) mice. In contrast, the levels of the secondary bile acids were lower in the liver of Stard10(-/-) mice, suggesting that the enterohepatic cycling is impaired. STARD10 was also expressed in the gallbladder and small intestine where the expression level of apical sodium dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) turned out to be markedly lower in Stard10(-/-) mice than in WT mice when measured under fed condition. Consistent with the above results, the fecal excretion of bile acids was significantly increased in Stard10(-/-) mice. Interestingly, PPARα-dependent genes responsible for the regulation of bile acid metabolism were down-regulated in the liver of Stard10(-/-) mice. The loss of STARD10 impaired the PPARα activity and the expression of a PPARα-target gene such as Cyp8b1 in mouse hepatoma cells. These results indicate that STARD10 is involved in regulating bile acid metabolism through the modulation of PPARα-mediated mechanism.

[PMID: 15976441]
The steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR)-related lipid transfer (START) domain is a protein module of approximately 210 residues that binds lipids, including sterols. Fifteen mammalian proteins, STARD1-STARD15, possess a START domain and these can be grouped into six subfamilies. Cholesterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine and ceramides are ligands for STARD1/STARD3/STARD5, STARD5, STARD2/STARD10, STARD10 and STARD11, respectively. The lipids or sterols bound by the remaining 9 START proteins are unknown. Recent studies show that the C-terminal end of the domain plays a fundamental role, forming a lid over a deep lipid-binding pocket that shields the ligand from the external environment. The START domain can be regarded as a lipid-exchange and/or a lipid-sensing domain. Mammalian START proteins have diverse expression patterns and can be found free in the cytoplasm, attached to membranes or in the nucleus. They appear to function in a variety of distinct physiological processes, such as lipid transfer between intracellular compartments, lipid metabolism and modulation of signaling events. Mutation or misexpression of START proteins is linked to pathological processes, including genetic disorders, autoimmune disease and cancer.

[PMID: 15911624]
We originally identified StarD10 as a protein overexpressed in breast cancer that cooperates with the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases in cellular transformation. StarD10 contains a steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR/StarD1)-related lipid transfer (START) domain that is thought to mediate binding of lipids. We now provide evidence that StarD10 interacts with phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) by electron spin resonance measurement. Interaction with these phospholipids was verified in a fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based assay with 7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl-labeled lipids. Binding was not restricted to lipid analogs since StarD10 selectively extracted PC and PE from small unilamellar vesicles prepared with endogenous radiolabeled lipids from Vero monkey kidney cells. Mass spectrometry revealed that StarD10 preferentially selects lipid species containing a palmitoyl or stearoyl chain on the sn-1 and an unsaturated fatty acyl chain (18:1 or 18:2) on the sn-2 position. StarD10 was further shown to bind lipids in vivo by cross-linking of protein expressed in transfected HEK-293T cells with photoactivable phosphatidylcholine. In addition to a lipid binding function, StarD10 transferred PC and PE between membranes. Interestingly, these lipid binding and transfer specificities distinguish StarD10 from the related START domain proteins Pctp and CERT, suggesting a distinct biological function.