[PMID: 29984580]
Porphyromonas gingivalis is a keystone periodontal pathogen that has been associated with autoimmune disorders. The cell surface proteases Lys-gingipain (Kgp) and Arg-gingipains (RgpA and RgpB) are major virulence factors, and their proteolytic activity is enhanced by small peptides such as glycylglycine (GlyGly). The reaction kinetics suggested that GlyGly may function as an acceptor molecule for gingipain-catalyzed transpeptidation. Purified gingipains and P. gingivalis whole cells were used to digest selected substrates including human hemoglobin in the presence or absence of peptide acceptors. Mass spectrometric analysis of the substrates digested with gingipains in the presence of GlyGly showed that transpeptidation outcompeted hydrolysis, whereas the trypsin-digested controls exhibited predominantly hydrolysis activity. The transpeptidation levels increased with increasing concentration of GlyGly. Purified gingipains and whole cells exhibited extensive transpeptidation activities on human hemoglobin. All hemoglobin cleavage sites were found to be suitable for GlyGly transpeptidation, and this transpeptidation enhanced hemoglobin digestion. The transpeptidation products were often more abundant than the corresponding hydrolysis products. In the absence of GlyGly, hemoglobin peptides produced during digestion were utilized as acceptors leading to the detection of up to 116 different transpeptidation products in a single reaction. P. gingivalis cells were able to digest hemoglobin faster when acceptor peptides derived from human serum albumin were included in the reaction, suggesting that gingipain-catalyzed transpeptidation may be relevant for substrates encountered in vivo. The transpeptidation of host proteins in vivo may potentially lead to the breakdown of immunological tolerance, culminating in autoimmune reactions.

[PMID: 28726036]
The present study was aimed to determine whether trefoil factor family (TFF) peptides which were generally considered to be resistant to proteolysis could be digested by gingipains, a major proteinases produced by Porphyromonas gingivalis. Recombinant human TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3 peptides were used as substrates. Gingipains including arginine gingipain (RgpB) and lysine gingipain (Kgp) were used as enzymes. Trypsin was used as a control protease. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization with time-of-flight / time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) were used for analyzing peptide mass signals and amino acid sequences of digested TFF peptides. MALDI-TOF/TOF analyses demonstrated that Kgp, RgpB, and trypsin were able to cleave TFF1 and TFF2 peptides, resulting in different patterns of digested fragments. However, impurity in recombinant TFF3 peptide substrates affected the interpretations of enzymatic reaction by MALDI-TOF/TOF. LC-MS analyses demonstrated that identified fragments of TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3 from digestion by gingipains were similar to those by trypsin. Using MALDI-TOF/TOF and LC-MS, the present study provides new information that gingipains containing trypsin-like activities are able to digest TFF peptides. The proteolytic effects of gingipains on TFF peptides may be responsible for reduction of salivary TFF peptides in chronic periodontitis patients. Further investigations to determine the pathological effects of gingipains on TFF peptides in saliva and periodontal tissues of patients with chronic periodontitis would be of interest.

[PMID: 28107612]
Porphyromonas gingivalis is a Gram-negative black pigmenting anaerobe that is unable to synthesize heme [Fe(II)-protoporphyrin IX] or hemin [Fe(III)-protoporphyrin IX-Cl], which are important growth/virulence factors, and must therefore derive them from the host. Porphyromonas gingivalis expresses several proteinaceous hemin-binding sites, which are important in the binding/transport of heme/hemin from the host. It also synthesizes several virulence factors, namely cysteine-proteases Arg- and Lys-gingipains and two lipopolysaccharides (LPS), O-LPS and A-LPS. The gingipains are required for the production of the black pigment, μ-oxo-bisheme {[Fe(III)PPIX]<sub>2</sub> O}, which is derived from hemoglobin and deposited on the bacterial cell-surface leading to the characteristic black colonies when grown on blood agar. In this study we investigated the role of LPS in the deposition of μ-oxo-bisheme on the cell-surface. A P. gingivalis mutant defective in the biosynthesis of Arg-gingipains, namely rgpA/rgpB, produces brown colonies on blood agar and mutants defective in Lys-gingipain (kgp) and LPS biosynthesis namely porR, waaL, wzy, and pg0129 (α-1, 3-mannosyltransferase) produce non-pigmented colonies. However, only those mutants lacking A-LPS showed reduced hemin-binding when cells in suspension were incubated with hemin. Using native, de-O-phosphorylated and de-lipidated LPS from P. gingivalis W50 and porR strains, we demonstrated that hemin-binding to O-polysaccharide (PS) and to the lipid A moiety of LPS was reduced compared with hemin-binding to A-PS. We conclude that A-LPS in the outer-membrane of P. gingivalis serves as a scaffold/anchor for the retention of μ-oxo-bisheme on the cell surface and pigmentation is dependent on the presence of A-LPS.