[PMID: 19836866]
Since the introduction of bisphosphonates to treat diseases that affect remodelling of bone, increasing numbers of patients with bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws have been reported; the number is currently unknown. Recently anti-RANKL agents (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand) such as denosumab (Prolia, Amgen Inc., California, USA) that have a similar mode of action to bisphosphonates have been introduced to treat such diseases. We report a case of osteonecrosis that was induced by anti-RANKL therapy. To our knowledge this is the first case to have been induced by these agents.

[PMID: 25509894]
To evaluate the efficacy and safety of Denosumab (Prolia), a first-line osteoporosis (OP) medication that is a fully human monoclonal antibody to the receptor activator of nuclear factor xB ligand (RANKL), within an open-label observational study. Patients aged 50 years or older with postmenopausal OP, who were treated with Prolia in clinical practice, were examined. The concentrations of the bone resorption (BR) marker of C-terminal telopeptide and other laboratory indicators (total serum calcium, total alkaline phosphatase, and creatinine) were measured following 3 months. Adverse drug reactions were recorded. Three months after initiation of the investigation, there was a significant decrease in the BR marker C-terminal telopeptide (by 89%; p<0.0001). There were rare adverse reactions: hypocalcemia in 3 (5.9%) patients, arthralgias in 2 (3.9%), and eczema in 1 (1.9%). There were neither serious adverse events nor study withdrawal cases. The preliminary results of the open-label study of Prolia in postmenopausal OP suggest that the significantly lower BR activity determines the efficacy of this drug and its high safety.

[PMID: 22023901]
Denosumab (Prolia) is a fully human monoclonal antibody directed against receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL), which interferes with the formation, activation, and survival of osteoclasts. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in June 2010 as a new treatment for postmenopausal osteoporosis in women who are at high risk for fracture. Given its mechanism of action, it is an antiresorptive therapy that is administered as a 60-mg subcutaneous injection every 6 months. It is the first biologic antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis, and the first osteoporosis therapy to show efficacy and safety in patients with renal impairment.