[PMID: 32643123]
Diamond-Blackfan anemia is an autosomal dominant syndrome, characterized by anemia and a predisposition for malignancies. Ribosomal proteins are responsible for this syndrome, and the incidence of colorectal cancer in patients with this syndrome is higher than the general population. This patient's Diamond-Blackfan anemia was caused by a novel ribosomal protein S19 gene mutation, and he received chemotherapy for colorectal cancer caused by it. In his cancer, ribosomal proteins S19 and TP53 were overexpressed. He received 5FU and cetuximab; however, his anemia made chemotherapy difficult, and he did not survive long. Patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia should be screened earlier and more often for colorectal cancer than usual.

[PMID: 32630050]
Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) are a group of cancer-prone genetic diseases characterized by hypocellular bone marrow with impairment in one or more hematopoietic lineages. The pathogenesis of IBMFS involves mutations in several genes which encode for proteins involved in DNA repair, telomere biology and ribosome biogenesis. The classical IBMFS include Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), Fanconi anemia (FA), dyskeratosis congenita (DC), and severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). IBMFS are associated with high risk of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and solid tumors. Unfortunately, no specific pharmacological therapies have been highly effective for IBMFS. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation provides a cure for aplastic or myeloid neoplastic complications. However, it does not affect the risk of solid tumors. Since approximately 28% of FA, 24% of SCN, 21% of DBA, 20% of SDS, and 17% of DC patients harbor nonsense mutations in the respective IBMFS-related genes, we discuss the use of the nonsense suppression therapy in these diseases. We recently described the beneficial effect of ataluren, a nonsense suppressor drug, in SDS bone marrow hematopoietic cells ex vivo. A similar approach could be therefore designed for treating other IBMFS. In this review we explain in detail the new generation of nonsense suppressor molecules and their mechanistic roles. Furthermore, we will discuss strengths and limitations of these molecules which are emerging from preclinical and clinical studies. Finally we discuss the state-of-the-art of preclinical and clinical therapeutic studies carried out for IBMFS.

[PMID: 32620751]
Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome associated with ribosomal gene mutations that lead to ribosomal insufficiency. DBA is characterized by anemia, congenital anomalies, and cancer predisposition. Treatment for DBA is associated with significant morbidity. Here, we report the identification of Nemo-like kinase (NLK) as a potential target for DBA therapy. To identify new DBA targets, we screen for small molecules that increase erythroid expansion in mouse models of DBA. This screen identified a compound that inhibits NLK. Chemical and genetic inhibition of NLK increases erythroid expansion in mouse and human progenitors, including bone marrow cells from DBA patients. In DBA models and patient samples, aberrant NLK activation is initiated at the Megakaryocyte/Erythroid Progenitor (MEP) stage of differentiation and is not observed in non-erythroid hematopoietic lineages or healthy erythroblasts. We propose that NLK mediates aberrant erythropoiesis in DBA and is a potential target for therapy.