[PMID: 19276163]
Gefitinib (Iressa) is a specific and effective epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor. An understanding of the downstream cellular targets of gefitinib will allow the discovery of biomarkers for predicting outcomes and monitoring anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapies and provide information for overcoming gefitinib resistance. In this study, we investigated the role and regulation of FOXM1 in response to gefitinib treatment in breast cancer. Using the gefitinib-sensitive breast carcinoma cell lines BT474 and SKBR3 as well as the resistant lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-453, we showed that gefitinib represses the expression of the transcription factor FOXM1 in sensitive, but not resistant, cells. FOXM1 repression by gefitinib is associated with FOXO3a activation and is mediated at the transcriptional level and gene promoter level. These results were verified by immunohistochemical staining of biopsy samples from primary breast cancer patients obtained from a gefitinib neoadjuvant study. We also showed that ectopic expression of an active FOXO3a represses FOXM1 expression, whereas knockdown of FOXO3a expression using small interfering RNA can up-regulate FOXM1 and its downstream targets polo-like kinase, cyclin B1, and CDC25B and rescue sensitive BT474 cells from gefitinib-induced cell proliferative arrest. These results suggest that gefitinib represses FOXM1 expression via FOXO3a in breast cancer. We further showed that overexpression of a wild-type FOXM1 or a constitutively active FOXM1, DeltaN-FOXM1, abrogates the cell death induced by gefitinib, indicating that FOXM1 has a functional role in mediating the gefitinib-induced proliferative arrest and in determining sensitivity to gefitinib. In summary, our study defined FOXM1 as a cellular target and marker of gefitinib activity in breast cancer.

[PMID: 18089711]
Gefitinib is a specific inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) that causes growth delay in cancer cell lines and human tumor xenografts expressing high levels of EGFR. An understanding of the downstream cellular targets of gefitinib will allow the discovery of biomarkers for predicting outcomes and monitoring anti-EGFR therapies and provide information for key targets for therapeutic intervention. In this study, we investigated the role of FOXO3a in gefitinib action and resistance. Using two gefitinib-sensitive (i.e., BT474 and SKBR3) as well as three other resistant breast carcinoma cell lines (i.e., MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-453), we showed that gefitinib targets the transcription factor FOXO3a to mediate cell cycle arrest and cell death in sensitive breast cancer cells. In the sensitive cells, gefitinib treatment causes cell cycle arrest predominantly at the G(0)-G(1) phase and apoptosis, which is associated with FOXO3a dephosphorylation at Akt sites and nuclear translocation, whereas in the resistant cells, FOXO3a stays phosphorylated and remains in the cytoplasm. The nuclear accumulation of FOXO3a in response to gefitinib was confirmed in tumor tissue sections from breast cancer patients presurgically treated with gefitinib as monotherapy. We also showed that knockdown of FOXO3a expression using small interfering RNA (siRNA) can rescue sensitive BT474 cells from gefitinib-induced cell-proliferative arrest, whereas reintroduction of active FOXO3a in resistant MDA-MB-231 cells can at least partially restore cell-proliferative arrest and sensitivity to gefitinib. These results suggest that the FOXO3a dephosphorylation and nuclear localization have a direct role in mediating the gefitinib-induced proliferative arrest and in determining sensitivity to gefitinib.

[PMID: 23255952]
Gefitinib, the specific inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), may cause growth delay in cancer cell lines. Thorough understanding of the downstream cellular signaling of gefitinib will facilitate the discovery of biomarkers for predicting outcomes and monitoring anti-EGFR therapies, and provide information for key targets for therapeutic intervention. In this study, we investigated the role of transducer of erbB2.1 (TOB1) in gefitinib therapy. Using the lung carcinoma cell lines A549 and NCI-H1975, the results suggested that gefitinib might mediate cell cycle arrest in lung cancer cells at least by targeting TOB1 expression. Gefitinib treatment caused cell cycle arrest predominantly at the G1 phase, which is associated with TOB1 nuclear translocation and its interaction with cyclin D1. We also showed that knockdown of TOB1 expression by RNAi rescued lung cancer cells from gefitinib-induced cell-proliferative arrest. These results suggest that TOB1 interaction with cyclin D1 and nuclear translocation is directly involved in the gefitinib-induced anti-proliferative cell cycle arrest.