[PMID: 12034848]
The UV-damaged DNA binding protein complex (UV-DDB) is implicated in global genomic nucleotide excision repair (NER) in mammalian cells. The complex consists of a heterodimer of p127 and p48. UV-DDB is defective in one complementation group (XP-E) of the heritable, skin cancer-prone disorder xeroderma pigmentosum. Upon UV irradiation of primate cells, UV-DDB associates tightly with chromatin, concomitant with the loss of extractable binding activity. We report here that an early event after UV, but not ionizing, radiation is the transient dose-dependent degradation of the small subunit, p48. Treatment of human cells with the proteasomal inhibitor NIP-L3VS blocks this UV-induced degradation of p48. In XP-E cell lines with impaired UV-DDB binding, p48 is resistant to degradation. UV-mediated degradation of p48 occurs independently of the expression of p53 and the cell's proficiency for NER, but recovery of p48 levels at later times (12 h and thereafter) is dependent upon the capacity of the cell to repair non-transcribed DNA. In addition, we find that the p127 subunit of UV-DDB binds in vivo to p300, a histone acetyltransferase. The data support a functional connection between UV-DDB binding activity, proteasomal degradation of p48 and chromatin remodeling during early steps of NER.

[PMID: 12812979]
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a skin cancer-prone autosomal recessive disease characterized by inability to repair UV-induced DNA damage. The major form of XP is defective in nucleotide excision repair (NER) and comprises seven complementation groups (A-G). The genes defective in all groups have been identified unambiguously with the exception of group E. The cells of some XP-E patients are deficient in a protein complex (consisting of two subunits: p127/DDBI and p48/DDB2) which binds to UV-damaged DNA (UV-DDB) and is specifically involved in the removal of photoproducts from the non-transcribed regions of the genome. However, other XP-E patients have been reported not to lack UV-damaged DNA binding activity (DDB(+)). Here we describe several genetically unrelated XP-E patients, not previously analyzed in depth, each carrying two mutated alleles for DDB2, causing either a single amino acid change or a protein truncation or internal deletion. These defects result in a severe decrease of detectable p48 protein, abolish interaction with the p127 subunit, and produce a deficiency in UV-DDB binding activity (DDB(-)). The role of p48 in the repair defect of these patients was demonstrated in vivo and in vitro. Investigation of four DDB(+) cell strains from patients previously assigned to XP-E, allowed us to reclassify all of them into other groups and to show that they do not share the molecular and biochemical features typical for XP-E. Besides confirming that the true XP-E phenotype is DDB(-), resulting from defects in a single gene, DDB2, our results identify the functional domains of the corresponding p48 protein.

[PMID: 16473935]
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a heritable human disorder characterized by defects in nucleotide excision repair (NER) and the development of skin cancer. Cells from XP group E (XP-E) patients have a defect in the UV-damaged DNA-binding protein complex (UV-DDB), involved in the damage recognition step of NER. UV-DDB comprises two subunits, products of the DDB1 and DDB2 genes, respectively. Mutations in the DDB2 gene account for the underlying defect in XP-E. The UV-DDB complex is a component of the newly identified cullin 4A-based ubiquitin E3 ligase, DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2). The E3 ubiquitin ligases recognize specific substrates and mediate their ubiquitination to regulate protein activity or target proteins for degradation by the proteasomal pathway. In this study, we have addressed the role of the UV-DDB-based E3 in NER and sought a physiological substrate. We demonstrate that monoubiquitinated histone H2A in native chromatin coimmunoprecipitates with the endogenous DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2) complex in response to UV irradiation. Further, mutations in DDB2 alter the formation and binding activity of the DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2) ligase, accompanied by impaired monoubiquitination of H2A after UV treatment of XP-E cells, compared with repair-proficient cells. This finding indicates that DDB2, as the substrate receptor of the DDB1-CUL4A-based ligase, specifically targets histone H2A for monoubiquitination in a photolesion-binding-dependent manner. Given that the loss of monoubiquitinated histone H2A at the sites of UV-damaged DNA is associated with decreased global genome repair in XP-E cells, this study suggests that histone modification, mediated by the XPE factor, facilitates the initiation of NER.