[PMID: 12407171]
Rod, cone, cone-rod, and macular dystrophies eventually bring about the death of cone photoreceptor cells. The present study explores means of inhibiting apoptosis in addition to inducing a specific apoptotic pathway within a photoreceptor-derived cell line. Retinal cell culture of murine 661W photoreceptor-derived cells was used to assess the effect of both a synthetic peptide inhibitor of caspases (benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-DL-Asp-[Ome] fluoromethylketone [Z-VAD.FMK]) and a natural inhibitor, baculoviral p35. In addition, the effect of transfection of Fas-associated death domain (FADD), a cellular protein implicated in receptor-induced apoptosis, was assessed. Assays were performed by transient transfection of cell cultures, and results were recorded by cell counting, Western blot, and spectrophotometry. Western blot analysis and chromogenic caspase substrate cleavage analysis confirmed the activation of caspases within 661W cells. At a concentration of 80 micro M, Z-VAD.FMK, 72.36% +/- 0.93% of 661W cells survived cytotoxic insult compared with 6.99% +/- 1.35% of control cells. Transient transfection of 1200 ng baculoviral p35 conferred a protection of 75.30% +/- 4.23%, compared with 19.61% +/-1.84% of control cells, and it was additionally observed that as little as 50 ng transfection of FADD was capable of inducing the death of 53.21% +/- 1.33% of cells in 661W cultures. Apoptotic cell death in 661W cells is caspase dependent and may be inhibited with both a synthetic and natural inhibitor of caspase function. Furthermore, 661W cells are highly sensitive to the FADD protein, which may suggest a number of novel therapeutic approaches to halt photoreceptor cell apoptosis.

[PMID: 18483489]
Programmed cell death or apoptosis is required for the patterning and development of multicellular organisms. However, apoptosis is a difficult process to measure because the dead cells are rapidly degraded by their neighbors within a few hours. The post-caspase activation events that determine whether a cell will undergo apoptosis remain elusive. Here we report that apoptosis-specific nuclear events that occur before DNA fragmentation can be distinguished by monitoring the histone H1 status. In both mammals and Drosophila, dying cells failed to be immunolabeled with an anti-H1 monoclonal antibody, AE-4. Real-time imaging of caspase activation and H1 dynamics in mammalian neural cells revealed that H1 changed its location in the nucleus after caspase activation. In addition, the timing of this re-localization was largely dependent on the apoptotic stimulus used. From the staining patterns of AE-4 and anti-active caspase-3 antibodies, cells undergoing the transition from caspase activation to the apoptotic H1 change could be identified as H1-positive caspase-activated cells, providing a novel criterion for early apoptosis and making it possible to characterize caspase-activated cells in tissues. On the basis of these staining patterns, we found that many olfactory sensory neurons in the developing mouse olfactory epithelium showed sustained caspase activity without the H1 change, suggesting a unique caspase function in these neurons.

[PMID: 16103108]
Caspase proteases have become the focal point for the development and application of anti-apoptotic therapies in a variety of central nervous system diseases. However, this approach is based on the premise that caspase function is limited to invoking cell death signals. Here, we show that caspase-3 activity is elevated in nonapoptotic differentiating neuronal cell populations. Moreover, peptide inhibition of protease activity effectively inhibits the differentiation process in a cultured neurosphere model. These results implicate caspase-3 activation as a conserved feature of neuronal differentiation and suggest that targeted inhibition of this protease in neural cell populations may have unintended consequences.

[PMID: 9874792]
The effect of expressing human huntingtin fragments containing polyglutamine (polyQ) tracts of varying lengths was assessed in Caenorhabditis elegans ASH sensory neurons in young and old animals. Expression of a huntingtin fragment containing a polyQ tract of 150 residues (Htn-Q150) led to progressive ASH neurodegeneration but did not cause cell death. Progressive cell death and enhanced neurodegeneration were observed in ASH neurons that coexpressed Htn-Q150 and a subthreshold dose of a toxic OSM-10::green fluorescent protein (OSM-10::GFP) fusion protein. Htn-Q150 huntingtin protein fragments formed protein aggregates in ASH neurons, and the number of ASH neurons containing aggregates increased as animals aged. ASH neuronal cell death required ced-3 caspase function, indicating that the observed cell death is apoptotic. Of interest, ced-3 played a critical role in Htn-Q150-mediated neurodegeneration but not in OSM10::GFP-mediated ASH neurodegeneration. ced-3 function was important but not essential for the formation of protein aggregates. Finally, behavioral assays indicated that ASH neurons, coexpressing Htn-Q150 and OSM10::GFP, were functionally impaired at 3 days before the detection of neurodegeneration, cell death, and protein aggregates.

[PMID: 22541691]
Caspase function is known to be essential for cell death by apoptosis, but it is now increasingly recognized that these proteases also play important roles in other cellular events. Here we report for the first time that inhibition of cellular caspase activity can induce differentiation of AML blasts, and can enhance vitamin D-induced cell differentiation of these cells. This was studied in blasts obtained from nine patients with AML and one patient with CML by ex vivo culture in the presence of Q-VD-OPh (QVD), a pan caspase inhibitor. Cell differentiation was manifested by the expression of markers of monocytic differentiation CD11b and CD14. Differentiation induced by 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) or its analogs PRI-1906 and PRI-2191 was enhanced by QVD to a varying degree, depending on the subtype of the leukemia. QVD and 1,25D-induced differentiation was accompanied by increased signaling by Hematopoietic Progenitor Kinase 1(HPK1), and the expression of transcription factors known to be involved in monocytic differentiation was increased. Although the magnitude and nature of these changes were not invariable, it is clear that caspase inhibitors warrant attention as components of differentiation therapy of leukemia, perhaps in combination with derivatives of vitamin D.

[PMID: 12170777]
Recent studies have shown that inhibition of stress-induced signaling via the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway can potentiate the toxic effects of chemotherapeutic drugs and ionizing radiation. Because of these observations, we have further investigated the impact upon growth and survival of mammary (MDA-MB-231, MCF7, T47D), prostate (DU145, LNCaP, PC3) and squamous (A431) carcinoma cells following irradiation and combined long-term exposure to MEK1/2 inhibitors. Exposure of carcinoma cells to ionizing radiation resulted in MAPK pathway activation initially (0-4 h) and modestly enhanced MAPK activity at later times (24 h-96 h). Inhibition of radiation-induced MAPK activation using MEK1/2 inhibitors potentiated radiation-induced apoptosis in two waves, at 21-30 h and 96-144 h after exposure. The potentiation of apoptosis was not observed in MCF7, LNCaP, or PC3 cells. At 24 h, the potentiation of apoptosis was independent of radiation dose whereas at 108 h, apoptosis correlated with increasing dose. Removal of the MEK1/2 inhibitor either 6 h or 12 h after exposure abolished the potentiation of apoptosis at 24 h. At this time, the potentiation of apoptosis correlated with cleavage of pro-caspases -8, -9 and -3, and with release of cytochrome c into the cytosol. Inhibition of caspase function using a pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD blocked the enhanced apoptotic response at 24 h. Selective inhibition of caspase 9 with LEHD or caspase 8 with IETD partially blunted the apoptotic response in MDA-MB-231, DU145 and A431 cells, whereas inhibition of both caspases reduced the response by > 90%. Removal of the MEK1/2 inhibitor either 24 h or 48 h after exposure abolished the potentiation of apoptosis at 108 h. Incubation of cells with ZVAD for 108 h also abolished the potentiation of apoptosis. In general agreement with the finding that prolonged inhibition of MEK1/2 was required to enhance radiation-induced apoptosis at 108 h, omission of MEK1/2 inhibitor from the culture media during assessment of clonogenic survival resulted in either little or no significant alteration in radiosensitivity. Collectively, our data show that combined exposure to radiation and MEK1/2 inhibitors can reduce survival in some, but not all, tumor cell types. Prolonged blunting of MAPK pathway function following radiation exposure is required for MEK1/2 inhibitors to have any effect on carcinoma cell radiosensitivity.

[PMID: 11679590]
Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. N-type neuroblastoma cells (represented by SH-SY5Y and IMR32 cell lines) are characterized by a neuronal phenotype. N-type cell lines are generally N-myc amplified, express the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, and do not express caspase-8. The present study was designed to determine the mechanism by which N-type cells die in response to specific cytotoxic agents (such as cisplatin and doxorubicin) commonly used to treat this disease. We found that N-type cells were equally sensitive to cisplatin and doxorubicin. Yet death induced by cisplatin was inhibited by the nonselective caspase inhibitor z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone or the specific caspase-9 inhibitor N-acetyl-Leu-Glu-His-Asp-aldehyde, whereas in contrast, caspase inhibition did not prevent doxorubicin-induced death. Neither the reactive oxygen species nor the mitochondrial permeability transition appears to play an important role in this process. Doxorubicin induced NF-kappa B transcriptional activation in association with I-kappa B alpha degradation prior to loss of cell viability. Surprisingly, the antioxidant and NF-kappa B inhibitor pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate blocked doxorubicin-induced NF-kappa B transcriptional activation and provided profound protection against doxorubicin killing. Moreover, SH-SY5Y cells expressing a super-repressor form of I-kappa B were completely resistant to doxorubicin killing. Together these findings show that NF-kappa B activation mediates doxorubicin-induced cell death without evidence of caspase function and suggest that cisplatin and doxorubicin engage different death pathways to kill neuroblastoma cells.

[PMID: 17091579]
Advances in molecular biology provide an opportunity to develop detailed models of biological processes that can be used to obtain an integrated understanding of the system. However, development of useful models from the available knowledge of the system and experimental observations still remains a daunting task. In this work, a model identification strategy for complex biological networks is proposed. The approach includes a state regulator problem (SRP) that provides estimates of all the component concentrations and the reaction rates of the network using the available measurements. The full set of the estimates is utilised for model parameter identification for the network of known topology. An a priori model complexity test that indicates the feasibility of performance of the proposed algorithm is developed. Fisher information matrix (FIM) theory is used to address model identifiability issues. Two signalling pathway case studies, the caspase function in apoptosis and the MAP kinase cascade system, are considered. The MAP kinase cascade, with measurements restricted to protein complex concentrations, fails the a priori test and the SRP estimates are poor as expected. The apoptosis network structure used in this work has moderate complexity and is suitable for application of the proposed tools. Using a measurement set of seven protein concentrations, accurate estimates for all unknowns are obtained. Furthermore, the effects of measurement sampling frequency and quality of information in the measurement set on the performance of the identified model are described.

[PMID: 12934068]
Autophagic programmed cell death occurs during the development of diverse animal groups, but the mechanisms that control this genetically regulated form of cell killing are poorly understood. Genetic studies of bulk protein degradation in yeast have provided important advances in our understanding of autophagy, and recent investigations of Drosophila autophagic cell death suggest that some of these mechanisms may be conserved. In Drosophila, several steroid-regulated genes that encode transcription regulators are required for autophagic cell death. These transcription regulators appear to activate a large number of genes that play a more direct role in cell killing, including genes that function in apoptosis such as caspases. While caspase function is required for autophagic cell death during Drosophila development, genes encoding proteins that are similar to the yeast autophagy regulators are also induced in dying salivary glands. Furthermore, numerous noncaspase proteases, cytoplasmic organizing factors, signaling molecules, and unknown factors are expressed in interesting patterns during autophagic cell death. This article reviews the current knowledge of the regulation of autophagic programmed cell death during development of Drosophila.

[PMID: 18544666]
We have defined some of the mechanisms by which the kinase inhibitor lapatinib kills HCT116 cells. Lapatinib inhibited radiation-induced activation of ERBB1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2, and AKT, and radiosensitized HCT116 cells. Prolonged incubation of HCT116 cells with lapatinib caused cell killing followed by outgrowth of lapatinib-adapted cells. Adapted cells were resistant to serum starvation-induced cell killing and were cross-resistant to multiple therapeutic drugs. Lapatinib was competent to inhibit basal and epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated ERBB1 phosphorylation in adapted cells. Coexpression of dominant-negative ERBB1 and dominant-negative ERBB2 inhibited basal and EGF-stimulated ERBB1 and ERBB2 phosphorylation in parental and adapted cells. However, in neither parental nor adapted cells did expression of dominant-negative ERBB1 and dominant-negative ERBB2 recapitulate the cell death-promoting effects of lapatinib. Adapted cells had increased expression of MCL-1, decreased expression of BAX, and decreased activation of BAX and BAK. Overexpression of BCL-XL protected parental cells from lapatinib toxicity. Knockdown of MCL-1 expression enhanced lapatinib toxicity in adapted cells that was reverted by knockdown of BAK expression. Inhibition of caspase function modestly reduced lapatinib toxicity in parental cells, whereas knockdown of apoptosis-inducing factor expression suppressed lapatinib toxicity. Thus, in HCT116 cells, lapatinib adaptation can be mediated by altered expression of pro- and antiapoptotic proteins that maintain mitochondrial function.

[PMID: 11551979]
Caspase-3 is a cysteine protease located in both the cytoplasm and mitochondrial intermembrane space that is a central effector of many apoptotic pathways. In resting cells, a subset of caspase-3 zymogens is S-nitrosylated at the active site cysteine, inhibiting enzyme activity. During Fas-induced apoptosis, caspases are denitrosylated, allowing the catalytic site to function. In the current studies, we sought to identify the subpopulation of caspases that is regulated by S-nitrosylation. We report that the majority of mitochondrial, but not cytoplasmic, caspase-3 zymogens contain this inhibitory modification. In addition, the majority of mitochondrial caspase-9 is S-nitrosylated. These studies suggest that S-nitrosylation plays an important role in regulating mitochondrial caspase function and that the S-nitrosylation state of a given protein depends on its subcellular localization.

[PMID: 10888847]
Caspases (cysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases) are at the core of the cell's suicide machinery. These enzymes, once activated, dismantle the cell by selectively cleaving key proteins after aspartate residues. The events culminating in caspase activation are the subject of intense study because of their role in cancer, and neurodegenerative and autoimmune disorders. Here we present a mechanistic mathematical model, formulated on the basis of newly emerging information, describing key elements of receptor-mediated and stress-induced caspase activation. We have used mass-conservation principles in conjunction with kinetic rate laws to formulate ordinary differential equations that describe the temporal evolution of caspase activation. Qualitative strategies for the prevention of caspase activation are simulated and compared with experimental data. We show that model predictions are consistent with available information. Thus, the model could aid in better understanding caspase activation and identifying therapeutic approaches promoting or retarding apoptotic cell death.

[PMID: 15970694]
dronc, the only apical caspase in Drosophila, is thought to be essential and non-redundant for apoptosis. Recent analyses of several independently derived dronc mutants have demonstrated that DRONC is required for normal development. Interestingly, analysis of these mutants show that DRONC is not essential for cell death in all tissues and that in some cases, DRONC-independent effector caspase activation and apoptosis can occur. These mutants provide a valuable resource to investigate the recently reported roles of DRONC in nonapoptotic pathways. Insights gained from the dronc mutants will help in advancing our understanding of caspase function in various developmental pathways.

[PMID: 12933355]
Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton elicits profound changes in cell survival and function. The actin cytoskeleton is regulated in a hierarchical manner by Rho GTPases. Rho kinase, a downstream effector of RhoA, regulates the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions. Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton causes apoptosis in airway epithelial cells. To examine further the relation of cytoskeletal integrity and apoptosis, we tested whether inhibition of Rho kinase would elicit apoptosis in airway epithelial cells. Inhibition with either Y-27632 or HA1077 induced membrane ruffling and loss of actin stress fibers, and apoptosis in airway epithelial cells that was blocked by inhibiting caspase function or by inhibiting protein synthesis. Cells overexpressing constitutively active Rho kinase, but not native Rho kinase, were resistant to Rho kinase inhibitor-induced stress fiber disruption and apoptosis. Inhibition of Rho kinase disrupted actin stress fibers but did not induce apoptosis in 3T3 cells. We demonstrate that Rho kinase inhibition induces airway epithelial cell apoptosis associated with changes in actin filament integrity. Our data suggest that Rho kinase may be a regulator of early initiation of apoptosis.

[PMID: 23139158]
Apoptosis is critical for organismal homeostasis and a wide variety of diseases. Caspases are the ultimate executors of the apoptotic programmed cell death pathway. As caspases play such a central role in apoptosis, there is significant demand for technologies to monitor caspase function. We recently developed a caspase activatable-GFP (CA-GFP) reporter. CA-GFP is unique due to its "dark" state, where chromophore maturation of the GFP is inhibited by the presence of a C-terminal peptide. Here we show that chromophore maturation is prevented because CA-GFP does not fold into the robust β-barrel of GFP until the peptide has been cleaved by active caspase. Both CA-GFP and GFP₁₋₁₀ , a split form of GFP lacking the 11th strand, have similar secondary structure, different from mature GFP. A similar susceptibility to proteolytic digestion indicates that this shared structure is not the robust, fully formed GFP β-barrel. We have developed a model that suggests that as CA-GFP is translated in vivo it follows the same folding path as wild-type GFP; however, the presence of the appended peptide does not allow CA-GFP to form the barrel of the fully matured GFP. CA-GFP is therefore held in a "pro-folding" intermediate state until the peptide is released, allowing it to continue folding into the mature barrel geometry. This new understanding of the structural basis of the dark state of the CA-GFP reporter will enable manipulation of this mechanism in the development of reporter systems for any number of cellular processes involving proteases and potentially other enzymes.

[PMID: 15723613]
Cerebral ischemia is one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality in the Western world. Despite extensive research, adequate therapies are still elusive. Neuronal degeneration and death are hallmarks of stroke/ischemia. Understanding how the death machinery executes neuronal death in ischemia will provide therapeutic targets. Key to the death machinery are caspases: the family of cell death proteases. While much data has been published regarding caspase involvement in models of ischemia, the pathways have not been thoroughly defined. The specification of the caspases critical for death has been hampered by the use of non-specific reagents. Thus many conclusions about specificity are unwarranted. In this review we discuss how caspases can be measured and review the existing knowledge of the roles of specific caspases in ischemia. We also discuss approaches to determining the molecules that execute ischemic death.

[PMID: 11553704]
Previous studies have argued that enhanced activity of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway can promote tumor cell survival in response to cytotoxic insults. In this study, we examined the impact of MAPK signaling on the survival of primary hepatocytes exposed to low concentrations of deoxycholic acid (DCA, 50 microM). Treatment of hepatocytes with DCA caused MAPK activation, which was dependent upon ligand independent activation of EGFR, and downstream signaling through Ras and PI(3) kinase. Neither inhibition of MAPK signaling alone by MEK1/2 inhibitors, nor exposure to DCA alone, enhanced basal hepatocyte apoptosis, whereas inhibition of DCA-induced MAPK activation caused approximately 25% apoptosis within 6 h. Similar data were also obtained when either dominant negative EGFR-CD533 or dominant negative Ras N17 were used to block MAPK activation. DCA-induced apoptosis correlated with sequential cleavage of procaspase 8, BID, procaspase 9, and procaspase 3. Inhibition of MAPK potentiated bile acid-induced apoptosis in hepatocytes with mutant FAS-ligand, but did not enhance in hepatocytes that were null for FAS receptor expression. These data argues that DCA is causing ligand independent activation of the FAS receptor to stimulate an apoptotic response, which is counteracted by enhanced ligand-independent EGFR/MAPK signaling. In agreement with FAS-mediated cell killing, inhibition of caspase function with the use of dominant negative Fas-associated protein with death domain, a caspase 8 inhibitor (Ile-Glu-Thr-Asp-p-nitroanilide [IETD]) or dominant negative procaspase 8 blocked the potentiation of bile acid-induced apoptosis. Inhibition of bile acid-induced MAPK signaling enhanced the cleavage of BID and release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, which were all blocked by IETD. Despite activation of caspase 8, expression of dominant negative procaspase 9 blocked procaspase 3 cleavage and the potentiation of DCA-induced apoptosis. Treatment of hepatocytes with DCA transiently increased expression of the caspase 8 inhibitor proteins c-FLIP-(S) and c-FLIP-(L) that were reduced by inhibition of MAPK or PI(3) kinase. Constitutive overexpression of c-FLIP-(s) abolished the potentiation of bile acid-induced apoptosis. Collectively, our data argue that loss of DCA-induced EGFR/Ras/MAPK pathway function potentiates DCA-stimulated FAS-induced hepatocyte cell death via a reduction in the expression of c-FLIP isoforms.

[PMID: 11489831]
Retinoids have been shown to be clinically useful in the biological therapy of certain myeloid and T-cell malignancies, whereas CD20 has proven to be an effective target in B-cell lymphoma immunotherapy. Both retinoic acid derivatives and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies have also been shown to induce apoptosis of malignant cells in vitro. Retinoid-induced apoptosis is thought to be mediated by nuclear retinoid receptor binding and transcriptional activation, whereas CD20 ligation appears to initiate transmembrane Ca(2+) influx with resultant programmed cell death. In this report, we evaluate the in vitro effects of N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide (4-HPR) with and without anti-CD20 antibodies in B-cell lymphoma lines. We demonstrate that 4-HPR inhibits the growth of malignant B-cells beyond that of all-trans-retinoic acid and 13-cis-retinoic acid. We also show that this 4-HPR-mediated growth inhibition is attributable to apoptosis, is consistent across a variety of malignant B-cell lines (Ramos, Ramos AW, SU-DHL4, and Raji), peaks at 96 to 144 h, and is attainable with concentrations as low as 2 microM. As with CD20-mediated apoptosis, we show that the final common pathway includes caspase activation that can be blocked by 2-val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone (z-VAD), a specific inhibitor of caspase function. Coincubation of a 2 microM concentration of 4-HPR and the anti-CD20 antibodies rituximab and tositumomab exhibited a supra-additive increase in levels of apoptosis induction of 24% (P = 0.009) and 42% (P = 0.0019) relative to expected additive levels of these same agents. These in vitro findings suggest that the potential in vivo synergy of these well-tolerated drugs may augment the previously demonstrated clinical activity of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of B-cell malignancies.

[PMID: 18955972]
Apoptosis is dependent upon caspase activation leading to substrate cleavage and, ultimately, cell death. Although required for the apoptotic phenotype, it has become apparent that cells frequently die even when caspase function is blocked. This process, termed caspase-independent cell death (CICD), occurs in response to most intrinsic apoptotic cues, provided that mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization has occurred. Death receptor ligation can also trigger a form of CICD termed necroptosis. In this review, we will examine the molecular mechanisms governing CICD, highlight recent findings demonstrating recovery from conditions of CICD and discuss potential pathophysiological functions of these processes.

[PMID: 14555221]
The cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteases (caspases) have been identified as key players in the cellular process termed programmed cell death or apoptosis. During apoptosis, activated apoptotic caspases cleave selected target proteins to execute cell death. Additionally to their established function in cell death, a variety of recent publications have provided increasing evidence that apoptotic caspases also participate in several non-apoptotic cellular processes. Activated caspases exhibit functions during T-cell proliferation and cell cycle regulation, but are also involved in the differentiation of a diverse array of cell types. In some cell types, their differentiation can be morphologically viewed as a kind of incomplete apoptosis. Analysis of well-known apoptotic targets of caspases implicates that the cleavage of a limited number of selected substrates plays a major role during non-apoptotic functions of caspases. Selective substrate cleavage might be regulated by activation of anti-apoptotic factors, via a compartmentalized activation of caspases, or through limited activity of caspases during apoptosis-independent functions. The increasing evidence for caspase function in non-apoptotic cellular events suggests that caspases play a much more diverse role than previously assumed.

[PMID: 10511707]
Apoptosis research demonstrates that, even though the multitude of regulatory circuits controlling programmed cell death might diverge, core elements of the 'apoptotic engine' are widely conserved. Therefore, studies in less complex model systems, such as the nematode and the fly, should continue to have a profound impact on our understanding of the process. This review explores genes and molecules that control apoptosis in Drosophila. The death inducers Reaper, Grim and Hid relay signals, possibly through IAPs (inhibitor of apoptosis proteins) and Dark (an Apaf-1/Ced-4 homologue), to trigger caspase function. This animal model promises continued insights into the determinants of cell death in 'naturally occurring' and pathological contexts.

[PMID: 11032171]
Programmed cell death plays an important role in maintaining homeostasis during animal development, and has been conserved in animals as different as nematodes and humans. Recent studies of Drosophila have provided valuable information toward our understanding of genetic regulation of death. Different signals trigger the novel death regulators rpr, hid, and grim, that utilize the evolutionarily conserved iap and ark genes to modulate caspase function. Subsequent removal of dying cells also appears to be accomplished by conserved mechanisms. The similarity between Drosophila and human in cell death signaling pathways illustrate the promise of fruit flies as a model system to elucidate the mechanisms underlying regulation of programmed cell death.

[PMID: 16284213]
The accelerated loss of lung epithelium through activation of extrinsic apoptosis is believed to play a causative role in lung pathogenesis. Previous investigations have shown that zinc is required to sustain lung epithelial cell viability under stress conditions and that depletion of intracellular zinc predisposes cells to apoptosis. In this investigation, we determined whether intracellular zinc deficiency enhanced the susceptibility of primary, differentiated cultures of human lung epithelium to death receptor-mediated apoptosis, leading to barrier dysfunction. Cultures obtained from multiple donors were exposed to stimuli that provoke death receptor-mediated apoptosis and depleted of intracellular zinc with a zinc-specific chelating agent. Transepithelial resistance, paracellular transport, caspase-8 and caspase-3 activity, and apoptosis were measured. Activation of extrinsic apoptosis or zinc chelation alone resulted in a nominal increase in caspase function and apoptosis without major evidence of barrier disruption. Activation of extrinsic apoptosis in addition to zinc depletion resulted in an abrupt decrease in transepithelial resistance, a substantial increase in apoptosis, and an increased paracellular leak. Cultures were rescued by supplementation with zinc sulfate. Further analysis revealed that exogenous zinc facilitates cell survival through activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway. We conclude that intracellular zinc is a vital factor in lung epithelium that protects cells from death receptor-mediated apoptosis and barrier dysfunction.

[PMID: 15711100]
Treatment of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is limited by its resistance to conventional chemotherapies. This may occur, in part, from resistance to apoptosis. The role of caspase activation in apoptosis resistance in treated RCCs was investigated. Two human RCC cell lines (ACHN and SN12K1) and renal tubular epithelial cells (HK2) were treated with 5-fluorouracil (0.2-20 microg/ml) or cisplatin (1-100 microM). Activation of caspase-3 and -2 was analysed and compared with levels of apoptosis. Caspase function was analysed using pan-caspase inhibition (z-VAD-fmk) and caspase-2 inhibition (z-VDVAD-fmk). RCC apoptosis was significantly lower (p < 0.05) than in HK2s after treatment, confirming their chemoresistance. Pro-caspase-3 (32 kDa) was detected in all cell lines. Cleaved caspase-3 (19 kDa) was not detected by Western immunoblots in treated RCCs and only minimal activated caspase-3 was detected in treated RCCs using immunohistochemistry. All cells had pro-caspase-2 (48 kDa) and the activated form (33 kDa) appeared in all treated cells. Caspase inhibition caused a reduction in, but not negation of, therapy-induced apoptosis in HK2s and RCCs (p < 0.05 for HK2s and ACHN cells), indicating that a caspase activation pathway must occur in RCC apoptosis but this pathway does not act via caspase-3 cleavage. Inhibition of caspase-2 reduced apoptosis only in HK2s, indicating that the activated caspase-2, identified in treated RCCs, was not responsible for their apoptosis induction. Specific differences in caspase-3 and -2 activation were identified in renal tubular epithelium and RCCs after chemotherapy. Identification of RCC-specific caspase inactivation or redundancy may explain, in part, the resistance of RCCs to cancer therapies and may be useful in targeting apoptotic pathways to overcome RCC resistance to treatment.

[PMID: 21238939]
Caspases, initially identified as a family of proteases regulating cell death, have been found to have nonapoptotic functions as well. Some family members are critical for mediating programmed cell death in development. After development, caspases are downregulated in the nervous system, but continue to perform important nonapoptotic functions relevant for neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity. In neurodegenerative diseases, where aberrant neuronal death is an outstanding feature, there is an increase in caspase activity. The specific caspase death pathways leading to dysfunction and death have still not been fully clarified, despite the plethora of scientific literature addressing these issues. In this chapter, we will present the current knowledge of caspase activation and activity pathways, the current tools for examining caspases, and functions of caspases in the nervous system in health and in disease. Alzheimer's Disease, the most common neurodegenerative disorder, and cerebral ischemia, the most common cause of neurologic death, are used to illustrate our current understanding of death signaling in neurodegenerative diseases. A better understanding of how caspases function in health and disease would provide appropriate specific targets for the development of therapeutic interventions for these diseases. Life and death are exquisitely regulated at the cellular level from development through maturity. During development, neuronal death is the major factor shaping the nervous system. This death is mainly caspase-mediated apoptosis. Once the waves of developmental death have passed (death occurs at different times in different parts of the nervous system), there is downregulation of the death machinery, as the postmitotic neurons should live for the life of the organism. Aberrant neuronal death is a major part of neurodegenerative disorders, but there is still no clear understanding of the processes leading to the phenotypes of the various diseases. Even the type of death that occurs continues to be debated, whether it is apoptotic, necrotic, or autophagic, or some combination of these death mechanisms. Here, we will discuss the role that the caspases play in neuronal function, dysfunction, and death. First, we will discuss the regulation of caspase activation and activity. We will examine the current understanding of caspase function in developmental neuronal death and then illustrate the role of caspases in neuronal death in disease employing two diseases of neuronal loss, Alzheimer's Disease (AD), which is the most common chronic neurodegenerative disorder, and cerebral ischemia/stroke, the third most common cause of death in Western society, which is an acute neuronal disorder with chronic sequelae.

[PMID: 15967022]
Recent advances in molecular biology techniques provide an opportunity for developing detailed mathematical models of biological processes. An iterative scheme is introduced for model identification using available system knowledge and experimental measurements. The scheme includes a state regulator algorithm that provides estimates of all system unknowns (concentrations of the system components and the reaction rates of their inter-conversion). The full system information is used for estimation of the model parameters. An optimal experiment design using the parameter identifiability and D-optimality criteria is formulated to provide "rich" experimental data for maximizing the accuracy of the parameter estimates in subsequent iterations. The importance of model identifiability tests for optimal measurement selection is also considered. The iterative scheme is tested on a model for the caspase function in apoptosis where it is demonstrated that model accuracy improves with each iteration. Optimal experiment design was determined to be critical for model identification. The proposed algorithm has general application to modeling a wide range of cellular processes, which include gene regulation networks, signal transduction and metabolic networks.

[PMID: 11996667]
The activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) by tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) receptors (TNFRs) is an integral part of the cytokine's pleiotropic cellular responses. Here we report differences in the caspase sensitivity and TNFR subtype activation of members of the ERK family. Inhibition in HeLa cells of caspase function by pharmacological inhibitors or the expression of CrmA (cytokine response modifier A), a viral modifier protein, blocks TNF-induced apoptosis or caspase-dependent protein kinase Cdelta and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase protein degradation. TNFR1- or TNFR2-stimulated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity was attenuated in cells in which caspase activity was inhibited either by pharmacological blockers or CrmA expression. Both TNFR1- and TNFR2-stimulated JNK activity was caspase-sensitive; however, only TNFR1 was capable of stimulating p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and p38 MAPK activities. TNFR1-stimulated p42/44 MAPK and p38 MAPK activities were insensitive to pharmacological caspase inhibition or CrmA. These findings were supported when measuring TNF-induced cytosolic phospholipase A(2) activation, which is a downstream target for MAPK and p38 MAPK. Profiling caspase enzymes activated by TNF in HeLa cells showed sequential caspase-8, -3, -7, -6 and -9 activation, with their inhibition characteristics suggesting a role for caspase-3 and/or caspase-6 in modulating JNK activity. Taken together these results show delineated ERK-activation pathways employed by TNFR subtypes.

[PMID: 10794589]
Caspases are a family of evolutionarily conserved cysteine proteases that constitute the effector arm of the apoptotic machinery. Studies in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and mouse point to evolutionarily conserved caspase function in developmentally programmed cell death in metazoans. Whereas in the nematode all developmental cell death is mediated by a single caspase, in Drosophila and the mouse some caspases appear to regulate cell death in a spatio-temporally restricted manner. This article reviews what we currently know about the roles of various caspases in the execution of developmentally programmed cell death and what may be expected from future research in this field.

[PMID: 14646471]
The importance of caspases in developmental neuronal death is well-established. Recent data provide compelling evidence of caspase activation after ischaemic brain injury. Caspase inhibitors reduce cell death in several models of ischaemic injury. This review summarizes our current understanding of caspase function in ischaemic brain injury and examines the accumulating evidence of caspase participation in several neurodegenerative diseases. The therapeutic consequences of caspase inhibitor treatment in reducing cell death after such injury are also discussed.

[PMID: 10739653]
Caspases are critical mediators of apoptosis, the principle mechanism by which extra and harmful cells are eliminated to ensure proper development and maintain cellular homeostasis in all multicellular organisms. While compelling evidence suggests that the activation of these otherwise latent intracellular proteases is required for the execution of most, if not all apoptosis in mammals, the presence of more than a dozen caspases presents a major challenge to our understanding of the precise function of individual caspases in vivo. Using a genetic approach, several groups have generated transgenic mice deficient in various caspases so as to investigate their physiological functions. In this review, we will discuss what these studies have revealed about the role of individual caspase in development, apoptosis, and inflammation, with a particular focus on the predictable phenotypes versus the surprises based on in vitro results, as well as the implications of these findings.

[PMID: 18729734]
To prolong cell viability and facilitate replication, viruses have evolved multiple mechanisms to inhibit the host apoptotic response. Cellular proteases such as caspases and serine proteases are instrumental in promoting apoptosis. Thus, these enzymes are logical targets for virus-mediated modulation to suppress cell death. Four major classes of viral inhibitors antagonize caspase function: serpins, p35 family members, inhibitor of apoptosis proteins, and viral FLICE-inhibitory proteins. Viruses also subvert activity of the serine proteases, granzyme B and HtrA2/Omi, to avoid cell death. The combined efforts of viruses to suppress apoptosis suggest that this response should be avoided at all costs. However, some viruses utilize caspases during replication to aid virus protein maturation, progeny release, or both. Hence, a multifaceted relationship exists between viruses and the apoptotic response they induce. Examination of these interactions contributes to our understanding of both virus pathogenesis and the regulation of apoptotic enzymes in normal cellular functions.

[PMID: 17181147]
Caspases are cysteine proteases that are essential for cytokine maturation and apoptosis. To facilitate the dissection of caspase function in vitro and in vivo, we have synthesized irreversible caspase inhibitors with biotin attached via linker arms of various lengths (12a-d) and a 2,4-dinitrophenyl labeled inhibitor (13). Affinity labeling of apoptotic extracts followed by blotting reveals that these affinity probes detect active caspases. Using the strong affinity of avidin for biotin, we have isolated affinity-labeled caspase 6 from apoptotic cytosolic extracts of cells overexpressing procaspase 6 by treatment with 12c, which contains biotin attached to the N(epsilon)-lysine of the inhibitor by a 22.5 A linker arm, followed by affinity purification on monomeric avidin-sepharose beads. Compound 13 has proven sufficiently cell permeable to rescue cells from apoptotic execution. These novel caspase inhibitors should provide powerful probes for the study of the active caspase proteome during apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo.

[PMID: 15450935]
The influence of p53 function and caspase 3 activity on the capacity of the antifolate, methotrexate, to promote senescence arrest and apoptotic cell death was investigated in breast tumor cells. In p53 wild-type, but caspase 3 deficient MCF-7 breast tumor cells, death of approximately 40% of the cell population was observed immediately after acute exposure to 10 microM methotrexate (the IC80 value for a 2 h drug exposure). There was no evidence of either DNA fragmentation, a sub G0 population or morphological alterations indicative of apoptosis; however, PARP cleavage was detected. Cell death was succeeded by growth arrest for at least 72 h--where arrest was characterized by expression of the senescence marker, beta-galactosidase. The response to methotrexate in MCF-7/E6 cells with attenuated p53 function was also primarily growth arrest--but lacking characteristics of senescence. In contrast, MCF-7 cells which expressed caspase 3 demonstrated a gradual and continuous loss of cell viability and unequivocal morphological evidence of apoptosis. DNA fragmentation indicative of apoptosis was also detected after exposure to methotrexate in p53 mutant MDA-MB231 breast tumor cells which also express caspase 3. Methotrexate-induced both p53 and p21waf1/cip1 in MCF-7 cells within 6 h; however, no significant DNA strand breakage was evident before 18 h, suggesting that the induction of p53 reflects a response to cellular stress other than DNA damage, such as nucleotide depletion. Overall, these studies suggest that the nature of the cellular response to methotrexate depends, in large part, on p53 and caspase function. p53 appears to be required for methotrexate-induced senescence, but not apoptosis, caspase 3 is required for DNA fragmentation and the morphological changes associated with apoptosis, while neither p53 nor caspase 3 are required for methotrexate-induced growth arrest. Furthermore, the senescence phenotype may occur in the absence of direct DNA damage.

[PMID: 22633487]
Members of the caspase family of cysteine proteases coordinate the morphological and biochemical events that typify apoptosis. However, neutralization of caspase activity in mammals fails to block death in response to most proapoptotic stimuli. This is because many cell death triggers provoke mitochondrial dysfunction upstream of caspase activation as a consequence of BAX/BAK channel opening. Although genetic or pharmacological inactivation of caspases fails to block cell death in most instances, it does convert the phenotype from apoptosis to necrosis. This has important implications for how the immune system responds to such cells, as necrotic cells provoke inflammation whereas apoptotic cells typically do not. Here, we propose an alternative perspective on apoptosis-associated caspase function by suggesting that these proteases are activated, not to kill, but to extinguish the proinflammatory properties of dying cells. This perspective unifies the mammalian caspase family as either positive or negative regulators of inflammation.

[PMID: 20846841]
Apoptosis and autophagic cell death occur during Drosophila development, and recent advances in their mechanisms have been made. As in other organisms, apoptosis is executed by caspases. In living cells, caspases are kept in check through a combination of IAP-binding and proteolytic inhibition. Once a cell commits to apoptosis, phagocytes recognize them through the immuno-receptor-like proteins Draper and Simu, and initiate corpse engulfment. Drosophila research has significantly contributed to the idea that autophagy is required for certain forms of cell death, and that caspase function in autophagic cell death depends on cell context. Surprisingly, the cell corpse engulfment receptor Draper also functions in autophagic cell death. These advances facilitate our understanding of the cell death mechanisms in development and disease.

[PMID: 17013363]
In living cells, apoptosis is effected through many different pathways. Programmed cell death (PCD) may proceed with the involvement of membrane receptors, mitochondria, granzyme B, or the endoplasmic reticulum. The mitochondrial pathway is initiated from within the cell as a consequence of changes in reductive potential. It may also be caused by DNA mutation or various disturbances in the cell's metabolism. In some cases, the intrinsic pathway is connected with the extrinsic one, generated by the cell's environment. The central organelle which initiates the intrinsic pathway is the mitochondrion. Changes in the permeability of the mitochondrial outer membrane cause an outflow of cytochrom c, which interacts with cytoplasmic factor Apaf-1 and procaspase 9, in the presence of ATP, and thus triggers the caspase cascade. Apart from cytochrom c, more than 40 regular or executor particles involved in apoptosis might be released from the mitochondrion. These include Smac/DIABLO, Omi/HTR A2, endonuclease G, AIF, and IAP. Moreover, regulatory functions are performed by Bcl-2 family proteins present in the cytoplasm that affect mitochondrial membrane permeability and by heat shock proteins (HSPs), both of these regulating caspase function. The phenomenon of programmed cell death is the main subject of research for many groups of scientists. There are still many aspects which need to be elucidated.

[PMID: 16622074]
We determined one mechanism by which the putative phosphoinositide-dependent kinase (PDK)-1 inhibitor 2-amino-N-{4-[5-(2-phenanthrenyl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl]-phenyl}acetamide (OSU-03012) killed primary human glioma and other transformed cells. OSU-03012 caused a dose-dependent induction of cell death that was not altered by p53 mutation, expression of ERBB1 vIII, or loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 function. OSU-03012 promoted cell killing to a greater extent in glioma cells than in nontransformed astrocytes. OSU-03012 and ionizing radiation caused an additive, caspase-independent elevation in cell killing in 96-h viability assays and true radiosensitization in colony formation assays. In a cell type-specific manner, combined exposure to OSU-03012 with a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2 inhibitor, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT inhibitors, or parallel molecular interventions resulted in a greater than additive induction of cell killing that was independent of AKT activity and caspase function. OSU-03012 lethality as a single agent or when combined with signaling modulators was not modified in cells lacking expression of BIM or of BAX/BAK. OSU-03012 promoted the release of cathepsin B from the lysosomal compartment and release of AIF from mitochondria. Loss of BH3-interacting domain (BID) function, overexpression of BCL(XL), and inhibition of cathepsin B function suppressed cell killing and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) release from mitochondria. In protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase-/- cells, the lethality of OSU-03012 was attenuated which correlated with reduced cleavage of BID and with suppression of cathepsin B and AIF release into the cytosol. Our data demonstrate that OSU-03012 promotes glioma cell killing that is dependent on endoplasmic reticulum stress, lysosomal dysfunction, and BID-dependent release of AIF from mitochondria, and whose lethality is enhanced by irradiation or by inhibition of protective signaling pathways.

[PMID: 16700650]
Caspases are key effector components of apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death. However, a large body of recent work has shown that caspase activity is necessary for several nonapoptotic cellular functions, such as proliferation, differentiation, survival, and the regulation of cytokine expression. In this review, we concentrate on the nonapoptotic functions of caspases and, in particular, on nonapoptotic roles of caspases in the immune system. Because of the involvement of caspases in promoting cell death, as well as cell proliferation and other nonapoptotic functions, studies involving the inhibition of caspases in vivo must be interpreted with caution.

[PMID: 11573949]
Nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) regulates the expression of various genes essential for cell survival. Here we demonstrate that suppression of NFkappaB nuclear import with SN50 peptide carrying the nuclear localization sequence (NLS) of the NFkappaB p50 subunit induces apoptosis in human peripheral blood T lymphocytes (T-PBL), which can be blocked with the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD.fmk. However, even when caspase function is blocked, the addition of SN50 induces irreversible cell loss due to the reduction in the mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DeltaPsim) followed by disruption of the cell membrane, hallmarks of necrosis. These observations demonstrate that although inhibition of NFkappaB nuclear translocation by SN50 peptide can induce caspase-dependent apoptosis in T-PBL, cell death may still proceed in the absence of functional caspase activity. The availability of downstream caspases appears to determine the mode of cell death in NFkappaB defective cells.

[PMID: 19473994]
Caspases are intracellular proteases that propagate programmed cell death, proliferation, and inflammation. Activation of caspases occurs by a conserved mechanism subject to strict cellular regulation. Once activated by a specific stimulus, caspases execute limited proteolysis of downstream substrates to trigger a cascade of events that culminates in the desired biological response. Much has been learned of the mechanisms that govern the activation and regulation of caspases, and this minireview provides an update of these areas. We also delineate substantial gaps in knowledge of caspase function, which can be approached by techniques and experimental paradigms that are currently undergoing development.

[PMID: 17082813]
The first proapoptotic caspase, CED-3, was cloned from Caenorhabditis elegans in 1993 and shown to be essential for the developmental death of all somatic cells. Following the discovery of CED-3, caspases have been cloned from several vertebrate and invertebrate species. As reviewed in other articles in this issue of Cell Death and Differentiation, many caspases function in nonapoptotic pathways. However, as is clear from the worm studies, the evolutionarily conserved role of caspases is to execute programmed cell death. In this article, I will specifically focus on caspases that function primarily in cell death execution. In particular, the physiological function of caspases in apoptosis is discussed using examples from the worm, fly and mammals.