[PMID: 22088535]
The mutation of the tyrosinase (TYR) gene results in oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1), an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. OCA1 is the most common type of OCA in the Chinese population. Hence, the TYR gene was tested in this study. We also delineated the genetic analysis of OCA1 in a Chinese family. Genomic DNA was isolated from the blood leukocytes of a proband and his family. Mutational analysis at the TYR locus by DNA sequencing was used to screen five exons, including the intron/exon junctions. A pedigree chart was drawn and the fundus of the eyes of the proband was also examined. A novel missense mutation p.I151S on exon 1, and homozygous TYR mutant alleles were identified in the proband. None of the mutants was identified among the 100 normal control subjects. Genetic analysis of the proband's wife showed normal alleles in the TYR gene. Thus, the fetus was predicated a carrier of OCA1 with a normal appearance. This study provided new information about a novel mutation, p.I151S, in the TYR gene in a Chinese family with OCA1. Further investigation of the proband would be helpful to determine the effects of this mutation on TYR activity.

[PMID: 21968110]
Mutation of the tyrosinase gene (TYR) causes oculocutaneous albinism, type 1 (OCA1), a condition characterized by reduced skin and eye melanin pigmentation and by vision loss. The retinal pigment epithelium influences postnatal visual development. Therefore, increasing ocular pigmentation in patients with OCA1 might enhance visual function. There are 2 forms of OCA1, OCA-1A and OCA-1B. Individuals with the former lack functional tyrosinase and therefore lack melanin, while individuals with the latter produce some melanin. We hypothesized that increasing plasma tyrosine concentrations using nitisinone, an FDA-approved inhibitor of tyrosine degradation, could stabilize tyrosinase and improve pigmentation in individuals with OCA1. Here, we tested this hypothesis in mice homozygous for either the Tyrc-2J null allele or the Tyrc-h allele, which model OCA-1A and OCA-1B, respectively. Only nitisinone-treated Tyrc-h/c-h mice manifested increased pigmentation in their fur and irides and had more pigmented melanosomes. High levels of tyrosine improved the stability and enzymatic function of the Tyrc-h protein and also increased overall melanin levels in melanocytes from a human with OCA-1B. These results suggest that the use of nitisinone in OCA-1B patients could improve their pigmentation and potentially ameliorate vision loss.

[PMID: 9170158]
Many specific gene products are sequentially made and utilized by the melanocyte as it emigrates from its embryonic origin, migrates into specific target sites, synthesizes melanin(s) within a specialized organelle, transfers pigment granules to neighboring cells, and responds to various exogenous cues. A mutation in many of the respective encoding genes can disrupt this process of melanogenesis and can result in hypopigmentary disorders. Following are examples highlighting this scenario. A subset of neural crest derived cells emigrate from the dorsal surface of the neural tube, become committed to the melanoblast lineage, and are targeted along the dorsal lateral pathway. The specific transcription factors PAX3 and MITF (microphthalmia transcription factor) appear to play a regulatory role in early embryonic development of the pigment system and in associated diseases (the Waardenburg syndromes). During the subsequent development and commitment of the melanoblast, concomitant expression of the receptors for fibroblasts growth factor (FGFR2), endothelin-B (EDNRB), and steel factor (cKIT) also appears essential for the continued survival of migrating melanoblasts. Lack or dysfunction of these receptors result in Apert syndrome, Hirschsprung syndrome and piebaldism, respectively. Once the melanocyte resides in its target tissue, a plethora of melanocyte specific enzymes and structural proteins are coordinately expressed to form the melanosome and to convert tyrosine to melanin within it. Mutations in the genes encoding these proteins results in a family of congenital hypopigmentary diseases called oculocutaneous albinism (OCA). The tyrosinase gene family of proteins (tyrosinase, TRP1, and TRP2) regulate the type of eumelanin synthesized and mutations affecting them result in OCA1, OCA3, and slaty (in the murine system), respectively. The P protein, with 12 transmembrane domains localized to the melanosome, has no assigned function as of yet but is responsible for OCA2 when dysfunctional. There are other genetically based syndromes, phenotypically resembling albinism, in which the synthesis of pigmented melanosomes, as well as specialized organelles of other cell types, is compromised. The Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) and the Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) are two such disorders. Eventually, the functional melanocyte must be maintained in the tissue throughout life. In some cases it is lost either normally or prematurely. White hair results in the absence of melanocytes repopulating the germinative hair follicle during subsequent anagen stages. Vitiligo, in contrast, results from the destruction and removal of the melanocyte in the epidermis and mucous membranes.

[PMID: 8651291]
Most types of human oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) result from mutations in the gene for tyrosinase (OCA1) or the P protein (OCA2), although other types of OCA have been described but have not been mapped to specific loci. Melanocytes were cultured from an African-American with OCA, who exhibited the phenotype of Brown OCA, and his normal fraternal twin. Melanocytes cultured from the patient with OCA and the normal twin appeared brown versus black, respectively. Melanocytes from both the patient with OCA and the normal twin demonstrated equal amounts of NP-40-soluble melanin; however, melanocytes from the patient with OCA contained only 7% of the amount of insoluble melanin found from the normal twin. Tyrosinase- related protein-1 (TRP-1) was not detected in the OCA melanocytes by use of various anti-TRP-1 probes. Furthermore, transcripts for TRP-1 were absent in cultured OCA melanocytes. The affected twin was homozygous for a single-bp deletion in exon 6, removing an A in codon 368 and leading to a premature stop at codon 384. Tyrosine hydroxylase activity of the OCA melanocytes was comparable to controls when assayed in cell lysates but was only 30% of controls when assayed in intact cells. We conclude that this mutation of the human TRP-1 gene affects its interaction with tyrosinase, resulting in dysregulation of tyrosinase activity, promotes the synthesis of brown versus black melanin, and is responsible for a third genetic type of OCA in humans, which we classify as "OCA3."

[PMID: 12829739]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) type 4 is a newly identified human autosomal recessive hypopigmentary disorder that disrupts pigmentation in the skin, hair and eyes. Three other forms of OCA have been previously characterized, each resulting from the aberrant processing and/or sorting of tyrosinase, the enzyme critical to pigment production in mammals. The disruption of tyrosinase trafficking occurs at the level of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in OCA1 and OCA3, but at the post-Golgi level in OCA2. The gene responsible for OCA4 is the human homologue of the mouse underwhite (uw) gene, which encodes the membrane-associated transporter protein (MATP). To characterize OCA4, we investigated the processing and sorting of melanogenic proteins in primary melanocytes derived from uw/uw mice and from wild-type mice. OCA4 melanocytes were found to be constantly secreted into the medium dark vesicles that contain tyrosinase and two other melanogenic enzymes, Tyrp1 (tyrosinase-related protein 1) and Dct (DOPAchrome tautomerase); this secretory process is not seen in wild-type melanocytes. Although tyrosinase was synthesized at comparable rates in wild-type and in uw-mutant melanocytes, tyrosinase activity in uw-mutant melanocytes was only about 20% of that found in wild-type melanocytes, and was enriched only about threefold in melanosomes compared with the ninefold enrichment in wild-type melanocytes. OCA4 melanocytes showed a marked difference from wild-type melanocytes in that tyrosinase was abnormally secreted from the cells, a process similar to that seen in OCA2 melanocytes, which results from a mutation of the pink-eyed dilution (P) gene. The P protein and MATP have 12 transmembrane regions and are predicted to function as transporters. Ultrastructural analysis shows that the vesicles secreted from OCA4 melanocytes are mostly early stage melanosomes. Taken together, our results show that in OCA4 melanocytes, tyrosinase processing and intracellular trafficking to the melanosome is disrupted and the enzyme is abnormally secreted from the cells in immature melanosomes, which disrupts the normal maturation process of those organelles. This mechanism explains the hypopigmentary phenotype of these cells and provides new insights into the involvement of transporters in the normal physiology of melanocytes.

[PMID: 23112997]
Oculocutaneous albinism type1 (OCA1) is characterized by the absence of melanin pigmentation. The mutation on TYR gene makes OCA1 as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. In this study, we delineated the genetic analysis of an Iranian family with four members affected with OCA1. Clinical exams and paraclinical test were performed for all patients of the case family, also proband, her husband, and her parents. Pedigree chart was drawn too. We extracted the genomic DNA from the leukocytes of seven members of the family. Haplotype analysis at the TYR locus was done and informative microsatellite markers were employed. In order to amplify the entire coding region of the TYR gene, for bidirectional direct sequencing mutation analysis, eight sets of primers were used. Our patients were diagnosed as affected with Oculocutaneous albinism type1a. Analysis of pedigree pattern showed an autosomal recessive inheritance. Analysis with different markers in chromosomes 5, 6, 9, 11 and 15 showed that cause of albinism in our case family was on chromosome 11 (D11S1887 marker was informative). The results offered a more developed method of diagnosis for OCA1 carrier identification and genetic counseling for OCA1 affected families as well; also submit a sample of mutation involved with oculocutaneous albinism in Iran. Genetic analysis is necessary for determining the type of albinism in an individual patient.

[PMID: 24934919]
The TYR gene (MIM #6069333) is located at position 11q14.3 on the human chromosome, and encodes tyrosinase, which is expressed in melanocytes and controls the biosynthesis of melanin. Most TYR mutations eliminate the activity of tyrosinase, preventing melanocytes from producing any melanin throughout life. People with this form of albinism have white hair, light-coloured eyes and very pale skin. Some mutations in TYR reduce but do not completely eliminate tyrosinase activity, and allow some melanin to be produced. We report a Pakistani family with four members affected by oculocutaneous albinism (OCA). Blood samples were collected from all affected individuals, normal siblings and their parents. Genomic DNA was extracted, and sequence analysis of all the coding exons and adjacent intronic sequences of TYR was performed, which identified a novel missense substitution (p.Ile198Thr). Sequencing of TYR in 90 unrelated healthy individuals showed no sequence variant at this location. Our study expands the mutational spectrum of OCA1.

[PMID: 11574907]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) affects approximately 1/20,000 people worldwide. All forms of OCA exhibit generalized hypopigmentation. Reduced pigmentation during eye development results in misrouting of the optic nerves, nystagmus, alternating strabismus, and reduced visual acuity. Loss of pigmentation in the skin leads to an increased risk for skin cancer. Two common forms and one infrequent form of OCA have been described. OCA1 (MIM 203100) is associated with mutations of the TYR gene encoding tyrosinase (the rate-limiting enzyme in the production of melanin pigment) and accounts for approximately 40% of OCA worldwide. OCA2 (MIM 203200), the most common form of OCA, is associated with mutations of the P gene and accounts for approximately 50% of OCA worldwide. OCA3 (MIM 203290), a rare form of OCA and also known as "rufous/red albinism," is associated with mutations in TYRP1 (encoding tyrosinase-related protein 1). Analysis of the TYR and P genes in patients with OCA suggests that other genes may be associated with OCA. We have identified the mouse underwhite gene (uw) and its human orthologue, which underlies a new form of human OCA, termed "OCA4." The encoded protein, MATP (for "membrane-associated transporter protein") is predicted to span the membrane 12 times and likely functions as a transporter.

[PMID: 15381243]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a heterogeneous congenital disorder. Tyrosinase is a key enzyme in melanin biosynthesis, and tyrosinase gene mutations cause the OCA1 subtype. This study was intended evaluate the frequency and details of tyrosinase gene mutations in Japanese OCA patients. We examined nine non-consanguineous OCA families, sequenced the tyrosinase gene of the patients and also confirmed a splicing site mutation using exon trapping system. Tyrosinase gene mutations were identified in five out of nine OCA families (55%). IVS2-10deltt-7t-a was present in 3 out of 18 alleles in three families (16%), P310insC was present in three alleles in three families (16%) and R278X was found in three alleles (16%), including those in one heterozygous and one compound homozygous patient. G97V (290 G-T) was found in 1 out of 18 alleles, and we could not find G97V in the mutation database. We have added this mutation as 9th mutation of Japanese OCA1 patients. In 8 of 18 alleles, four families, no tyrosinase mutations were identified. They were presumed not to be OCA1, but other subtypes of OCA. Exon trapping system demonstrated IVS2-10deltt-7t-a mutation generated the abnormal splicing site, and inserted the codon 4 bases in mRNA level resulting in premature termination codon downstream. This study provided new information about OCA1 mutations, and highlights the requirement of broader detailed search to make precise diagnosis of OCA.

[PMID: 16767664]
Mutation analysis and prenatal gene diagnosis for the mutated tyrosinase (TYR) gene in two families with oculocutaneous albinism type I (OCA1). To define the fetus genotypes and gene mutation sites, the PCR and sequencing techniques were applied to amplify and analyze the regions of exon, exon-intron and promoter of TYR gene in probands and their parents of 2 families. The patient or proband of family 1 showed as a compound heterozygote with mutants R278X and 929insC. However, the fetus did not get any one of the two mutations, and so was with a normal genotype and phenotype. The parents of proband in family 2 were heterozygous with IVS4+ 3A>T or G253E respectively, but their fetus was heterozygous only with IVS4+3A>T but without G253E, and so was a carrier as his father. In the mainland of China, the prenatal gene diagnosis of OCA1 is reported for the first time.

[PMID: 23242301]
Oculocutaneus albinism is a pigment-related inherited disorder characterized by hypopigmentation of the skin, hair and eyes, foveal hypoplasia and low vision. To date, 230 mutations in the TYR gene have been reported as responsible for oculocutaneus albinism type 1 worldwide. TYR gene encodes the enzyme tyrosinase involved in the metabolic pathway of melanin synthesis. Mutations were identified in the TYR gene as responsible for oculocutaneous albinism type 1 in five Colombian individuals, and a new ophthalmic system was tested that corrected visual defects and symptoms in a patient with oculocutaneous albinism. Samples were taken from 5 individuals, four of whom belong to a single family, along with a fifth individual not related to the family. Five exons in the TYR gene were sequenced to search for the gene carriers in the family and in the non-related individual. In addition, clinical ophthalmological evaluation and implementation of an new oculo-visual system was undertaken. A G47D and 1379delTT mutation was identified in the family. The unrelated individual carried a compound heterozygote for the G47D and D42N mutations. The oculo-visual corrective system was able to increase visual acuity and to diminish the nystagmus and photophobia. This is the first study in Colombia where albinism mutations are reported. The methods developed will enable future molecular screening studies in Colombian populations.

[PMID: 27775880]
Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the tyrosinase gene. Two subtypes of OCA1 have been described: severe OCA1A with complete absence of tyrosinase activity and less severe OCA1B with residual tyrosinase activity. Here, we characterize the recombinant human tyrosinase intramelanosomal domain and mutant variants, which mimic genetic changes in both subtypes of OCA1 patients. Proteins were prepared using site-directed mutagenesis, expressed in insect larvae, purified by chromatography, and characterized by enzymatic activities, tryptophan fluorescence, and Gibbs free energy changes. The OCA1A mutants showed very low protein expression and protein yield and are enzymatically inactive. Mutants mimicking OCA1B were biochemically similar to the wild type, but exhibited lower specific activities and protein stabilities. The results are consistent with clinical data, which indicates that OCA1A mutations inactivate tyrosinase and result in severe phenotype, while OCA1B mutations partially inactivate tyrosinase and result in OCA1B albinism.

[PMID: 10571953]
Type I oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1) is an autosomal recessive disorder, which is caused by the reduction or the absence of tyrosinase activity in melanocytes of the skin, hair and eyes. Although tyrosinase mutations of OCA1 have been extensively analyzed in most populations worldwide, there is no systemic study of OCA1 mutation in Chinese patients. By use of single strand conformation polymorphism and direct sequencing, we had detected 21 mutant alleles out of 24 OCA1 chromosomes screened (87.5%). Detected mutant alleles include one splicing site, three insertion/deletion and five missense mutations, of which the splicing site nucleotide alteration (IVS 1-3C>G) and two each of the insertion/deletion (232-233 ins GGG and 861-862 del TT) and missense mutations (Cys 289 Gly and Trp 400 Leu) are novel. The ins/del mutations accounts for about 37.5% in Chinese OCA1 alleles. The 232-233 ins GGG, one of the novel mutations, was found to be most frequent (25%) among the OCA1 alleles in Chinese. Through this study, we found that while some of the OCA mutant alleles were identified in other populations, ethnic difference still exists. Hum Mutat 14:542, 1999.

[PMID: 25093188]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by either complete lack of or a reduction of melanin biosynthesis in the melanocytes. The OCA1A is the most severe type with a complete lack of melanin production throughout life, while the milder forms OCA1B, OCA2, OCA3, and OCA4 show some pigment accumulation over time. Mutations in TYR, OCA2, TYRP1, and SLC45A2 are mainly responsible for causing oculocutaneous albinism. Recently, two new genes SLC24A5 and C10orf11 are identified that are responsible to cause OCA6 and OCA7, respectively. Also a locus has been mapped to the human chromosome 4q24 region which is responsible for genetic cause of OCA5. In this paper, we summarized the clinical and molecular features of OCA genes. Further, we reviewed the screening of pathological mutations of OCA genes and its molecular mechanism of the protein upon mutation by in silico approach. We also reviewed TYR (T373K, N371Y, M370T, and P313R), OCA2 (R305W), TYRP1 (R326H and R356Q) mutations and their structural consequences at molecular level. It is observed that the pathological genetic mutations and their structural and functional significance of OCA genes will aid in development of personalized medicine for albinism patients.

[PMID: 10713140]
Tyrosinase is a copper-containing enzyme that regulates melanin biosynthesis in mammals. Mutations at a single N-glycosylation sequon of tyrosinase have been reported to be responsible for oculocutaneous albinism type IA in humans, characterized by inactive tyrosinase and the total absence of pigmentation. To probe the role that each N-glycosylation site plays in the synthesis of biologically active tyrosinase, we analyzed the calnexin mediated folding of tyrosinase N-glycosylation mutants. We have determined that four of the six potential N-glycosylation sites, including that associated with albinism, are occupied. Analysis of the folding pathway and activity of 15 tyrosinase mutants lacking one or more of the occupied N-glycosylation sites shows that glycans at any two N-glycosylation sites are sufficient to interact with calnexin and give partial activity, but a specific pair of sites (Asn(86) and Asn(371)) is required for full activity. The mutants with less than two N-glycosylation sites do not interact with calnexin and show a complete absence of enzyme activity. Copper analysis of selected mutants suggests that the observed partial activity is due to two populations with differential copper content. By correlating the degree of folding with the activity of tyrosinase, we propose a local folding mechanism for tyrosinase that can explain the mechanism of inactivation of tyrosinase N-glycosylation mutants found in certain pigmentation disorders.

[PMID: 16907708]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by an abnormally low amount of melanin in the eyes, skin and hair, and associated with common developmental abnormalities of the eye. Defects in the tyrosinase gene (TYR) cause a common type of OCA, known as oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1). The molecular basis of OCA has been studied extensively in different population groups, but very little information is available on Indian patients. Our investigation covering thirteen ethnic groups of India, some representing >20 million people, revealed that among 25 OCA families 12 were affected with OCA1, and that these cases were primarily due to founder mutations in TYR. We detected nine mutations and eight SNPs in TYR, of which six mutations (five point mutations & one gross deletion) were novel. In contrast to most reports describing compound heterozygotes, the presence of homozygotes in 10 out of the 12 pedigrees underscores the lack of intermixing between these ethnic groups in India. Haplotype analysis suggested a few founder chromosomes causing the disease in the majority of the patients. Direct detection of the mutations prevalent in specific ethnic groups could be used for carrier detection and genetic counselling.

[PMID: 7886000]
Mutations of the tyrosinase gene associated with a partial or complete loss of enzymatic activity are responsible for tyrosinase related oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1). A large number of mutations have been identified and their analysis has provided insight into the biology of tyrosinase and the pathogenesis of these different mutations. Missense mutations produce their effect on the activity of an enzyme by altering an amino acid at a specific site. The location of these mutations in the peptide can be used to indicate potential domains important for enzymatic activity. Missense mutations of the tyrosinase polypeptide cluster in four regions, suggesting that these are important functional domains. Two of the potential domains involve the copper binding sites while the others are likely involved in substrate binding. More critical analysis of the copper binding domain of tyrosinase can be gained by analyzing the structure of hemocyanin, a copper-binding protein with a high degree of homology to tyrosinase in the copper binding region. This analysis indicates a single catalytic site in tyrosinase for all enzymatic activities.

[PMID: 27537549]
Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1), caused by pathogenic variations in the tyrosinase gene (TYR), is the most frequent and severe form of hypopigmentary disorder worldwide. While OCA1A manifests as a complete loss of melanin pigment, patients with OCA1B show residual pigmentation of the skin, hair and eyes. Limited experimental evidence suggests retention of TYR in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causes OCA1 pathogenesis. However, a comprehensive functional analysis of TYR missense variations and correlation with genotype is lacking. Functional characterization of nonsynonymous tyrosinase variants in patients with OCA1 reported in the Albinism Database, dbSNP and the published literature, and an attempt to correlate them with reported and predicted phenotypes. Thirty-four reported missense variants of TYR were subcloned by site-directed mutagenesis, and the dual-enzyme activities of the variant proteins were compared with the wild-type. The degree of ER retention was also checked for each of the variants through endoglycosidase H (Endo H) digestion followed by immunoprecipitation and densitometric analysis. Functional studies revealed one reported OCA1A variation with nearly 100% enzyme activity, 10 OCA1B variants lacking any enzyme activity, eight nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with ~30-70% of enzyme activity, and three SNPs that completely lacked activity altogether. The Endo H assay corroborated these results. Loss of enzyme activity of TYR variants was completely in agreement with ER retention across all variants examined. The results of the assay clearly established that determination of the biological activity of identified variants in patients with OCA is essential to correlate the identified suspect genotype with the obvious phenotype of the disease.

[PMID: 1905879]
Mutations in the gene for the pigment-producing enzyme tyrosinase are responsible for type IA (tyrosinase-negative) oculocutaneous albinism (OCA). Most reported mutations have been single base substitutions. We now report three different frameshift mutations in three unrelated individuals with type IA OCA. The first individual has a single base deletion within a series of five guanidines, resulting in a premature stop codon in exon I on one allele and a missense mutation at codon 382 in exon III on the homologous allele. The second individual is a genetic compound of two separate frameshift mutations, including both the same exon I single base deletion found in the first individual and a deletion of a thymidine-guanidine pair, within the sequence GTGTG, forming a termination codon (TAG) in exon I on the homologous allele. The third individual has a single base insertion in exon I on one allele and a missense mutation at codon 373 in exon III on the homologous allele. The two missense mutations occur within the copper Bbinding region and may interfere with either copper binding to the enzyme or oxygen binding to the copper. These five different mutations disrupt tyrosinase function and are associated with a total lack of melanin biosynthesis.

[PMID: 24721949]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a congenital genetic disorder characterized by defects in melanin production. OCA type 1 (OCA1) is the most serious and common type of OCA. This study characterized mutations associated with OCA1 in a series of Chinese patients. We recruited 41 unrelated patients with OCA and 100 healthy subjects from the Chinese Han population. Genomic DNA was extracted from their blood samples. Mutational analysis of tyrosinase (TYR) genes was conducted using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing, specifically to test the 100 control subjects and exclude the possibility of polymorphism. Mutational analysis and bioinformatics study were performed in TYR mutations. Among the 24 (58.5%) patients with OCA1, 21 different TYR mutations were identified, including three previously unidentified alleles (PUAs): one frameshift mutation (c.216delA) and two missense mutations (A241T and N364K). The proband mutation A241T carries three possible mutations in complex OCA. The findings of this study expand current knowledge and data of mutations associated with OCA1 in China and allow us to estimate or explore the mutation spectrum and relative frequencies of the TYR gene in the Chinese population.

[PMID: 20447099]
To identify the sequence variants of the tyrosinase (TYR) gene in Chinese families with oculocutaneous albinism. Three families with oculocutaneous albinism type 1 and 95 unrelated healthy Chinese individuals with normal pigmentation were screened for mutations in the TYR gene by direct sequencing. Computational algorithms were used to characterize the biological significance of the mutants. Four previously reported mutations (R299C, R299H, W400L and frame-shift c.930insC) and one novel mutation (F214del) were identified, and probands had homozygous or compound heterozygous TYR mutant alleles. None of the mutants were identified among the 95 normal control subjects. Computational analysis predicted that the R299C mutant inactivates the tyrosinase enzyme by misfolding of protein tertiary structure and/or retention of the misfolded tyrosinase within the endoplasmic reticulum, and F214del causes dysfunction of tyrosine enzyme by affecting the copper binding sites and altering substrate orientation and electronic transfers during catalytic reactions for melanosynthesis. We have identified five different TYR mutations, including one novel mutation, which caused oculocutaneous albinism type 1 in Chinese. Further analysis of the patients will be useful to determine the effects of these mutations on the tyrosinase activities.

[PMID: 9242509]
Tyrosinase (EC 1.14.18.1) is a copper-containing enzyme that catalyzes several reactions in the biosynthesis of melanin pigments and is deficient in patients with type I oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1). Tyrosinase is thought to bind two copper ions, one at each of two conserved sequence motifs, termed CuA and CuB, but to date this has been directly proved only for the Neurospora and mushroom enzyme. Here, we demonstrate that mammalian tyrosinase directly binds copper, and that the CuA and CuB sites are both required for copper binding and for catalytic activity. We show that in human tyrosinase, copper binding by the CuB site is most likely coordinated by residues His363, His367, and His389, and that copper binding may be cooperative, with copper binding at one site facilitating copper binding by the other site. Furthermore, correct folding of the tyrosinase polypeptide appears to be necessary for copper binding, and a number of human OCA1 mutations disrupt copper binding and thus catalytic function of tyrosinase.

[PMID: 27829221]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by either complete lack of or a reduction in melanin biosynthesis in the skin, hair, and eyes. OCA1, the most common and severe type, is caused by mutations in the tyrosinase (TYR) gene. In this study, we report a Chinese family with two members affected by OCA. Blood samples were collected from all family members. Genomic DNA was isolated from blood leukocytes, and all coding exons and adjacent intronic sequences of the TYR gene were examined for mutation analysis using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based sequencing. A pedigree chart was drawn, and clinical examinations and paraclinical tests were performed. Compound heterozygous mutations in TYR (c.832C>T and c.929_930insC, which resulted in p.Arg278* and p.Arg311Lysfs*7, respectively) were identified in the two patients with milky skin, white hair, photophobia, and reduced visual acuity, while other family members only carried one of two heterozygous mutations. In addition, a homozygous missense mutation c.814G>A (p.Glu272Lys) in the solute carrier family 45 member 2 (SLC45A2) gene was found in both patients and unaffected family members, suggesting that this may not be a causative mutation. The findings of this study expand the mutational spectrum of OCA. Compound heterozygous mutations (c.832C>T and c.929_930insC) in the TYR gene may be responsible for partial clinical manifestations of OCA, while the homozygous missense mutation c.814G>A (p.Glu272Lys) in the SLC45A2 gene may not be associated with OCA.

[PMID: 11641241]
Various types of oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) are associated with reduced pigmentation in the skin, hair, and eyes that results from mutations in genes involved in melanin synthesis. Immortal mouse melanocyte lines (melan-a, melan-b, and melan-c) provide opportune models with which to investigate the etiology of two different types of OCA (types I and III), which arise from mutations in Tyr and Tyrp1, respectively. We compared intracellular processing, sorting, and degradation of tyrosinase and Tyrp1, and the effects on their catalytic function and melanin synthesis, in these wild-type and mutant melanocytes. A mutation in either Tyr or Tyrp1 increased the time of association of tyrosinase and Tyrp1 with calnexin and Bip, which in turn resulted in the retention of these mutant products in the ER. A mutation in either gene selectively enhanced the duration and efficiency of chaperone interactions (even with the wild-type protein in the mutant melanocytes) and markedly slowed their transport to melanosomes. These results show that OCA1 and OCA3 are (in some cases, at least) ER retention diseases wherein a mutation in one melanogenic protein affects the maturation and stability of the other in the melanogenic pathway.

[PMID: 25216246]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive disorders resulting from mutations of the tyrosinase (TYR) gene and presents with either complete or partial absence of pigment in the skin, hair and eyes due to a defect in an enzyme involved in the production of melanin. In this study, mutations in the TYR gene of 30 unrelated Iranian OCA1 patients and 100 healthy individuals were examined using PCR-sequencing. Additionally, in order to predict the possible effects of new mutations on the structure and function of tyrosinase, these mutations were analyzed by SIFT, PolyPhen and I-Mutant 2 software. Here, two new pathogenic p.C89S and p.H180R mutations were detected in two OCA1 patients. Moreover, the R402Q and S192Y variants, which are common non-pathogenic polymorphisms, were detected in 17.5% and 35% of the patients, respectively. The outcome of this study has extended the genotypic spectrum of OCA1 patients, which paves the way for more efficient carrier detection and genetic counseling.

[PMID: 19208379]
Mutations in the gene for tyrosinase, the key enzyme in melanin synthesis, are responsible for oculocutaneous albinism type 1, and more than 100 mutations of this gene have been identified. The c.1205G > A variant of the tyrosinase gene (rs1126809) predicts p.R402Q and expression studies show thermolabile enzyme activity for the variant protein. The Q402 allele has been associated with autosomal recessive ocular albinism when it is in trans with a tyrosinase gene mutation associated with oculocutaneous albinism type 1. We have identified 12 families with oculocutaneous albinism type 1 that exhibit segregation of the c.1205G > A variant with a known pathologic mutation on the homologous chromosome, and demonstrate no genetic association between autosomal recessive oculocutaneous albinism and the Q402 variant. We conclude that the codon 402 variant of the tyrosinase gene is not associated with albinism.

[PMID: 15146472]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) in man may be caused by mutations within the tyrosinase gene (TYR) resulting in OCA1. Analysing patients with recessively inherited albinism we found DNA variations in 82 unrelated individuals. 53 out of 78 mutations and polymorphisms revealed by this study are not published previously. The changes include 68 nucleotide substitutions resulting in amino acid changes, stop mutations and polymorphisms as well as four nucleotide insertions and six deletions. Furthermore, we found an accumulation of three to five mutations in 17 patients with OCA1.

[PMID: 22875490]
To evaluate the feasibility of genetic analysis of tyrosinase gene (TYR) in oculocutaneous albinism type I (OCA1). Mutation analysis and prenatal genetic diagnosis of TYR gene for seven pedigrees with OCA1 were performed. PCR was used to amplify the exons, exon-intron boundaries and promoter of the TYR gene in the probands and/or their parents. The products were further analyzed by direct sequencing. Prenatal genetic diagnoses were performed by chorionic villus sampling after the genotypes of the probands or their parents were determined. Compound heterozygous mutations were detected in all pedigrees, which included 9 mutations, namely R76Q, c.232insGGG, R116X, R278X, R299H, c.929-930insC, IVS2-11delTT, Q399X and W400L. Among these, R76Q and Q399X were identified for the first time. Seven families have requested prenatal diagnoses. One fetus was detected with double mutations of TYR gene, and the parents have decided to have therapeutic abortion. Two fetuses did not carry the mutations identified in the probands, whilst other four fetuses were carriers of heterozygous mutations. Six families decided to carry on with the pregnancies. And the neonates did not show any symptoms of OCA after birth. Direct sequencing of the TYR gene is helpful for genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis and carriers screening of OCA1.

[PMID: 15937636]
Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) results from mutations in the tyrosinase gene, which lead to partial or complete loss of activity of the corresponding enzyme. A large number of mutations have been identified worldwide, providing insight into the pathogenesis of the disorder. We performed ophthalmic and dermatological exams on 30 Lebanese subjects with oculocutaneous albinism, then screened for mutations in the tyrosinase gene in an effort to establish the molecular basis of the disorder in our population and correlate it with phenotypic findings. The five exons of the gene together with the exon-intron boundaries and part of the promoter region were sequenced. Mutations were found in a total of 14 patients (47%) while no mutation was identified in the sequenced regions in 53% of patients. Fourteen different mutations were identified of which eight were novel while six had been previously reported. Mutations were mainly seen in patients with clinical findings, suggestive of OCA1A (64% of patients with OCA1A versus 25% of patients with OCA1B); therefore, the absence of mutations in some of the other patients may indicate the involvement of other genes.

[PMID: 11284711]
Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from mutations of the tyrosinase gene (TYR). To elucidate the molecular basis of OCA1 phenotypes, we analysed the early processing and maturation of several different types of mutant tyrosinase with various degrees of structural abnormalities (i.e. two large deletion mutants, two missense mutants that completely destroy catalytic function and three missense mutants that have a temperature-sensitive phenotype). When expressed in COS7 cells, all mutant tyrosinases were sensitive to endoglycosidase H digestion, and immunostaining showed their localization in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and their failure to be sorted further to their target organelles. Pulse-chase experiments showed that all mutant tyrosinases were retained by calnexin in the ER and that they were degraded at similarly rapid rates, which coincided with their dissociation from calnexin. Temperature-sensitive mutant enzymes were sorted more efficiently at 31 degrees C than at 37 degrees C, and their degradation was accelerated at 37 degrees C compared with 31 degrees C. Thus in contrast to the current concept that mutant tyrosinases are transported to melanosomes but are functionally inactive there, our results suggest that mutant tyrosinases may not be transported to melanosomes in the first place. We conclude that a significant component of mutant tyrosinase malfunction in OCA1 results from their retention and degradation in the ER compartment. This quality-control process is highly sensitive to minimal changes in protein folding, and so even relatively minor mutations in peripheral sequences of the enzyme not involved with catalytic activity may result in a significant reduction of functional enzyme in melanosomes.

[PMID: 12753405]
Research on human albinism has been central to many of the major discoveries in human genetics. These include the first evidence that Mendel's rules of genetic segregation apply to humans, first published in 1903. Contrary to initial thought that albinism is caused by mutations in a single gene, we now know that the genetics of albinism are complex. The complexity of albinism was hinted at, in early publications, but has only recently been fully appreciated with the advent of molecular techniques. Currently, 12 different genes have been identified, that when mutated, result in a different type of albinism. Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1), resulting from mutations of the tyrosinase gene, is genetically and biochemically the best understood type of albinism. Though much of the research in albinism has involved OCA1, there are many unanswered questions about OCA1 and albinism, in general. The next 100 yr should still provide many surprises as did the first 100 yr.

[PMID: 17355913]
Tyrosinase (TYR) is a multifunctional copper-containing glycoenzyme (approximately 80 kDa), which plays a key role in the rate-limiting steps of the melanin biosynthetic pathway. This membrane-bound protein, possibly evolved by the fusion of two different copper-binding proteins, is mainly expressed in epidermal, ocular and follicular melanocytes. In the melanocytes, TYR functions as an integrated unit with other TYR-related proteins (TYRP1, TYRP2), lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) and melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptors; thus forming a melanogenic complex. Mutations in the TYR gene (TYR, 11q14-21, MIM 606933) cause oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1, MIM 203100), a developmental disorder having an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. In addition, TYR can act as a modifier locus for primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) and it also contributes significantly in the eye developmental process. Expression of TYR during neuroblast division helps in later pathfinding by retinal ganglion cells from retina to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. However, mutation screening of TYR is complicated by the presence of a pseudogene-TYR like segment (TYRL, 11p11.2, MIM 191270), sharing approximately 98% sequence identity with the 3' region of TYR. Thus, in absence of a full-proof strategy, any nucleotide variants identified in the 3' region of TYR could actually be present in TYRL. Interestingly, despite extensive search, the second TYR mutation in 15% of the OCA1 cases remains unidentified. Several possible locations of these "uncharacterized mutations" (UCMs) have been speculated so far. Based on the structure of TYR gene, its sequence context and some experimental evidences, we propose two additional possibilities, which on further investigations might shed light on the molecular basis of UCMs in TYR of OCA1 patients; (i) partial deletion of the exons 4 and 5 region of TYR that is homologous with TYRL and (ii) variations in the polymorphic GA complex repeat located between distal and proximal elements of the human TYR promoter that can modulate the expression of the gene leading to disease pathogenesis.

[PMID: 11041207]
Through the last century there has been a steady progression in our understanding of the biology of melanin biosynthesis. Much of this work includes the analysis of coat color mutations of the mouse and albinism in man. Our understanding has been greatly enhanced in the last 10 years, as the molecular pathogenesis of albinism has been better understood. Different mutations of the tyrosinase gene (TYR) , and their association with oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) has provided insight into the biology of tyrosinase, including protein trafficking and structure/function analysis. Several questions still remain, including cryptic mutations that affect tyrosinase activity and the minimum amount of pigment required for normal optic development. The next 10 years should prove just as exciting as the last.

[PMID: 25577957]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a heterogeneous autosomal recessive genetic disorder that affects melanin synthesis. OCA results in reduced or absent pigmentation in the hair, skin and eyes. Type 1 OCA (OCA1) is the result of tyrosinase (TYR) gene mutations and is a severe disease type. This study investigated TYR mutations in a Chinese cohort with OCA1. This study included two parts: patient genetic study and prenatal genetic diagnosis. A total of 30 OCA1 patients were subjected to TYR gene mutation analysis. Ten pedigrees were included for prenatal genetic diagnosis. A total of 100 unrelated healthy Chinese individuals were genotyped for controls. The coding sequence and the intron/exon junctions of TYR were analysed by bidirectional DNA sequencing. In this study, 20 mutations were identified, four of which were novel. Of these 30 OCA1 patients, 25 patients were TYR compound heterozygous; two patients carried homozygous TYR mutations; and three were heterozygous. Among the ten prenatally genotyped fetuses, three fetuses carried compound heterozygous mutations and seven carried no mutation or only one mutant allele of TYR and appeared normal at birth. In conclusion, we identified four novel TYR mutations and showed that molecular-based prenatal screening to detect TYR mutations in a fetus at risk for OCA1 provided essential information for genetic counselling of couples at risk.

[PMID: 26763160]
A feral donkey population (Equus asinus), living in the Asinara National Park (an island north-west of Sardinia, Italy), includes a unique white albino donkey subpopulation or colour morph that is a major attraction of this park. Disrupting mutations in the tyrosinase (TYR) gene are known to cause recessive albinisms in humans (oculocutaneous albinism Type 1; OCA1) and other species. In this study, we analysed the donkey TYR gene as a strong candidate to identify the causative mutation of the albinism of these donkeys. The TYR gene was sequenced from 13 donkeys (seven Asinara white albino and six coloured animals). Seven single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified. A missense mutation (c.604C>G; p.His202Asp) in a highly conserved amino acid position (even across kingdoms), which disrupts the first copper-binding site (CuA) of functional protein, was identified in the homozygous condition (G/G or D/D) in all Asinara white albino donkeys and in the albino son of a trio (the grey parents had genotype C/G or H/D), supporting the recessive mode of inheritance of this mutation. Genotyping 82 donkeys confirmed that Asinara albino donkeys had genotype G/G whereas all other coloured donkeys had genotype C/C or C/G. Across-population association between the c.604C>G genotypes and the albino coat colour was highly significant (P = 6.17E-18). The identification of the causative mutation of the albinism in the Asinara white donkeys might open new perspectives to study the dynamics of this putative deleterious allele in a feral population and to manage this interesting animal genetic resource.

[PMID: 15635296]
Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) patients demonstrate a partial or total lack of melanin in the skin, hair and eye. OCA1 is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder caused by mutations in the TYR gene located at chromosome band 11q14-q25. The purpose of this study was to carry out genetic analysis of OCA1 in Indian families. Genomic DNA was isolated from blood leukocytes of all the individuals in this study. Haplotype analysis was performed at the TYR locus using informative microsatellite markers. Eight sets of primers were used to amplify the entire coding region of the TYR gene for bidirectional direct sequencing mutation analysis. Two novel deletions (c.937del8, c.1379del2) and a previously known nonsense mutation (R278X) in the TYR gene were identified from a total of 8 oculocutaneous albinism patients in India. Our study reports the distribution of two novel frameshift and a previously reported nonsense mutations in four OCA1 families from the Indian population. These findings will contribute to the development of a diagnostic method for OCA1 carrier status and genetic counseling for OCA1 affected families.

[PMID: 10094567]
Albinism, caused by a deficiency of melanin pigment in the skin, hair, and eye (oculocutaneous albinism [OCA]), or primarily in the eye (ocular albinism [OA]), results from mutations in genes involved in the biosynthesis of melanin pigment. The lack of melanin pigment in the developing eye leads to fovea hypoplasia and abnormal routing of the optic nerves. These changes are responsible for the nystagmus, strabismus, and reduced visual acuity common to all types of albinism. Mutations in six genes have been reported to be responsible for different types of oculocutaneous and ocular albinism, including the tyrosinase gene (TYR) and OCA1 (MIM# 203100), the OCA2 gene and OCA2 (MIM# 203200), the tyrosinase-related protein-1 gene (TYRP1) and OCA3 (MIM# 203290), the HPS gene and Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (MIM# 203300), the CHS gene (CHS1), and Chediak-Higashi syndrome (MIM# 214500), and the X-linked ocular albinism gene and OA1 (MIM#300500). The function of only two of the gene products is known tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related protein-1 both of which are enzymes in the melanin biosynthetic pathway. Continued mutational analysis coupled with function/structure studies should aid our understanding of the function of the remaining genes and their role in albinism. Mutation and polymorphism data on these genes are available from the International Albinism Center Albinism Database web site (http://www.cbc.umn.edu/tad).

[PMID: 22097729]
To explore the patients' genotypes and the mutation spectrum of Tyrosinase (TYR) gene and the effects on protein structure and function in oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequencing techniques were applied to amplify and analyze the regions of exon, exonintron and promoter of TYR gene of 15 OCA1 probands and some of their parents. The protein structure and function were forecasted and analyzed by bioinformatics software. Sequencing result showed 11 kinds of mutations, including 5 missense mutations (W400L, R299H, E294K, R77Q and K142M), 3 nonsense mutations (R116X, R278X and G295X), 2 insertion mutation (929insC and 232insGGG) and 1 splice site mutation (IVS1-3C > G). The nosogenesis was related to the change of protein structure and function in four pathological mutations. It seemes that W400L is the frequent mutations, which accounted for about 30.0% in Chinese mainland OCA1 alleles. It is doable to make some reasonable interpretation about TYR gene nosogenesis by bioinformatics method.

[PMID: 11153699]
The sequence of the tyrosinase (Tyr) gene coding tracts has been obtained for the gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla). The five exons of the gene were sequenced in three gorillas and in a normally pigmented human. The tyrosinase gene has been found to be a very conserved locus with a very low substitution rate. Some nucleotide and amino acid differences were found between the gorilla and human tyrosinase coding sequences. One of the gorillas included in the study is the only known case of albinism in a gorilla ('Snowflake'). Mutations of the TYR gene lead to Oculocutaneous Albinism type 1 (OCA1), the most common type of albinism in humans (OMIM accession number 203100). The TYR gene encodes the tyrosinase enzyme (E.C. 1.14.18.1), whose activity was found to be completely lacking in 'Snowflake', indicating that a mutation in the Tyr gene is the likely cause of his albinism. Nonetheless, no nucleotide changes were detected that could account for the lack of Tyr product or tyrosinase activity in Snowflake, and explanations of these findings are discussed.

[PMID: 25919014]
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive disorder. The most common type OCA1 and OCA2 are caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the tyrosinase gene (TYR) and OCA2 gene, respectively. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the molecular basis of oculocutaneous albinism in four Chinese families. Four non-consanguineous OCA families were included in the study. The TYR and OCA2 genes of all individuals were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), sequenced and compared with a reference database. Four patients with a diagnosis of oculocutaneous albinism, presented with milky skin, white or light brown hair and nystagmus. Genetic analyses demonstrated that patient A was compound heterozygous for c.1037-7T.A, c.1037-10_11delTT and c.1114delG mutations in the TYR gene; patient B was heterozygous for c.593C>T and c.1426A>G mutations in the OCA2 gene, patients C and D were compound heterozygous mutations in the TYR gene (c.549_550delGT and c.896G>A, c.832C>T and c.985T>C, respectively). The heterozygous c.549_550delGT and c.1114delG alleles in the TYR gene were two novel mutations. Interestingly, heterozygous members in these pedigrees who carried c.1114delG mutations in the TYR gene or c.1426A>G mutations in the OCA2 gene presented with blond or brown hair and pale skin, but no ocular disorders when they were born; the skin of these patients accumulated pigment over time and with sun exposure. This study expands the mutation spectrum of oculocutaneous albinism. It is the first time, to the best of our knowledge, to report that c.549_550delGT and c.1114delG mutations in the TYR gene were associated with OCA. The two mutations (c.1114delG in the TYR gene and c.1426A>G in the OCA2 gene) may be responsible for partial clinical manifestations of OCA.

[PMID: 15760344]
Tyrosinase serves as a key enzyme in the synthesis of melanin. In humans mutations in the TYR gene are associated with type 1 oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1) that leads to reduced or absent pigmentation of skin, hair and eye. Various mutations causing OCA in man, mouse, rabbit and cattle have been identified throughout the Tyrosinase gene including nonsense, missense, frameshift and splice site alterations. Here we report a missense substitution at codon R299H in exon 2 of the Tyr gene in the albino Wistar rat. As this very exchange has already been described in OCA patients, our findings reinforce the significance of this region for normal catalytic activity of tyrosinase protein.

[PMID: 10671066]
Mutations in the human tyrosinase gene produce tyrosinase-related oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1, MIM #203100). Tyrosinase is a copper containing enzyme and is responsible for catalyzing the rate limiting step in melanin biosynthesis, the hydroxylation of tyrosine to dopaquinone. We report 13 new mutations in the tyrosinase gene associated with OCA1A (without pigment) and OCA1B (with pigment) including 9 missense mutations (H19Q, R521, R77C, G97R, C289R, L312V, P313R, F340L and H404P), two nonsense mutations (W80X and R116X) and two frameshift mutations (53delG and 223 delG). Our previous work has defined clusters of missense mutations that appear to represent functional domains of the enzyme, and three of the missense mutations fall into these clusters including two (F340L and H404P) that flank the copper B bindng site and the missense mutation R52I that is located in the amino terminal end cluster of the protein. The G97R missense mutation is the first identified within the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like sequence and the H19Q missense mutation alters the cleavage site of the signal peptide sequence. Mutational analysis can provide a definitive diagnosis of the type of OCA as well as help structure/function analysis.

[PMID: 10671067]
Mutations in the human P gene lead to oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2, MIM #203200), the most common type of albinism in humans. The P gene encodes a 110 kDa protein that is associated with melonosomal membranes and contains 12 potential membrane spanning domains. The specific function of the P protein is currently unknown. We report 7 new mutations in the P gene associated with OCA2. This includes 6 missense mutations (S86R, C112F, A368V, T592I, A724P and A787V) and one frameshift mutation (1047del7). We also report 8 polymorphisms including one amino acid substitution, D/A257. We and others have found many polymorphisms of the P gene in the coding region, several of which result in amino acid substitutions, making molecular diagnosis problematic. In contrast to this is the tyrosinase gene associated with OCA1, with a limited number of polymorphic variations in the coding region. There is also no apparent clustering of P gene missense mutations in contrast to the clustering observed by the tyrosinase gene missense mutations that define functional domains of the protein. Further mutational analysis is needed to help define the critical functional domains of the P protein and to allow a definitive diagnosis of OCA2.

[PMID: 24392141]
Tyrosinase (TYR) catalyzes the rate-limiting, first step in melanin production and its gene (TYR) is mutated in many cases of oculocutaneous albinism (OCA1), an autosomal recessive cause of childhood blindness. Patients with reduced TYR activity are classified as OCA1B; some OCA1B mutations are temperature-sensitive. Therapeutic research for OCA1 has been hampered, in part, by the absence of purified, active, recombinant wild-type and mutant human enzymes. The intra-melanosomal domain of human tyrosinase (residues 19-469) and two OCA1B related temperature-sensitive mutants, R422Q and R422W were expressed in insect cells and produced in T. ni larvae. The short trans-membrane fragment was deleted to avoid potential protein insolubility, while preserving all other functional features of the enzymes. Purified tyrosinase was obtained with a yield of >1 mg per 10 g of larval biomass. The protein was a monomeric glycoenzyme with maximum enzyme activity at 37C and neutral pH. The two purified mutants when compared to the wild-type protein were less active and temperature sensitive. These differences are associated with conformational perturbations in secondary structure. The intramelanosomal domains of recombinant wild-type and mutant human tyrosinases are soluble monomeric glycoproteins with activities which mirror their in vivo function. This advance allows for the structure - function analyses of different mutant TYR proteins and correlation with their corresponding human phenotypes; it also provides an important tool to discover drugs that may improve tyrosinase activity and treat OCA1.