[PMID: 21824072]
Peripheral blood eosinophilia and eosinophilic lung inflammation are common in a variety of pulmonary conditions, including eosinophilic pneumonia and asthma, hypereosinophilic syndrome and Churg-Strauss syndrome. Therapy in most of these clinical entities consists of long-term treatment with systemic corticosteroids, which is not always successful and has substantial side-effects. Interest has increased considerably regarding alternative corticosteroid-sparing "smart" regimens in these diseases that target IL-5, an important regulator of eosinophilic development and function. To date, two humanized monoclonal antibodies, mepolizumab and reslizumab, have been developed that bind to human IL-5. In addition a new monoclonal antibody (MEDI-563) has been recently developed targeting the IL-5 receptor. This review will investigate the current status on IL-5 targeted therapy and related patents regarding eosinophil-driven respiratory diseases, primarily eosinophilic asthma but also CSS and HES. Recent advances and information from clinical trials will be presented in a way that will allow the reader to approach the role of the eosinophil in the lung diseases presented in this review.

[PMID: 20021987]
Therapy principles of the last decade and recent advances in the research of polynuclear eosinophil have led to a new approach in the hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), with important consequences on the development of new and effective therapies. HES is defined by persistent and marked eosinophilia and eosinophil-related organ damage in the absence of any evident cause of hypereosinophilia. Two variants of HES have been characterized, with different prognosis and possible associations with malignant diseases such as myeloid leukemia or T-cell lymphomas. The lymphocytic variant of HES (L-HES) is characterized by the presence of T cell clones, IL-5 expression and possible progression to T-cell lymphoma. Besides steroid therapy, the anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody mepolizumab is considered as a target therapy for L-HES. The myeloproliferative variant of HES (M-HES) is associated with an increased risk of myeloid leukemia and good response to anti-tyrosine-kinase therapy. The imatinib target is a kinase resulting from an 800-kb deletion on chromosome 4. The fusion gene Fip1-like 1-platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (FIP1L1-PDGFRA) has been validated as a marker of response to anti-tyrosine-kinase therapy. Early identification of HES variants is crucial for the rapid introduction of early and appropriately adjusted therapy.

[PMID: 25199060]
Many patients with severe asthma require regular treatment with oral glucocorticoids despite the use of high-dose inhaled therapy. However, the regular use of systemic glucocorticoids can result in serious and often irreversible adverse effects. Mepolizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to and inactivates interleukin-5, has been shown to reduce asthma exacerbations in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. In a randomized, double-blind trial involving 135 patients with severe eosinophilic asthma, we compared the glucocorticoid-sparing effect of mepolizumab (at a dose of 100 mg) with that of placebo administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks for 20 weeks. The primary outcome was the degree of reduction in the glucocorticoid dose (90 to 100% reduction, 75 to less than 90% reduction, 50 to less than 75% reduction, more than 0 to less than 50% reduction, or no decrease in oral glucocorticoid dose, a lack of asthma control during weeks 20 to 24, or withdrawal from treatment). Other outcomes included the rate of asthma exacerbations, asthma control, and safety. The likelihood of a reduction in the glucocorticoid-dose stratum was 2.39 times greater in the mepolizumab group than in the placebo group (95% confidence interval, 1.25 to 4.56; P=0.008). The median percentage reduction from baseline in the glucocorticoid dose was 50% in the mepolizumab group, as compared with no reduction in the placebo group (P=0.007). Despite receiving a reduced glucocorticoid dose, patients in the mepolizumab group, as compared with those in the placebo group, had a relative reduction of 32% in the annualized rate of exacerbations (1.44 vs. 2.12, P=0.04) and a reduction of 0.52 points with respect to asthma symptoms (P=0.004), as measured on the Asthma Control Questionnaire 5 (in which the minimal clinically important difference is 0.5 points). The safety profile of mepolizumab was similar to that of placebo. In patients requiring daily oral glucocorticoid therapy to maintain asthma control, mepolizumab had a significant glucocorticoid-sparing effect, reduced exacerbations, and improved control of asthma symptoms. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; SIRIUS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01691508.).

[PMID: 19929788]
Eosinophils are major pro-inflammatory cells that make a major contribution to diseases that affect the upper and lower airways, skin and gastrointestinal tract. Interleukin (IL)-5 is central to their maturation and release from the bone marrow together with their subsequent accumulation and activation in the tissues. Mepolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) with potent IL-5 neutralizing effects that represents a potential treatment for eosinophilic diseases. Several clinical trials with mepolizumab reported that treatment of patients with mild to severe asthma resulted in a substantial reduction in blood and sputum eosinophil numbers. However, clinical outcomes were disappointing as there were no significant effects on airway hyper-reactivity or the late asthmatic reaction to inhaled allergen challenge. More recently two studies, one in in patients with refractory eosinophilic asthma with a history of recurrent severe exacerbations and the other in patients with persistent sputum eosinophilia and symptoms despite systemic treatment with prednisone treatment, reported that monthly intravenous mepolizumab reduced sputum/blood eosinophilia, asthma exacerbations together with improvments in quality of life. Mepolizumab also appears to be an effective therapy for hypereosinophilic syndrome while other trials have shown efficacy of mepolizumab therapy in eosinophilic esophagitis. This review will consider the current status of the clinical development of mepolizumab for diseases with a significant eosinophilic component to their pathology.

[PMID: 22092535]
Interleukin-5 is a Th2 homodimeric cytokine involved in the differentiation, maturation, migration, development, survival, trafficking and effector function of blood and local tissue eosinophils, in addition to basophils and mast cells. The IL-5 receptor (IL-5R) consists of an IL-5-specific α subunit that interacts in conformationally dynamic ways with the receptor's βc subunit, an aggregate of domains it shares with binding sites of IL-3 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. IL-5 and IL-5R drive allergic and inflammatory immune responses characterizing numerous diseases, such as asthma, atopic dermatitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases, hyper-eosinophilic syndrome, Churg-Strauss syndrome and eosinophilic nasal polyposis. Although corticosteroid therapy is the primary treatment for these diseases, a substantial number of patients exhibit incomplete responses and suffer side-effects. Two monoclonal antibodies have been designed to neutralize IL-5 (mepolizumab and reslizumab). Both antibodies have demonstrated the ability to reduce blood and tissue eosinophil counts. One additional monoclonal antibody, benralizumab (MEDI-563), has been developed to target IL-5R and attenuate eosinophilia through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. All three monoclonal antibodies are being clinically evaluated. Antisense oligonucleotide technology targeting the common βc IL-5R subunit is also being used therapeutically to inhibit IL-5-mediated effects (TPI ASM8). Small interfering RNA technology has also been used therapeutically to inhibit the expression of IL-5 in animal models. This review summarizes the structural interactions between IL-5 and IL-5R and the functional consequences of such interactions, and describes the pre-clinical and clinical evidence supporting IL-5R as a therapeutic target.

[PMID: 11496242]
Allergic respiratory diseases are characterized by large numbers of eosinophils and their reactive products in airways and blood; these are believed to be involved in progressive airway damage and remodeling. IL-5 is the principal cytokine for eosinophil maturation, differentiation, and survival. Mepolizumab (SB-240563), a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) specific for human IL-5, is currently in clinical trials for treatment of asthma. The purpose of this study was to characterize the pharmacologic activity and long-term safety profile of an anti--human IL-5 mAb to support clinical trials in asthmatic patients. Naive and Ascaris suum -sensitive cynomolgus monkeys received various dose levels of mepolizumab and were monitored for acute and chronic pharmacologic and toxic responses. To support preclinical safety assessment, cynomolgus monkey IL-5 was cloned, expressed, and characterized. Although monkey IL-5 differs from human IL-5 by 2 amino acids (Ala27Gly and Asn40His), mepolizumab has comparable inhibitory activity against both monkey IL-5 and human IL-5. In A suum--sensitive monkeys, single doses of mepolizumab significantly reduced blood eosinophilia, eosinophil migration into lung airways, and levels of RANTES and IL-6 in lungs for 6 weeks. However, mepolizumab did not affect acute bronchoconstrictive responses to inhaled A suum. In an IL-2--induced eosinophilia model (up to 50% blood eosinophilia), 0.5 mg/kg mepolizumab blocked eosinophilia by >80%. Single-dose and chronic (6 monthly doses) intravenous and subcutaneous toxicity studies in naive monkeys found no target organ toxicity or immunotoxicity up to 300 mg/kg. Monkeys did not generate anti-human IgG antibodies. Monthly mepolizumab doses greater than 5 mg/kg caused an 80% to 100% decrease in blood and bronchoalveolar lavage eosinophils lasting 2 months after dosing, and there was no effect on eosinophil precursors in bone marrow after 6 months of treatment. Eosinophil decreases correlated with mepolizumab plasma concentrations (half-life = 13 days). These studies demonstrate that chronic antagonism of IL-5 by mepolizumab in monkeys is safe and has the potential, through long-term reductions in circulating and tissue-resident eosinophils, to be beneficial therapy for chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases.

[PMID: 16184589]
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is a rare disorder that is characterized by persistent and marked eosinophilia combined with organ system dysfunction. HES has substantial clinical heterogeneity but can be fatal without treatment, especially in patients who present with a myelodysplastic variant of the disorder. Although the pathophysiology of HES is poorly defined, dysregulation of cytokines (interleukin 5 [IL-5], IL-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]) responsible for the maturation of eosinophils is a primary feature. Of these cytokines, IL-5 appears to have the greatest role in the regulation of eosinophil maturation. There is no Food and Drug Administration-approved treatment for HES as yet; current strategies are designed to lower blood eosinophils and attempt to limit end-organ damage. Historically, corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents have been the mainstays of therapy, with biological response modifiers such as interferon-alpha also effective in some patients. However, despite improvements in survival, available agents have significant limitations in terms of efficacy, tolerability, and long-term toxicity. More recently, new agents directed at specific targets in the pathogenesis of HES have been developed. These include imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and more recently, mepolizumab, an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody. In a small case series of patients, these agents have been shown to produce hematological and clinical responses in patients with HES, although they may be effective in different subsets of patients. These targeted therapies have the potential to improve clinical outcomes and to further the understanding the pathophysiology of this difficult-to-treat condition.

[PMID: 14699394]
IL-5 is a cytokine critically involved in regulating several aspects of eosinophils including their production, activation, and tissue recruitment. As such, IL-5 may be involved in the pathogenesis of hypereosinophilic syndromes, a group of poorly treated diverse disorders characterized by sustained peripheral blood and/or tissue eosinophilia. We aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of a humanized blocking monoclonal antibody against IL-5 (mepolizumab) in patients with several forms of hyper-eosinophilic syndromes. We performed an open-label trial of anti-IL-5 in which 3 intravenous doses (10 mg/kg, maximum 750 mg) were administered at 4-week intervals to 4 patients with hypereosinophilic syndromes (defined by peripheral blood and/or tissue eosinophilia). The effects of treatment on safety, eosinophil levels (in peripheral blood and/or diseased tissue), pulmonary function, and quality of life were measured over a 28-week period. Anti-IL-5 was well tolerated in all patients and lowered peripheral blood eosinophil counts despite ongoing systemic glucocorticoid therapy. The decline in circulating eosinophil counts was sustained for at least 12 weeks after the last dose of anti-IL-5. In addition, anti-IL-5 improved clinical and quality of life measurements. In one patient with striking tissue eosinophilia (eosinophilic esophagitis), anti-IL-5 resulted in a 10-fold reduction in tissue eosinophil levels. These results suggest that anti-IL-5 is safe, effective in lowering eosinophil levels, and has potential glucocorticoid-sparing effects in patients with a variety of hyper-eosinophilic syndromes. As such, anti-IL-5 may have significant therapeutic potential for hypereosinophilic syndromes.

[PMID: 21346698]
The hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) are rare disorders characterized by sustained, nonreactive hypereosinophilia with eosinophilia-associated organ damage/dysfunction. The most frequent clinical manifestations include skin abnormalities, cardiac failure, and neurological deficits, but disease presentations differ between patients and every organ may be affected. HES patients are currently categorized according to 2 classifications: World Health Organization 2008 and Working Classification 2006, but both have several limitations in daily practice. Despite advances in our understanding of HES pathogenesis, more than 50% of patients are still diagnosed with idiopathic disease, while the remaining subset has myeloproliferative (M-HES) or lymphocytic (L-HES) variants. In 10% to 20% of patients with M-HES, a unique genetic marker, fip1-like1/platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (FIP1L1-PDGFRA), was identified. It has dramatically changed disease management since imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, appeared to be highly effective in these patients with up to 100% of long-term hematological response. L-HES is associated with abnormal T-cell populations secreting excessive amounts of eosinophilopoietic cytokines, mainly interleukin 5 (IL-5). Recently, encouraging results of treatment with monoclonal antibody neutralizing IL-5, mepolizumab, have been published. Corticosteroids remain the first-line therapeutic option for patients who do not have FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion transcript, but treatment discontinuation leads to the recurrence of eosinophilia. This review reflects the current state of knowledge on the pathogenesis and therapy of HES. The shortcomings of current definitions and classifications are also discussed.

[PMID: 24424174]
Eosinophilia-associated myopathies are clinically and pathologically heterogeneous conditions characterized by the presence of peripheral and/or muscle eosinophilia. There are at least three distinct subtypes: focal eosinophilic myositis, eosinophilic polymyositis, and eosinophilic perimyositis. Infiltrating eosinophils are not always identified in conventional muscle histologic examination, but the eosinophil major basic protein, whose extracellular diffusion is considered a hallmark of eosinophilic cytotoxicity, is usually detected by immunostaining in muscle biopsy. Whereas focal eosinophilic myositis seems to be a benign and isolated condition, and perimyositis is usually related with the inflammatory infiltrate due to fasciitis, eosinophilic polymyositis can be associated with muscular dystrophy or be a feature of multiorgan hypereosinophilic syndrome. Muscle biopsy remains the cornerstone for the diagnosis. Parasitic infections, connective tissue disorders, hematologic and non-hematologic malignancies, drugs, and toxic substances are the main etiologic agents of eosinophilia-associated myopathy. However, in some cases, no known etiologic factor is identified, and these are considered idiopathic. Glucocorticoids are the mainstay therapy in idiopathic forms. Imatinib and mepolizumab, a humanized anti-interleukin 5 monoclonal antibody, may be useful in patients with eosinophilic myositis as part of a hypereosinophilic syndrome.

[PMID: 14523040]
Eosinophil-derived TGF-beta has been implicated in remodeling events in asthma. We hypothesized that reduction of bronchial mucosal eosinophils with anti-IL-5 would reduce markers of airway remodeling. Bronchial biopsies were obtained before and after three infusions of a humanized, anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody (mepolizumab) in 24 atopic asthmatics in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The thickness and density of tenascin, lumican, and procollagen III in the reticular basement membrane (RBM) were quantified immunohistochemically by confocal microscopy. Expression of TGF-beta1 mRNA by airway eosinophils was assessed by in situ hybridization, and TGF-beta1 protein was measured in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid by ELISA. At baseline, airway eosinophil infiltration and ECM protein deposition was increased in the RBM of asthmatics compared with nonasthmatic controls. Treating asthmatics with anti-IL-5 antibody, which specifically decreased airway eosinophil numbers, significantly reduced the expression of tenascin, lumican, and procollagen III in the bronchial mucosal RBM when compared with placebo. In addition, anti-IL-5 treatment was associated with a significant reduction in the numbers and percentage of airway eosinophils expressing mRNA for TGF-beta1 and the concentration of TGF-beta1 in BAL fluid. Therefore eosinophils may contribute to tissue remodeling processes in asthma by regulating the deposition of ECM proteins.

[PMID: 19264687]
Eosinophilic inflammation, which may be a consequence of interleukin-5 action, is a characteristic feature of some forms of asthma. However, in three previous clinical trials involving patients with asthma, blockade of this cytokine did not result in a significant improvement in outcomes. We studied the prednisone-sparing effect of mepolizumab, a monoclonal antibody against interleukin-5, in a rare subgroup of patients who have sputum eosinophilia and airway symptoms despite continued treatment with prednisone. Secondary objectives were to examine its effect on the number of eosinophils in sputum and blood, symptoms, and airflow limitation. In this randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial involving patients with persistent sputum eosinophilia and symptoms despite prednisone treatment, we assigned 9 patients to receive mepolizumab (administered in five monthly infusions of 750 mg each) and 11 patients to receive placebo. There were 12 asthma exacerbations in 10 patients who received placebo, 9 of whom had sputum eosinophilia at the time of exacerbation. In comparison, only one patient who received mepolizumab had an asthma exacerbation, and this episode was not associated with sputum eosinophilia (P=0.002). Patients who received mepolizumab were able to reduce their prednisone dose by a mean (+/-SD) of 83.8+/-33.4% of their maximum possible dose, as compared with 47.7+/-40.5% in the placebo group (P=0.04). The use of mepolizumab was associated with a significant decrease in the number of sputum and blood eosinophils. Improvements in eosinophil numbers, asthma control, and forced expiratory volume in 1 second were maintained for 8 weeks after the last infusion. There were no serious adverse events. Mepolizumab reduced the number of blood and sputum eosinophils and allowed prednisone sparing in patients who had asthma with sputum eosinophilia despite prednisone treatment. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00292877.)

[PMID: 19264686]
Exacerbations of asthma are associated with substantial morbidity and mortality and with considerable use of health care resources. Preventing exacerbations remains an important goal of therapy. There is evidence that eosinophilic inflammation of the airway is associated with the risk of exacerbations. We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of 61 subjects who had refractory eosinophilic asthma and a history of recurrent severe exacerbations. Subjects received infusions of either mepolizumab, an anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody (29 subjects), or placebo (32) at monthly intervals for 1 year. The primary outcome measure was the number of severe exacerbations per subject during the 50-week treatment phase. Secondary outcomes included a change in asthma symptoms, scores on the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ, in which scores range from 1 to 7, with lower values indicating more severe impairment and a change of 0.5 unit considered to be clinically important), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) after use of a bronchodilator, airway hyperresponsiveness, and eosinophil counts in the blood and sputum. Mepolizumab was associated with significantly fewer severe exacerbations than placebo over the course of 50 weeks (2.0 vs. 3.4 mean exacerbations per subject; relative risk, 0.57; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.32 to 0.92; P=0.02) and with a significant improvement in the score on the AQLQ (mean increase from baseline, 0.55 vs. 0.19; mean difference between groups, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.08 to 0.62; P=0.02). Mepolizumab significantly lowered eosinophil counts in the blood (P<0.001) and sputum (P=0.002). There were no significant differences between the groups with respect to symptoms, FEV(1) after bronchodilator use, or airway hyperresponsiveness. The only serious adverse events reported were hospitalizations for acute severe asthma. Mepolizumab therapy reduces exacerbations and improves AQLQ scores in patients with refractory eosinophilic asthma. The results of our study suggest that eosinophils have a role as important effector cells in the pathogenesis of severe exacerbations of asthma in this patient population. (Current Controlled Trials number, ISRCTN75169762.)

[PMID: 21958585]
Approximately 85% of nasal polyps (NPs) in white subjects are characterized by prominent eosinophilia. IL-5 is the key driver of eosinophilic differentiation and survival. We sought to investigate the therapeutic potential of inhibiting IL-5 with a humanized mAb as treatment for severe nasal polyposis. Thirty patients with severe nasal polyposis (grade 3 or 4 or recurrent after surgery) refractory to corticosteroid therapy were randomized in a double-blind fashion to receive either 2 single intravenous injections (28 days apart) of 750 mg of mepolizumab (n = 20) or placebo (n = 10). Change from baseline in NP score was assessed monthly until 1 month after the last dose (week 8). Computed tomographic scans were also performed at week 8. Twelve of 20 patients receiving mepolizumab had a significantly improved NP score and computed tomographic scan score compared with 1 of 10 patients receiving placebo at week 8 versus baseline. Mepolizumab achieved a statistically significant reduction in NP size for at least 1 month after dosing in 12 of 20 patients. IL-5 inhibition is a potential novel therapeutic approach in patients with severe eosinophilic nasal polyposis.

[PMID: 12704348]
Eosinophils develop from CD34(+) progenitors under the influence of IL-5. Atopic asthmatic individuals have increased numbers of mature eosinophils and eosinophil pro-genitors within their bone marrow and bronchial mucosa. We have previously reported that anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody treatment decreases total bone marrow and bronchial mucosal eosinophil numbers in asthma. Using an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody, we examined the role of IL-5 in eosinophil development within the bone marrow and bronchial mucosa in asthma. Blood, bone marrow, and airway mucosal biopsy specimens were examined before and after anti-IL-5 (mepolizumab) treatment of asthmatic individuals in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Numbers of mature and immature eosinophils were measured by histologic stain (bone marrow myelocytes, metamyelocytes, and mature eosinophils), flow cytometry (bone marrow and blood CD34(+)/IL-5Ralpha(+) cells), enumeration of bone marrow-derived eosinophil/basophil colony-forming units in methylcellulose culture, and sequential immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization (bronchial mucosal CD34(+)/IL-5Ralpha mRNA(+) cells). Mepolizumab decreased mature eosinophil numbers in the bone marrow by 70% (P =.017) in comparison with placebo and decreased numbers of eosinophil myelocytes and metamyelocytes by 37% (P =.006) and 44% (P =.003), respectively. However, mepolizumab had no effect on numbers of blood or bone marrow CD34(+), CD34(+)/IL-5Ralpha(+) cells, or eosinophil/basophil colony-forming units. There was a significant decrease in bronchial mucosal CD34(+)/IL-5Ralpha mRNA(+) cell numbers in the anti-IL-5 treated group (P =.04). These data suggest that anti-IL-5 therapy might induce partial maturational arrest of the eosinophil lineage in the bone marrow. The reduction in airway CD34(+)/IL-5 mRNA(+) cell numbers suggests that IL-5 might also be required for local tissue eosinophilopoiesis.

[PMID: 12870444]
GlaxoSmithKline (formerly SmithKline Beecham) is developing mepolizumab (SB-240563), a monoclonal antibody directed against IL-5, as a potential treatment for asthma and atopic dermatitis. Phase II trials in asthma were underway by April 1998 and by March 2002, phase II trials had also been initiated in atopic dermatitis.

[PMID: 24685200]
Despite the administration of appropriate treatment, a high number of patients with asthma remain uncontrolled. This suggests the need for alternative treatments that are effective, safe and selective for the established asthma phenotypes, especially in patients with uncontrolled severe asthma. The most promising options among the new asthma treatments in development are biological therapies, particularly those monoclonal antibodies directed at selective targets. It should be noted that the different drugs, and especially the new biologics, act on very specific pathogenic pathways. Therefore, determination of the individual profile of predominant pathophysiological alterations of each patient will be increasingly important for prescribing the most appropriate treatment in each case. The treatment of severe allergic asthma with anti-IgE monoclonal antibody (omalizumab) has been shown to be effective in a large number of patients, and new anti-IgE antibodies with improved pharmacodynamic properties are being investigated. Among developing therapies, biologics designed to block certain pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-5 (mepolizumab) and IL-13 (lebrikizumab), have a greater chance of being used in the clinic. Perhaps blocking more than one cytokine pathway (such as IL-4 and IL-13 with dulipumab) might confer increased efficacy of treatment, along with acceptable safety. Stratification of asthma based on the predominant pathogenic mechanisms of each patient (phenoendotypes) is slowly, but probably irreversibly, emerging as a tailored medical approach to asthma, and is becoming a key factor in the development of drugs for this complex respiratory syndrome.

[PMID: 21348536]
Mepolizumab is a fully humanized monoclonal antibody (IgG1/κ) targeting human interleukin-5 (IL-5), a key haematopoietin needed for eosinophil development and function. Mepolizumab blocks human IL-5 from binding to the α-chain of the IL-5 receptor complex on the eosinophil cell surface, thereby inhibiting IL-5 signalling. The pharmacokinetics of mepolizumab have been evaluated in clinical studies at doses of 0.05-10 mg/kg and at 250 mg, 750 mg and 1500 mg. Mepolizumab was eliminated slowly, with mean initial and terminal phase half-life values of approximately 2 and 20 days, respectively. Plasma clearance ranged from 0.064 to 0.163 mL/h/kg and steady-state volume of distribution ranged from 49 to 93 mL/kg. Pharmacokinetics were dose proportional and time independent. Estimates based on a two-compartment intravenous infusion model from patients with asthma or healthy subjects following single doses predicted mepolizumab plasma concentrations in multiple-dose studies involving patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), asthma or eosinophilic oesophagitis. The absolute bioavailability of mepolizumab was 64-75% following subcutaneous injection and 81% following intramuscular injection. Peripheral blood eosinophil levels decreased in healthy subjects and patients with HES, asthma, eosinophilic oesophagitis or atopic dermatitis after intravenous mepolizumab infusion and subcutaneous injection. Reductions in eosinophil counts in oesophagus, sputum, skin, bone marrow, nasal lavage fluid and/or bronchial mucosa after treatment with mepolizumab were observed in placebo-controlled studies in various indications. The relationship between percentage change from baseline in blood eosinophils and mepolizumab plasma concentrations was described by an indirect pharmacological response model. The estimated maximal decrease in eosinophil count was approximately 85% from baseline and the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) was approximately 0.45 μg/mL.

[PMID: 15175031]
Anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody (mepolizumab) reduces baseline bronchial mucosal eosinophils and deposition of extracellular matrix proteins in the reticular basement membrane in mild asthma. Here we report the effect of anti-IL-5, in the same patients, on allergen-induced eosinophil accumulation, tenascin deposition (as a marker of repair and remodelling) and the magnitude of the late-phase allergic cutaneous reaction. Skin biopsies were performed in 24 atopic subjects at allergen- and diluent-injected sites before 6 and 48 h after, three infusions of a humanized, monoclonal antibody against IL-5 (mepolizumab) using a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled design. Anti-IL-5 significantly inhibited eosinophil infiltration in 6 h and 48 h skin biopsies as well as the numbers of tenascin immunoreactive cells at 48 h. In contrast, anti-IL-5 had no significant effect on the size of the 6 or 48 h late-phase cutaneous allergic reaction. This study (a) suggests that eosinophils are unlikely to cause the redness, swelling, and induration characteristic of the peak (6 h) late-phase cutaneous allergic reaction and (b) shows that decreases in tenascin positive cells at 48 h correlates with reduction of eosinophils, so providing further evidence of involvement in remodelling processes associated with allergic inflammation.

[PMID: 23257685]
We examined levels of hyaluronan, a matrix glycosaminoglycan and versican, a matrix proteoglycan, in the sputum of asthmatics treated with mepolizumab (anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody) versus placebo to evaluate the utility of these measurements as possible biomarkers of asthma control and airway remodeling. Patients with severe, prednisone-dependent asthma received either mepolizumab or placebo as described in a previously published randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. We measured hyaluronan and versican levels by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in sputum collected before and after the 16-week treatment phase. Patients underwent a predefined prednisone tapering schedule if they remained exacerbation free, and sputum eosinophil percentage, asthma control questionnaire (ACQ) and spirometry were monitored. After 6 months of mepolizumab therapy and prednisone tapering, there was a significant increase in sputum hyaluronan in the placebo group compared with baseline (p = 0.003). In contrast, there was a significant decrease in sputum hyaluronan in the active treatment group compared with placebo (p = 0.007), which correlated with improvements in percent forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1%) (p = 0.001) and ACQ scores (p = 0.009) as well as a decrease in sputum eosinophils (p = 0.02). There was a nonsignificant increase in sputum versican in the placebo group (p = 0.16), a decrease in the mepolizumab group (p = 0.13) and a significant inverse correlation between versican reduction and FEV1% improvement (p = 0.03). Sputum hyaluronan values are reduced with mepolizumab therapy and correlate with improved clinical and spirometry values, suggesting this measurement may serve as a noninvasive biomarker of asthma control.

[PMID: 20110057]
Among diagnostic progress over the last three years in internal medicine, Antisynthetase Syndrome is now more easily recognised with the diffusion of laboratory tests for research of antibodies against tRNA synthetases (Anti JO1, anti PL7, Anti PL12). In two third of cases, these antibodies are found despite absence of antinuclear antibodies. Hence, we have to search them specifically in patients with polyarthritis associated with myositis, cutaneous manifestations (Raynaud phenomenom and "mechanic'hands") and interstitial lung disease. Discovery of asymptomatic mutation in the L ferritin coding sequence help us to better understand the "unexplained" hyperferritinemia. Initially described by japonese gastroenterologists, auto immune pancreatitis in fact a part of a systemic sclerosing disease with a biochemical hallmark: in crease of a subclass of immunoglobulins G (IgG4). A new pediatric disease due to a deficiency of the interleukin1 receptor antagonist (multifocal aseptic osteitis, periostitis, stomatitis, disseminated pustulosis) help us to better understand unexplained auto inflammatory diseases. The therapeutic progress is primarily due to an explosion of biological therapies, particularly four of them very useful for internists (in an off label use) : Interleukin 1 inhibitors (anakinra, Canakinumab) to treat some auto inflammatory diseases (cryopirin associated periodic syndromes and deficency of interleukin 1 receptor antagonist), monoclonal antibody against interleukin 5 (mepolizumab) to treat some hypereosinophilic syndromes and Churg and Strauss angiitis, interleukin 6 inhibitiors to treat multifocal Castleman's disease and adult Still disease, a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor (Bevacizumab) to treat hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.

[PMID: 25199059]
Some patients with severe asthma have frequent exacerbations associated with persistent eosinophilic inflammation despite continuous treatment with high-dose inhaled glucocorticoids with or without oral glucocorticoids. In this randomized, double-blind, double-dummy study, we assigned 576 patients with recurrent asthma exacerbations and evidence of eosinophilic inflammation despite high doses of inhaled glucocorticoids to one of three study groups. Patients were assigned to receive mepolizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against interleukin-5, which was administered as either a 75-mg intravenous dose or a 100-mg subcutaneous dose, or placebo every 4 weeks for 32 weeks. The primary outcome was the rate of exacerbations. Other outcomes included the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and scores on the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) and the 5-item Asthma Control Questionnaire (ACQ-5). Safety was also assessed. The rate of exacerbations was reduced by 47% (95% confidence interval [CI], 29 to 61) among patients receiving intravenous mepolizumab and by 53% (95% CI, 37 to 65) among those receiving subcutaneous mepolizumab, as compared with those receiving placebo (P<0.001 for both comparisons). Exacerbations necessitating an emergency department visit or hospitalization were reduced by 32% in the group receiving intravenous mepolizumab and by 61% in the group receiving subcutaneous mepolizumab. At week 32, the mean increase from baseline in FEV1 was 100 ml greater in patients receiving intravenous mepolizumab than in those receiving placebo (P=0.02) and 98 ml greater in patients receiving subcutaneous mepolizumab than in those receiving placebo (P=0.03). The improvement from baseline in the SGRQ score was 6.4 points and 7.0 points greater in the intravenous and subcutaneous mepolizumab groups, respectively, than in the placebo group (minimal clinically important change, 4 points), and the improvement in the ACQ-5 score was 0.42 points and 0.44 points greater in the two mepolizumab groups, respectively, than in the placebo group (minimal clinically important change, 0.5 points) (P<0.001 for all comparisons). The safety profile of mepolizumab was similar to that of placebo. Mepolizumab administered either intravenously or subcutaneously significantly reduced asthma exacerbations and was associated with improvements in markers of asthma control. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; MENSA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01691521.).

[PMID: 21790283]
Mepolizumab (Bosatria(®), GlaxoSmithKline) is a biologic agent developed to treat asthma. It represents a humanized monoclonal antibody of IgG1 κ type, which targets human IL-5 and thus prevents its interaction with the α-chain of the IL-5 receptor. To date, it has not been approved for use in any eosinophil-related disorder; however, several studies have suggested some therapeutic benefit across a spectrum of eosinophil-related disorders. This article evaluates the currently available preclinical and clinical studies, and the impact of mepolizumab against a variety of eosinophilic disorders.

[PMID: 12406833]
The role of eosinophils as effector cells in asthma pathogenesis has been questioned since an anti-interleukin (IL)-5 monoclonal antibody (mepolizumab), which depleted blood and sputum eosinophils, failed to inhibit allergen-induced bronchoconstriction and airway hyperresponsiveness. However, the effect of IL-5 blockade on tissue eosinophils was not examined. We sought to determine whether mepolizumab depletes airway tissue eosinophils and their products. Twenty-four patients with mild asthma received three intravenous doses of either 750 mg of mepolizumab or placebo in a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group fashion over 20 weeks. Mepolizumab produced a median decrease from baseline of 55% for airway eosinophils (interquartile range, 29-89%; p = 0.009 versus placebo), 52% for bone marrow eosinophils (45-76%, p = 0.003), and 100% for blood eosinophils (range, 67-100%, p = 0.02). Mepolizumab had no appreciable effect on bronchial mucosal staining of eosinophil major basic protein. There were no significant changes in clinical measures of asthma (airway hyperresponsiveness, FEV1, and peak flow recordings) between the mepolizumab and placebo-treated groups. Anti-IL-5 treatment reduces but does not deplete airway or bone marrow eosinophils. The role of the eosinophil remains uncertain. Further clinical studies in asthma with more effective antieosinophil strategies are required.

[PMID: 20810155]
Mepolizumab, a monoclonal anti-IL-5 antibody, is an effective corticosteroid-sparing agent for patients with Fip1-like 1/platelet-derived growth factor receptor α fusion (F/P)-negative hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES). Lymphocytic variant hypereosinophilic syndrome (L-HES) is characterized by marked overproduction of IL-5 by dysregulated T cells. To determine whether patients with L-HES respond to mepolizumab in terms of corticosteroid tapering and eosinophil depletion to the same extent as corticosteroid-responsive F/P-negative patients with HES and a normal T-cell profile. Patients enrolled in the mepolizumab trial were evaluated for L-HES on the basis of T-cell phenotyping and T-cell receptor gene rearrangement patterns, and their serum thymus-and-activation-regulated chemokine (TARC) levels were measured. Response to treatment was compared in patient subgroups based on results of these analyses. Lymphocytic variant HES was diagnosed in 13 of 63 patients with HES with complete T-cell assessments. The ability to taper corticosteroids on mepolizumab was similar in patients with L-HES and those with a normal T-cell profile, although a lower proportion of patients with L-HES maintained eosinophil levels below 600/μL. Increased serum TARC levels (>1000 pg/mL) had no significant impact on the ability to reduce corticosteroid doses, but a lower proportion of patients with elevated TARC achieved eosinophil control on mepolizumab. Mepolizumab is an effective corticosteroid-sparing agent for patients with L-HES. In some cases however, eosinophil levels remain above 600/μL, suggesting incomplete neutralization of overproduced IL-5 or involvement of other eosinophilopoietic factors.

[PMID: 17872493]
Accumulation of eosinophils in the bronchial mucosa of individuals with asthma is considered to be a central event in the pathogenesis of asthma. In animal models, airway eosinophil recruitment and airway hyperresponsiveness in response to allergen challenge are reduced by specific targeting of interleukin-5. A previous small dose-finding study found that mepolizumab, a humanized anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody, had no effect on allergen challenge in humans. To investigate the effect of three intravenous infusions of mepolizumab, 250 or 750 mg at monthly intervals, on clinical outcome measures in 362 patients with asthma experiencing persistent symptoms despite inhaled corticosteroid therapy (400-1,000 mug of beclomethasone or equivalent). Multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Morning peak expiratory flow, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, daily beta(2)-agonist use, symptom scores, exacerbation rates, and quality of life measures. Sputum eosinophil levels were also measured in a subgroup of 37 individuals. Mepolizumab was associated with a significant reduction in blood and sputum eosinophils in both treatment groups (blood, P < 0.001 for both doses; sputum, P = 0.006 for 250 mg and P = 0.004 for 750 mg). There were no statistically significant changes in any of the clinical end points measured. There was a nonsignificant trend for decrease in exacerbation rates in the mepolizumab 750-mg treatment group (P = 0.065). Mepolizumab treatment does not appear to add significant clinical benefit in patients with asthma with persistent symptoms despite inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Further studies are needed to investigate the effect of mepolizumab on exacerbation rates, using protocols specifically tailored to patients with asthma with persistent airway eosinophilia.

[PMID: 23742015]
Several lines of evidence suggest that deficiency of eosinophils is not associated with any characteristic abnormality. Patients lacking eosinophils, in the setting of immunodeficiency or as a consequence of IgG-mediated eosinophil precursor destruction, do not display any distinguishing abnormalities related to eosinophil reduction. The observation that eosinophil-deficient mice do not display any distinctive syndrome or failure of their health is evidence that, under ordinary laboratory conditions, the eosinophil does not play a critical role in the well-being of mammals. Observations that monoclonal antibodies to interleukin-5 (IL-5) are well tolerated appear unsurprising in light of these findings. For example, patients with the hypereosinophilic syndrome have received mepolizumab, an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody, for as long as 6 years and have not developed any characteristic set of adverse events. Safety data for reslizumab, another anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody, and benralizumab, a monoclonal antibody to the IL-5 receptor α-chain, are comparatively limited, especially for benralizumab, although reports of administration of these antibodies to humans suggest that they are well tolerated. Thus, data to the present suggest that reduction of eosinophils appears to have no characteristic ill effects on normal health, and monoclonal antibodies that deplete eosinophils have the potential to be widely employed in the treatment of eosinophil-associated diseases.

[PMID: 23844029]
The mechanism for the contribution of eosinophils (EOS) to asthma pathophysiology is not fully understood. Genome-wide expression analysis of airway EOS by microarrays has been limited by the ability to generate high quality RNA from sufficient numbers of airway EOS. To identify, by genome-wide expression analyses, a compendium of expressed genes characteristic of airway EOS following an in vivo allergen challenge. Atopic, mild asthmatic subjects were recruited for these studies. Induced sputum was obtained before and 48h after a whole lung allergen challenge (WLAC). Individuals also received a segmental bronchoprovocation with allergen (SBP-Ag) 1 month before and after administering a single dose of mepolizumab (anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody) to reduce airway EOS. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed before and 48 h after SBP-Ag. Gene expression of sputum and BAL cells was analyzed by microarrays. The results were validated by qPCR in BAL cells and purified BAL EOS. A total of 299 transcripts were up-regulated by more than 2-fold in total BAL cells following SBP-Ag. Mepolizumab treatment resulted in a reduction of airway EOS by 54.5% and decreased expression of 99 of the 299 transcripts. 3 of 6 post-WLAC sputum samples showed increased expression of EOS-specific genes, along with the expression of 361 other genes. Finally, the intersection of the 3 groups of transcripts (increased in BAL post SBP-Ag (299), decreased after mepolizumab (99), and increased in sputum after WLAC (365)) was composed of 57 genes characterizing airway EOS gene expression. We identified 57 genes that were highly expressed by BAL EOS compared to unseparated BAL cells after in vivo allergen challenge. 41 of these genes had not been previously described in EOS and are thus potential new candidates to elucidate EOS contribution to airway biology.

[PMID: 15813818]
Eosinophils may play an important role in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (AD). Interleukin-5 is essential for eosinophil growth, differentiation and migration. A monoclonal antibody to human interleukin-5 (mepolizumab) was developed for atopic diseases. This study was designed to study the effect of mepolizumab in AD. Two single doses of 750 mg mepolizumab, given 1 week apart, were studied in patients with moderate to severe AD using a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel group design. The primary endpoint of 'success' to treatment was defined as the percentage of patients with at least 'marked improvement' after 2 weeks as assessed by the Physician's Global Assessment of Improvement (PGA). Furthermore, SCORing AD (SCORAD), pruritus scoring, number of blood eosinophils and serum thymus and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC) values served as secondary endpoints. Fluticasone propionate cream 0.05%, once daily could be used as rescue medication from day 16 if no improvement was recorded. Eighteen patients received mepolizumab and 22 placebo treatment. Peripheral blood eosinophil numbers were significantly reduced in the treatment group compared with placebo (P < 0.05). No clinical success was reached by PGA assessment (P = 0.115), SCORAD (P = 0.293), pruritus scoring and TARC values in the mepolizumab-treated group compared with placebo. However, modest improvement (<50% improvement) assessed by PGA was scored significantly more in the mepolizumab-treated group compared with placebo (P < 0.05). Two single doses of 750 mg mepolizumab did not result in clinical success in patients with AD, despite a significant decrease in peripheral blood eosinophils.

[PMID: 24322486]
Eosinophils play an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic, infectious and malignant diseases. Over the last decade, new diagnostic tools and treatment modalities have led to the re-evaluation of the existing definition of eosinophilic disorders. This review discusses a recent proposal for new terminology and classification of hypereosinophilia. The results of targeted therapy for hypereosinophilia-related disorders are also summarized. A panel of multidisciplinary experts agreed on unifying definitions and criteria of eosinophilia-associated disorders and created a new classification of hypereosinophilia-related conditions based on clinical, haematological and laboratory findings as well as the underlying cause of hypereosinophilia. Recent results of the treatment of idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) with the anti-interleukin 5 monoclonal antibody mepolizumab showed its efficacy and manageable safety profile. The treatment of platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFRA)-positive HES with imatinib demonstrated long-lasting efficacy and low likelihood of drug resistance. The unifying terminology and definitions should aid physicians caring for patients with hypereosinophilia. Despite much progress, serum biomarkers correlate with disease severity and predict responses to treatment that are needed. There is also a great need for understanding and specific therapy for PDGFRA-negative HES.

[PMID: 22998420]
Five percent of asthmatics have severe symptoms despite high doses of inhaled (ICS) or additional oral corticosteroids (OCS): these patients have high morbidity, risk for asthma death, and account for half of asthma healthcare spending. A subgroup (20 - 40%) of these has persistent airway eosinophilia and frequent exacerbations. Mepolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks binding of the key cytokine implicated specifically in eosinophil maturation and survival, interleukin-5, to its receptor. Pharmacology, Phase I/IIa and Phase II/III studies of mepolizumab for asthma. Mepolizumab depleted blood and sputum eosinophils and partially reduced airway and bone marrow eosinophils. It also reduced airway remodeling. In unselected patients with moderate/severe asthma there was no clinically significant effect on lung function, but a trend to reduced exacerbation rates. When patients were selected for persistent sputum eosinophilia despite high-dose ICS/OCS, and frequent exacerbations, mepolizumab reduced exacerbations by 50%. Mepolizumab can reduce exacerbation rates in the severe asthma cohort who have eosinophilic airway inflammation despite corticosteroid treatment. This may be 30% of severe asthmatics and represents a new and important treatment option. Further studies need to confirm efficacy and indications for asthma (and other eosinophilic airway disease), and to examine clinical consequences of reducing remodeling.

[PMID: 16462679]
Diagnosis of major hypereosinophilia (>1500 x 10(9)/L) is complex because the possible causes cover the entire range of medical specialties. History and clinical condition will usually suggest parasitic or allergic diseases or drug reactions. When workups for them are negative, rarer causes must be suspected: specific organ diseases (chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, bullous pemphigoid, etc.), solid tumor, clonal blood disorders, or vasculitis. When the condition is prolonged and unexplained, hypereosinophilic syndrome is diagnosed. A rare disorder, its prognosis depends on largely on its cardiac effects. It is usually associated with heterogeneous hematologic conditions, mainly myeloproliferative and lymphocytic disease. The myeloproliferative or primary variant sometimes follows chromosomal deletions that cause a fusion between the Fip1-like1 (FIP1L1) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) genes, thus increasing the tyrosine kinase activity of the latter. Imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, is usually effective in this situation. In the lymphocytic variant, hypereosinophilia is secondary to a primitive Th2 lymphocyte expansion that causes overproduction of interleukin 5 (IL-5). Corticosteroids are the first-line therapy. Mepolizumab, an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody, currently being evaluated, seems promising. Despite recent progress, about 40% of the cases of hypereosinophilic syndrome remain unexplained.

[PMID: 22541618]
Elevated numbers of blood and tissue eosinophils are present in allergic diseases and experimental evidence suggests that eosinophils play an important pathogenic role in these conditions. Regulation of eosinophil maturation, recruitment, and survival is under the control of a small group of factors, including interleukin-5 (IL-5). Given the probable importance of eosinophils to allergy and other associated disorders, IL-5 has been proposed as a potential molecular target in the treatment of these diseases. IL-5 antagonist therapies in current development include two monoclonal anti-IL-5 antibodies (mepolizumab, reslizumab), a monoclonal antibody directed at the IL-5 receptor (benralizumab), and anti-sense oligonucleotide therapy (TPI ASM8). Anti-IL5 antibody therapy has been the most extensively studied of these agents, and trials have been performed in patients with bronchial asthma, nasal polyposis, atopic dermatitis, eosinophilic esophagitis, hypereosinophilic syndrome, and Churg-Strauss syndrome. In studies of asthmatics, anti-IL-5 showed minimal efficacy in patients with moderate, controlled asthma. In patients with severe, refractory asthma associated with eosinophilia, however, clinical trials have demonstrated significant reductions in asthma exacerbations. Clinical studies in other disorders, particularly eosinophilic esophagitis and hypereosinophilic syndrome, have also shown significant improvements in blood and/or tissue eosinophilia and variable alterations in clinical disease activity. Strategies aimed at the inhibition of IL-5 may hold great promise in the treatment of eosinophilic diseases.

[PMID: 19828470]
Eosinophilic oesophagitis (EoO) is a clinicopathological condition defined by proton pump inhibitor-refractory oesophageal symptoms combined with oesophageal eosinophilia. The pharmacodynamic effect of mepolizumab (a humanised anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody) in EoO was evaluated. Eleven adults with active EoO (>20 peak eosinophil number/high power field (hpf) and dysphagia) were randomised to 750 mg of mepolizumab (n = 5) or placebo (n = 6) and received two intravenous infusions, 1 week apart. Those not in complete remission (<5 peak eosinophil number/hpf) after 8 weeks received two further doses 4 weeks apart, 1500 mg of mepolizumab or placebo. The effect of mepolizumab was assessed clinically, endoscopically, histologically, and via blood and tissue biomarkers. As assessed by immunofluorescence, a marked reduction of mean oesophageal eosinophilia (p = 0.03) was seen in the mepolizumab group (-54%) compared with the placebo group (-5%) 4 weeks after initiation of treatment. No further reduction of eosinophil numbers was observed in response to the two additional infusions in either group. Mepolizumab reduced tenascin C (p = 0.033) and transforming growth factor beta1 (p = 0.05) expression in the oesophageal epithelial layer 13 weeks after initiation of treatment. Clinically, limited improvement of symptoms was seen, although a trend was seen between 4 and 13 weeks after initiation of mepolizumab treatment. Mepolizumab was well tolerated. Mepolizumab significantly reduced eosinophil numbers in oesophageal tissues in adult patients with active EoO, and changes in the expression of molecules associated with oesophageal remodelling were reversed. Minimal clinical improvement was achieved in a subgroup of patients with EoO. Mepolizumab had an acceptable safety profile, even at the high 1500 mg dose level. NCT00274703.

[PMID: 18298130]
Mepolizumab is an anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody that is in clinical trials with GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) for the treatment of severe asthma, nasal polyposis and hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic oesophagitis (the latter two indications are classed as eosinophilia in the phase table). Interleukin-5 stimulates the production, activation and maturation of eosinophils. Since mepolizumab inhibits interleukin-5 and has a long terminal half-life, treatment with mepolizumab causes a sustained reduction in the numbers of circulating eosinophils. Thus, mepolizumab may be a useful therapeutic agent for the treatment of conditions characterized by increased levels of eosinophils. Hypereosinophilic syndrome is a rare idiopathic disease with broad clinical signs and symptoms that is diagnosed based on a persistent blood eosinophil count of >1500 cells, various end-organ damages (including skin, heart, lung, nervous system and digestive system), and with exclusion of known secondary causes of hypereosinophilia. Mepolizumab is in clinical trials for the treatment of hypereosinophilic syndrome, eosinophilc oesophagitis, severe asthma (in patients with airway eosinophilia) and nasal polyposis. GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) has completed enrolment in a phase II study of mepolizumab in 20 patients with symptomatic eosinophilic bronchitis with or without asthma in Canada. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study is evaluating the effects of intravenous mepolizumab on asthma control, airway eosinophilia and the degree to which concomitant corticosteroid treatment can be reduced (NCT00292877). In previous clinical studies, including trials in the EU and US, mepolizumab has shown a lack of effect on allergen-induced airway responses and inflammation despite a significant reduction in blood and sputum eosinophil levels.A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, phase III study of mepolizumab over 9 months in 85 patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome was completed in 2006. All patients have been offered, and continued in, a phase III, open-label, long-term extension study of mepolizumab. Enrolment in this study was completed in September 2006.A phase III, compassionate use trial of mepalizumab (NCT00244686) in patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome was ongoing in October 2007 in the US. Patients who have significant clinical disease but are unresponsive to traditional treatment and those who have demonstrated clinical benefit from previous anti-IL-5 treatment are eligible to take part in the trial. Mepolizumab received orphan drug status for first-line treatment in patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome in the US and the EU in 2004. Mepolizumab is also in phase I/II clinical development for the treatment of eosinophilic oesophagitis. A phase I/II trial (NCT00358449) began in August 2006 in the US, Australia, the UK and Canada, and will enrol approximately 72 paediatric patients with eosinophilic oesophagitis. The randomized, parallel-group clinical trial will evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of intravenous mepolizumab for 12 weeks. In September 2006, GSK completed enrolment in a phase I/II study of mepolizumab for the treatment of eosinophilic oesophagitis in ten adult patients in Switzerland (NCT00274703). The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study will evaluate the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety and tolerability of IV mepolizumab.A phase I/II trial of mepolizumab in four patients with eosinophilic oesophagitis conducted by Cincinnati Children's hospital found the monoclonal antibody was safe and effective. Brigham and Women's Hospital in association with GSK is conducting a phase I/II trial of mepolizumab in patients with Churg-Strauss Syndrome (CSS) in the US. The trial, which started in September 2007, will evaluate the potential of mepolizumab to reduce the need for corticosteroid therapy in patients with CSS (NCT00527566). CSS, otherwise known as allergic granulomatosis, is defined by patients with asthma, eosinophilia and vasculitis.

[PMID: 19243381]
The hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) encompass a spectrum of diseases that have increased blood eosinophils and tissue damage in common. The clinical manifestations are protean and may involve any organ system, but especially the skin. Our understanding of these diseases has drastically changed over the past 15 years, along with new classifications that characterize patients with marked eosinophilia. One HES variant, myeloproliferative, is actually chronic eosinophilic leukaemia with a unique genetic marker, FIP1L1-PDGFRA. Such patients are well-controlled by administration of the kinase inhibitor, imatinib, and remissions appear durable with continued imatinib therapy. FIP1L1-PDGFRA is expressed in several cell lineages, thus explaining increases in neutrophils and mast cells in HES. The lymphocytic HES variant is associated with T-cell clones producing interleukin-5 (IL-5) and can evolve into lymphoma. While myeloproliferative and lymphocytic HES are well established and permit elimination of the term, idiopathic, to these varieties, most HES patients do not fall into these categories and are classified as complex (using the 2006 Workshop Report). A recent study showed that a monoclonal antibody to IL-5, mepolizumab, reduced glucocorticoid therapy in HES patients who did not possess the FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutation while controlling eosinophilia and preventing recurrence or progression of tissue damage. These advances augur well for continued progress in the understanding and treatment of HES.

[PMID: 20513524]
Treatments for Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS), a rare eosinophilic vasculitis characterized by asthma, sinusitis, peripheral eosinophilia, pulmonary infiltrates, and tissue infiltration, are limited by toxicity or poor efficacy. Levels of IL-5, a cytokine regulating eosinophils, can be increased in patients with CSS. Mepolizumab, a humanized monoclonal anti-IL-5 antibody, decreases steroid requirements in patients with non-CSS hypereosinophilic syndromes. The purpose of this study was to assess whether mepolizumab would safely allow corticosteroid tapering in patients with steroid-dependent CSS while decreasing serum markers of disease activity. This open-label pilot study treated 7 patients with 4 monthly doses of mepolizumab to assess whether it safely decreased CSS disease activity and permitted tapering of systemic corticosteroids. Mepolizumab was safe and well tolerated in patients with CSS. Mepolizumab reduced eosinophil counts and allowed for safe corticosteroid reduction in all 7 subjects. On cessation of mepolizumab, CSS manifestations recurred, necessitating corticosteroid bursts. Mepolizumab is a safe and well-tolerated therapy in patients with CSS, offering clinical benefit by enabling corticosteroid tapering while maintaining clinical stability.

[PMID: 18344568]
The hypereosinophilic syndrome is a group of diseases characterized by persistent blood eosinophilia, defined as more than 1500 cells per microliter with end-organ involvement and no recognized secondary cause. Although most patients have a response to corticosteroids, side effects are common and can lead to considerable morbidity. We conducted an international, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of an anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody, mepolizumab, in patients with the hypereosinophilic syndrome. Patients were negative for the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene and required prednisone monotherapy, 20 to 60 mg per day, to maintain a stable clinical status and a blood eosinophil count of less than 1000 per microliter. Patients received either intravenous mepolizumab or placebo while the prednisone dose was tapered. The primary end point was the reduction of the prednisone dose to 10 mg or less per day for 8 or more consecutive weeks. The primary end point was reached in 84% of patients in the mepolizumab group, as compared with 43% of patients in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 2.90; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.59 to 5.26; P<0.001) with no increase in clinical activity of the hypereosinophilic syndrome. A blood eosinophil count of less than 600 per microliter for 8 or more consecutive weeks was achieved in 95% of patients receiving mepolizumab, as compared with 45% of patients receiving placebo (hazard ratio, 3.53; 95% CI, 1.94 to 6.45; P<0.001). Serious adverse events occurred in seven patients receiving mepolizumab (14 events, including one death; mean [+/-SD] duration of exposure, 6.7+/-1.9 months) and in five patients receiving placebo (7 events; mean duration of exposure, 4.3+/-2.6 months). Our study shows that treatment with mepolizumab, an agent designed to target eosinophils, can result in corticosteroid-sparing for patients negative for FIP1L1-PDGFRA who have the hypereosinophilic syndrome. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00086658 [ClinicalTrials.gov].).

[PMID: 20565230]
Patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) vary considerably in their clinical presentation with regard to the severity and pattern of end-organ involvement. Clinical manifestations range from nonspecific symptoms to life-threatening, multisystem damage caused by eosinophil infiltration and local release of proinflammatory mediators and toxic granule products from these invading cells. The primary objective of treatment is to reduce blood and tissue eosinophilia and prevent eosinophil-mediated tissue damage as safely as possible. Systemic corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are first-line therapy for the management of patients with symptomatic HES who lack the Fip1-like 1-platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (FIP1L1-PDGFRA) gene fusion mutation. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor, imatinib, is first-line treatment for FIP1L1-PDGFRA-positive patients). Because of the toxicity and serious side-effects that can occur with oral corticosteroids, alternative therapies may need to be introduced to reduce the cumulative corticosteroid exposure while maintaining disease control. Among corticosteroid-sparing agents are cytotoxic drugs and interferon-alpha; anti-interleukin-5 (IL-5) monoclonal antibodies are also currently under investigation for the treatment of HES. This manuscript reviews the available treatments for HES and the range of side-effects associated with long-term corticosteroid use, and then focuses on the anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibodies, mepolizumab and reslizumab. Of these, only mepolizumab has been studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Literature search methodology utilized www.pubmed.gov and www.clinicaltrials.gov with search terms including hypereosinophilic syndrome and corticosteroid side-effects coupled with search terms including eosinophils, mepolizumab and reslizumab through March 2010. Three case studies are presented that demonstrate the limitations of corticosteroid therapy in terms of tolerability and quality of life, and the subsequent use of mepolizumab as a corticosteroid-sparing agent in these individuals. Targeted eosinophil-directed therapy with an anti-IL-5 neutralizing monoclonal antibody reduced the need for corticosteroids in these three HES patients without disease exacerbations.

[PMID: 16931891]
The atopy patch test (APT) is an in vivo model to study the induction of eczema by inhalant allergens in atopic dermatitis (AD) patients. Mepolizumab is a monoclonal antibody to interleukin-5, which reduces peripheral blood eosinophils. Previously, we reported that mepolizumab treatment did not result in clinical improvement in AD. The current study investigates the effect of mepolizumab therapy on the APT in the same patients. Mepolizumab treatment was given at days 0 and 7 in a double-blind placebo-controlled design. The APT was applied at days -2, 0, 14 and 28. Clinical evaluation of each APT was conducted 48 h after application at days 0, 2, 16 and 30. Skin biopsies were taken at days 0, 2 and 16 for eosinophil counts. The mepolizumab-treated group showed no significant reduction in macroscopic outcome of the APT. Tissue eosinophils were reduced in the mepolizumab-treated group at day 16 compared with placebo; however, this was not significant. Mepolizumab therapy cannot prevent the eczematous reaction induced by the APT. Furthermore, the influx of tissue eosinophil numbers in the APT is not significantly inhibited after mepolizumab treatment compared with placebo, despite a significant reduction in peripheral blood eosinophils.

[PMID: 22901886]
Some patients with severe asthma have recurrent asthma exacerbations associated with eosinophilic airway inflammation. Early studies suggest that inhibition of eosinophilic airway inflammation with mepolizumab-a monoclonal antibody against interleukin 5-is associated with a reduced risk of exacerbations. We aimed to establish efficacy, safety, and patient characteristics associated with the response to mepolizumab. We undertook a multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial at 81 centres in 13 countries between Nov 9, 2009, and Dec 5, 2011. Eligible patients were aged 12-74 years, had a history of recurrent severe asthma exacerbations, and had signs of eosinophilic inflammation. They were randomly assigned (in a 1:1:1:1 ratio) to receive one of three doses of intravenous mepolizumab (75 mg, 250 mg, or 750 mg) or matched placebo (100 mL 0·9% NaCl) with a central telephone-based system and computer-generated randomly permuted block schedule stratified by whether treatment with oral corticosteroids was required. Patients received 13 infusions at 4-week intervals. The primary outcome was the rate of clinically significant asthma exacerbations, which were defined as validated episodes of acute asthma requiring treatment with oral corticosteroids, admission, or a visit to an emergency department. Patients, clinicians, and data analysts were masked to treatment assignment. Analyses were by intention to treat. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01000506. 621 patients were randomised: 159 were assigned to placebo, 154 to 75 mg mepolizumab, 152 to 250 mg mepolizumab, and 156 to 750 mg mepolizumab. 776 exacerbations were deemed to be clinically significant. The rate of clinically significant exacerbations was 2·40 per patient per year in the placebo group, 1·24 in the 75 mg mepolizumab group (48% reduction, 95% CI 31-61%; p<0·0001), 1·46 in the 250 mg mepolizumab group (39% reduction, 19-54%; p=0·0005), and 1·15 in the 750 mg mepolizumab group (52% reduction, 36-64%; p<0·0001). Three patients died during the study, but the deaths were not deemed to be related to treatment. Mepolizumab is an effective and well tolerated treatment that reduces the risk of asthma exacerbations in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma. GlaxoSmithKline.

[PMID: 23362812]
In this large (616 patients), double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of mepolizumab (a monoclonal antibody that blocks IL-5 binding to its receptor), patients were given placebo, 75-, 250- or 750-mg mepolizumab by intravenous infusion every 4 weeks for 1 year. Exacerbation rates at all doses were 50% less than those in the placebo group. There were no changes in any other asthma measures (symptoms, quality of life or lung function). This may be a useful advance for a subgroup of severe asthma with frequent exacerbations and persistent eosinophilia, which may be about half of severe asthmatics. More information on patient selection and cost-benefit will be required.

[PMID: 21443279]
Eosinophilic oesophagitis (EE) is a clinico-pathological entity recognized with increased frequency in children and adults. It is an atopic disease involving ingested and inhaled allergens. A pathological eosinophilic infiltrate is diagnosed by finding ≥ 15 eosinophils per high-powered field on oesophageal mucosal biopsies. This infiltrate may result in a narrowed oesophageal lumen. It does not involve the stomach or duodenum. Children commonly present with abdominal pain, vomiting and dysphagia. Presentation in adults is with dysphagia, heartburn, chest pain or impaction of a food bolus in the oesophagus. There is often a history of allergy (asthma, hay fever, eczema). A male predominance (70% in adults) is unexplained. Distinctive endoscopic features are linear furrows, mucosal rings and white papules, and the narrowed lumen may be appreciated. Although EE and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease are separate entities, there is a significant overlap of the conditions. Treatment options include nonpharmacological approaches including an elimination or elemental diet, and/ or medications, chiefly with corticosteroids. The topical administration of fluticasone propionate has been demonstrated to improve symptoms and mobilize the pathological infiltrate of eosinophils. There has been a variable effect with the leukotriene receptor antagonist montelukast and promising early results with mepolizumab, a monoclonal antibody against interleukin-5. The long-term efficacy of topical corticosteroids has not been well studied and most patients experience recurrent symptoms when treatment is completed. Currently, repeated short courses of topical corticosteroids are utilized. Acid suppression by a proton pump inhibitor may be considered in view of the overlap between EE and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.

[PMID: 23544105]
Interleukin (IL)-5 is believed to be a key cytokine in eosinophil inflammatory infiltration in asthma. Previous clinical trials have evaluated the efficacy and safety of mepolizumab, a monoclonal antibody against IL-5, in patients with asthma. However, most of these studies were small, the conclusions were inconsistent, and the precise effects are therefore debatable. A meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials was conducted to evaluate the effect of intravenous infusion of mepolizumab on clinical outcomes in patients with asthma. Trials were searched in PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane CENTRAL, Scopus, reviews, and reference lists of relevant articles. The outcome variables analyzed included eosinophil counts in blood and sputum, airways outcome measures, exacerbations, asthma control, and quality of life scores. Seven studies met final inclusion criteria (total n = 1131). From the pooled analyses, mepolizumab significantly reduced eosinophils in blood (MD -0.29×10(9)/L, 95% CI -0.44 to -0.14×10(9)/L, P = 0.0001) and sputum (MD -6.05%, 95% CI -9.34 to -2.77%, P = 0.0003). Mepolizumab was also associated with significantly decreased exacerbation risk than placebo (OR 0.30, 95%CI 0.13 to 0.67, P = 0.004), and with a significant improvement in the scores on the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ) (MD 0.26, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.49, P = 0.03) in patients with eosinophilic asthma. There were no statistical differences between the groups with respect to FEV1, PEF, or histamine PC20 (all P>0.05), and a non-significant trend for improvement in scores on the Juniper Asthma Control Questionnaire (JACQ) (MD -0.21, 95% CI -0.43 to 0.01, P = 0.06) in the mepolizumab group was observed. Mepolizumab reduces the risk of exacerbations and improves quality of life in patients with eosinophilic asthma, but no significant improvement in lung function outcomes was observed. Further research is required to establish the possible role of anti-IL-5 as a therapy for asthma.