[PMID: 18347206]
Limited data exist about the molecular types of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strains found in children with cystic fibrosis (CF). We sought to characterize MRSA strains from these patients and compare them with MRSA strains from non-CF pediatric patients. All MRSA isolates were collected prospectively at Children's Medical Center in Dallas, TX, and the University of Chicago Comer Children's Hospital in 2004 to 2005. All CF MRSA isolates underwent susceptibility testing, multilocus sequence typing, Panton-Valentine leukocidin gene detection (pvl+), and staphylococcal chromosome cassette mec (SCCmec) typing. A total of 22 of 34 MRSA isolates (64.7%) from patients with CF belonged to clonal complex (CC) 5 and contained SCCmec II, so-called health-care associated MRSA (HA-MRSA) strains. Nine of 34 MRSA strains (26.5%) were CC 8, and contained SCCmec IV, so-called community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) strains. The CA-MRSA strains tended to be isolated from newly colonized CF patients. In contrast, CC8 isolates predominated among the non-CF patients (294 of 331 patients; 88.8%). MRSA isolates from children with CF were more likely to be resistant to clindamycin (65% vs 19%, respectively) and ciprofloxacin (62% vs 17%, respectively) compared with strains from non-CF patients (p < 0.001). There was no difference in the rate of pvl+ isolate recovery from children with CF undergoing a surveillance culture (7 of 23 children) compared with those with pulmonary exacerbation (3 of 11 children; p = 1.0). Both CA-MRSA (CC8) isolates and HA-MRSA (CC5) isolates populate the respiratory tracts of children with CF. HA-MRSA isolates predominated, but CA-MRSA strains predominated among CF patients with newly acquired MRSA strains and among the non-CF patients. The presence of CA-MRSA strains in children with CF was not associated with exacerbation or necrotizing pneumonia.

[PMID: 8851953]
We investigated the distribution of MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) on and around six patients with MRSA infection in our neurosurgical ward. All patients had a disturbance of consciousness and had sputum colonization of MRSA. Samples were obtained from 11 sites (patients' hands, attendances' hands, floors, sidetables, bedclothes, chairs, walls, curtains, door knobs, faucets and disposable gloves) in the patients' rooms by the wiping method. High counts of MRSA were detected on horizontal planes such as floors, sidetables and chairs, but MRSA was not detected on vertical planes such as curtains and walls. The reason why MRSA was detected on the horizontal planes was due to a fall of MRSA spread from sputum in the air. These findings indicate that the disinfection of horizontal planes is important for preventing the spread of MRSA. We also evaluated what disinfectant was useful for floor disinfection and concluded that 0.5% chlorhexidine digluconate (Hibitane) and 0.5% benzalkonium chloride (Osvan) were more effective than the other usually-used disinfectants such as alkyldiaminoethyl glycine (Tego-51).

[PMID: 26684366]
We describe the clinical characteristics and epidemiology of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in children with cystic fibrosis (CF) from the U.S. CF center with the highest MRSA prevalence. Medical records of children with CF were retrospectively reviewed from 1997-2009. MRSA clinical isolates from 2007-2009 were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and pulsed field gel electrophoresis. The prevalence of MRSA was 1% in 1997 and 49% in 2009. Fifty-five children (26%) had persistent MRSA infection. Sixty-eight percent of MRSA isolates were hospital-associated (HA) MRSA, of which 52% were pulsed-field type USA 100. Ninety-three percent of HA MRSA isolates were clindamycin resistant. Twelve children acquired MRSA before 1 year of age, 83% of whom were hospitalized prior to acquisition of MRSA. Ten of 11 sibling pairs carried indistinguishable MRSA strains. Children with persistent MRSA were hospitalized more often (P = .01), required inhaled medications more frequently (P = .01), and had higher rates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa coinfection (P < .001). MRSA prevalence in children with CF is increasing, and most children are infected with HA MRSA. Exposure to health care facilities and gastrointestinal surgeries may facilitate early acquisition of MRSA. Siblings carry indistinguishable MRSA strains, indicating household transmission of MRSA. Children with persistent MRSA had worse pulmonary morbidity. Coinfection with MRSA and P aeruginosa is likely associated with further increased pulmonary morbidity.

[PMID: 22291965]
Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus-(CA-MRSA) strains have emerged in Argentina. We investigated the clinical and molecular evolution of community-onset MRSA infections (CO-MRSA) in children of Córdoba, Argentina, 2005-2008. Additionally, data from 2007 were compared with the epidemiology of these infections in other regions of the country. Two datasets were used: i) lab-based prospective surveillance of CA-MRSA isolates from 3 Córdoba pediatric hospitals-(CBAH1-H3) in 2007-2008 (compared to previously published data of 2005) and ii) a sampling of CO-MRSA from a study involving both, healthcare-associated community-onset-(HACO) infections in children with risk-factors for healthcare-associated infections-(HRFs), and CA-MRSA infections in patients without HRFs detected in multiple centers of Argentina in 2007. Molecular typing was performed on the CA-MRSA-(n: 99) isolates from the CBAH1-H3-dataset and on the HACO-MRSA-(n: 51) and CA-MRSA-(n: 213) isolates from other regions. Between 2005-2008, the annual proportion of CA-MRSA/CA-S. aureus in Córdoba hospitals increased from 25% to 49%, P<0.01. Total CA-MRSA infections increased 3.6 fold-(5.1 to 18.6 cases/100,000 annual-visits, P<0.0001), associated with an important increase of invasive CA-MRSA infections-(8.5 fold). In all regions analyzed, a single genotype prevailed in both CA-MRSA (82%) and HACO-MRSA(57%), which showed pulsed-field-gel electrophoresis-(PFGE)-type-"I", sequence-type-5-(ST5), SCCmec-type-IVa, spa-t311, and was positive for PVL. The second clone, pulsotype-N/ST30/CC30/SCCmecIVc/t019/PVL(+), accounted for 11.5% of total CA-MRSA infections. Importantly, the first 4 isolates of Argentina belonging to South American-USA300 clone-(USA300/ST8/CC8/SCCmecIVc/t008/PVL(+)/ACME(-)) were detected. We also demonstrated that a HA-MRSA clone-(pulsotype-C/ST100/CC5) caused 2% and 10% of CA-MRSA and HACO-MRSA infections respectively and was associated with a SCCmec type closely related to SCCmecIV(2B&5). The dissemination of epidemic MRSA clone, ST5-IV-PVL(+) was the main cause of increasing staphylococcal community-onset infections in Argentinean children (2003-2008), conversely to other countries. The predominance of this clone, which has capacity to express the h-VISA phenotype, in healthcare-associated community-onset cases suggests that it has infiltrated into hospital-settings.

[PMID: 15472807]
Asymptomatic colonization with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has been described as a risk factor for subsequent MRSA infection. MRSA is an important nosocomial pathogen but has currently been reported in patients without typical risk factors for nosocomial acquisition. This study was designed to evaluate the impact of asymptomatic nares MRSA colonization on the development of subsequent MRSA infection. The incidence of MRSA infection was examined in patients with and patients without MRSA or methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) colonization at admission to the hospital and in those who developed colonization during hospitalization. Patients admitted to 5 representative hospital units were prospectively evaluated. Nares samples were obtained for culture at admission and during hospitalization. Laboratory culture results were monitored to identify all MRSA infections that occurred during the study period and 1 year thereafter. Of the 758 patients who had cultures of nares samples performed at admission, 3.4% were colonized with MRSA, and 21% were colonized with MSSA. A total of 19% of patients with MRSA colonization at admission and 25% who acquired MRSA colonization during hospitalization developed infection with MRSA, compared with 1.5% and 2.0% of patients colonized with MSSA (P<.01) and uncolonized (P<.01), respectively, at admission. MRSA colonization at admission increased the risk of subsequent MRSA infection, compared with MSSA colonization (relative risk [RR], 13; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.7-64) or no staphylococcal colonization (RR, 9.5; 95% CI, 3.6-25) at admission. Acquisition of MRSA colonization also increased the risk for subsequent MRSA infection, compared with no acquisition (RR, 12; 95% CI, 4.0-38). MRSA colonization of nares, either present at admission to the hospital or acquired during hospitalization, increases the risk for MRSA infection. Identifying MRSA colonization at admission could target a high-risk population that may benefit from interventions to decrease the risk for subsequent MRSA infection.

[PMID: 24267132]
To study the clinical and molecular characteristics of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection in children. A total of 37 MRSA strains were isolated from hospitalized patients in Children's Hospital of Fudan University from March 2009 to November 2011. The clinical characteristics were investigated by a cohort study. Furthermore, the mecA, Panton-Valentine leucocidin (PVL) genes were detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the genotypes of SCCmec were determined by multiplex PCR. (1) Among the 37 MRSA isolates, infections with 21 were acquired from hospital (HA-MRSA), and 16 isolates were acquired from community (CA-MRSA). (2) In the study, MRSA frequently caused respiratory tract infection, and most of the strains were isolated from intensive care unit (ICU). (3) CA-MRSA was most frequently associated with skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI), suppurative tonsillitis, even pneumonia and septicemia. HA-MRSA infection was more aggressive, most frequently associated with pneumonia, septicemia, and central nervous system (CNS) infections, such as meningitis. In children with fever caused by HA-MRSA or CA-MRSA infection, HA-MRSA showed a longer duration of fever, for 10.5 days. C-reactive protein (CRP) level caused by HA-MRSA (63.00 mg/L) was higher than CA-MRSA (9.50 mg/L) , and there were statistically significant differences between the groups (t = 2.5670, P < 0.05). However, there were no statistically significant differences between the groups in white blood cell count (WBC) or procalcitonin (PCT) level. (4) Among 37 MRSA isolates, the whole isolates were mecA gene positive (100%). SCCmec genotyping results showed that the most frequent SCCmec types were type III, 17 isolates, the others including type IV 8 isolates, type II1 isolates, nontypable 11 isolates, type I and type V were not found in this group. Therein, among 21 HA-MRSA isolates, SCCmec III was the most common, 15 isolates, type IV 1 isolates, nontypable 5 isolates; among 16 CA-MRSA isolates, SCCmec type IV was the most common, 7 isolates, type III 2 isolates, type II 1 isolate, nontypable 6 isolates. (5) Among the 37 MRSA isolates, 28 were PVL gene positive; and among 21 HA-MRSA isolates, 17 were PVL gene positive; Among 16 CA-MRSA isolates, 11 were PVL gene positive; There were no statistically significant differences between the groups (χ(2) = 0.735, P > 0.05) . Compared with CA-MRSA, HA-MRSA infection was more aggressive, and induced higher C reactive protein; the dominant epidemic strains of CA-MRSA was SCCmec type IV, and HA-MRSA was SCCmec type III; the positive rate of PVL gene was high.

[PMID: 27025639]
During the past 25 years an increase in the prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (HA-MRSA) was recorded worldwide. Additionally, MRSA infections may occur outside and independent of hospitals, caused by community associated MRSA (CA-MRSA). In Germany, we found that at least 10% of these sporadic infections are due to livestock-associated MRSA (LA-MRSA), which is initially associated with livestock. The majority of these MRSA cases are attributed to clonal complex CC398. LA-MRSA CC398 colonizes the animals asymptomatically in about half of conventional pig farms. For about 77%-86% of humans with occupational exposure to pigs, nasal carriage has been reported; it can be lost when exposure is interrupted. Among family members living at the same farms, only 4%-5% are colonized. Spread beyond this group of people is less frequent. The prevalence of LA-MRSA in livestock seems to be influenced by farm size, farming systems, usage of disinfectants, and in-feed zinc. LA-MRSA CC398 is able to cause the same kind of infections in humans as S. aureus and MRSA in general. It can be introduced to hospitals and cause nosocomial infections such as postoperative surgical site infections, ventilator associated pneumonia, septicemia, and infections after joint replacement. For this reason, screening for MRSA colonization at hospital admittance is recommended for farmers and veterinarians with livestock contacts. Intrahospital dissemination, typical for HA-MRSA in the absence of sufficient hygiene, has only rarely been observed for LA-MRSA to date. The proportion of LA-MRSA among all MRSA from nosocomial infections is about 3% across Germany. In geographical areas with a comparatively high density of conventional farms, LA-MRSA accounts for up to 10% of MRSA from septicemia and 15% of MRSA from wound infections. As known from comparative genome analysis, LA-MRSA has evolved from human-adapted methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, and the jump to livestock was obviously associated with several genetic changes. Reversion of the genetic changes and readaptation to humans bears a potential health risk and requires tight surveillance. Although most LA-MRSA (>80%) is resistant to several antibiotics, there are still sufficient treatment options.

[PMID: 25240872]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) burden is increasing worldwide in hospitals [healthcare-associated (HA)-MRSA] and in communities [community-associated (CA)-MRSA]. However, the impact of CA-MRSA within hospitals remains limited, particularly in Latin America. A countrywide representative survey of S. aureus infections was performed in Argentina by analyzing 591 clinical isolates from 66 hospitals in a prospective cross-sectional, multicenter study (Nov-2009). This work involved healthcare-onset infections-(HAHO, >48 hospitalization hours) and community-onset (CO) infections [including both, infections (HACO) in patients with healthcare-associated risk-factors (HRFs) and infections (CACO) in those without HRFs]. MRSA strains were genetically typed as CA-MRSA and HA-MRSA genotypes (CA-MRSAG and HA-MRSAG) by SCCmec- and spa-typing, PFGE, MLST and virulence genes profile by PCR. Considering all isolates, 63% were from CO-infections and 55% were MRSA [39% CA-MRSAG and 16% HA-MRSAG]. A significantly higher MRSA proportion among CO- than HAHO-S. aureus infections was detected (58% vs 49%); mainly in children (62% vs 43%). The CA-MRSAG/HA-MRSAG have accounted for 16%/33% of HAHO-, 39%/13% of HACO- and 60.5%/0% of CACO-infections. Regarding the epidemiological associations identified in multivariate models for patients with healthcare-onset CA-MRSAG infections, CA-MRSAG behave like HA-MRSAG within hospitals but children were the highest risk group for healthcare-onset CA-MRSAG infections. Most CA-MRSAG belonged to two major clones: PFGE-type N-ST30-SCCmecIVc-t019-PVL(+) and PFGE-type I-ST5-IV-SCCmecIVa-t311-PVL(+) (45% each). The ST5-IV-PVL(+)/ST30-IV-PVL(+) clones have caused 31%/33% of all infections, 20%/4% of HAHO-, 43%/23% of HACO- and 35%/60% of CACO- infections, with significant differences by age groups (children/adults) and geographical regions. Importantly, an isolate belonging to USA300-0114-(ST8-SCCmecIVa-spat008-PVL(+)-ACME(+)) was detected for the first time in Argentina. Most of HA-MRSAG (66%) were related to the Cordobes/Chilean clone-(PFGE-type A-ST5-SCCmecI-t149) causing 18% of all infections (47% of HAHO- and 13% of HACO-infections). Results strongly suggest that the CA-MRSA clone ST5-IV-PVL(+) has begun to spread within hospitals, replacing the traditional Cordobes/Chilean-HA-MRSA clone ST5-I-PVL(-), mainly in children. Importantly, a growing MRSA reservoir in the community was associated with spreading of two CA-MRSA clones: ST5-IV-PVL(+), mainly in children with HRFs, and ST30-IV-PVL(+) in adults without HRFs. This is the first nationwide study in Argentina providing information about the molecular and clinical epidemiology of CA-MRSA, particularly within hospitals, which is essential for designing effective control measures in this country and worldwide.

[PMID: 17581935]
Community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) carrying pvl is an emerging problem worldwide. CA-MRSA tends to harbor staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec type IV (SCCmec IV), to be non-multiantibiotic resistant, and to have different genotypes from the local hospital-acquired MRSA (HA-MRSA). However, in Ireland, 80% of HA-MRSA isolates have the non-multiantibiotic-resistant genotype ST22-MRSA-IV. This study investigated MRSA isolates from Ireland (CA-MRSA, health care-associated MRSA, and HA-MRSA) for the carriage of pvl and determined the genotypic characteristics of all pvl-positive isolates identified. All 1,389 MRSA isolates were investigated by antibiogram-resistogram typing and SmaI DNA macrorestriction analysis. pvl-positive isolates were further characterized by multilocus sequence typing and SCCmec, agr, and toxin gene typing. Twenty-five (1.8%) MRSA isolates belonging to six genotypes (ST30, ST8, ST22, ST80, ST5, and ST154) harbored pvl. Nineteen of these (76%) were CA-MRSA isolates, but a prospective study of MRSA isolates from 401 patients showed that only 6.7% (2/30) of patients with CA-MRSA yielded pvl-positive isolates. Thus, pvl cannot be used as a sole marker for CA-MRSA. Fifty-two percent of pvl-positive MRSA isolates were recovered from patients with skin and soft tissue infections; thirty-six percent were from patients of non-Irish ethnic origin, reflecting the increasing heterogeneity of the Irish population due to immigration. All 25 pvl-positive isolates carried SCCmec IV; 14 (56%) harbored SCCmec IV.1 or IV.3, and the remaining 11 isolates could not be subtyped. This study demonstrates that pvl is not a reliable marker for CA-MRSA in Ireland and reveals the emergence and importation of diverse genotypes of pvl-positive MRSA in Ireland.

[PMID: 15884297]
This article explains what methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is, how it is spread and what the real challenges are in healthcare settings in the UK. It explores the different strains of MRSA and points out the main ways to control their spread. It is intended to be a reference source for all nurses.

[PMID: 27721155]
Community-associated methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) has become a severe health concern because of its treatment difficulties. Herein, we report the synthesis and biological evaluation of two phenazine natural products and a series of phenazines that show promising activities against MRSA with MIC values in the low micromolar range. Basic studies revealed that these compounds are bacteriostatic agents. The most active compound also displayed promising IC50 values against HaCat cells. Finally, a QSAR model was developed to understand the key structural features of the molecules.

[PMID: 27112442]
Little is known about the management of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) carriers in the German outpatient sector and about the impact of MRSA on their daily life. Reimbursement for MRSA related costs in the German outpatient sector is available since 2012, but its impact has not been studied yet. The aim of the study was to analyze the outpatient management of MRSA carriers from both, physicians' and MRSA carriers' perspective. Paper-based questionnaires were mailed to physicians providing outpatient care and to MRSA carriers in 2013. MRSA carriers were recruited among patients tested positive for MRSA during a hospital stay in 2012. General practitioners, specialists for internal medicine, urologists, and dermatologists working in the outpatient catchment areas of the hospitals were contacted. Out of 910 MRSA carriers 16.5 % completed the questionnaires; among 851 physicians 9.5 % participated. 27.3 % of the responding MRSA carriers stated that no healthcare professional had ever talked to them about MRSA. 17.4 % reported self-stigmatization in terms of restricting social contacts; 47.3 % remembered decolonization and 33.3 % reported that their MRSA status was checked after discharge. Physicians displayed heterogeneous attitude and activity towards MRSA (number of applied decolonization and MRSA screenings). A minority (15.2 %) were satisfied with the reimbursement of costs, 35.9 % reported full agreement with the general recommendations for the handling of MRSA carriers. MRSA carriers appear not well informed; (self-) stigmatization is occurring and should be tackled. Greater awareness of MRSA as a problem in the outpatient sector could lead to a better handling of MRSA carriers.

[PMID: 19130105]
The aim of this study was to investigate the methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) clones isolated in a Dutch university hospital, situated near the borders of Belgium and Germany, between 2002 and 2006. MRSA strains (n = 175) were characterized using spa and SCCmec typing. The presence of Panton Valentine leukocidin (PVL) was determined. Between 2002 and 2005, ST5-MRSA-IV was predominant, and the spa type of ST5-MRSA-IV changed from t002 to t447. ST5-MRSA-I, ST5-MRSA-II, ST228-MRSA-I, and ST247-MRSA-I were also observed in this period. From 2004, the MRSA genetic background became more diverse, and in 2006, ST5-MRSA-IV was only sporadically observed. From 2005, ST5-MRSA-II, ST8-MRSA-IV, ST22-MRSA-IV, and ST45-MRSA-IV were increasingly observed. Several other MRSA clones, such as ST239-MRSA-III, were found sporadically. Four PVL-positive MRSA isolates were observed, associated with ST80-MRSA-IV and ST8-MRSA-IV. ST5-MRSA-I, ST5-MRSA-II, ST5-MRSA-IV, and ST228-MRSA-I have not been described previously in The Netherlands.

[PMID: 19777772]
The theory of positive deviance holds that in any group, some people are more effective than others even when they have the same resources at hand. The object is to identify those people, see what they're doing differently and share it with the larger group. The Plexus Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation recently collaborated on a six-hospital positive-deviance study that reduced methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection rates by 70 percent. What these hospitals learned may help others cut their MRSA rates.

[PMID: 21075466]
In 2005, a distinct clone of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA CC398) was found in pigs and people in contact with pigs. The structure of the pig production chain in high technology pig husbandry enables pathogens to spread during animal trading, with an increasing prevalence in herds further down the chain. The objective of this study was to quantify the effect of the MRSA status of the supplying herd on the MRSA status of the receiving herd in order to gain more insight into the role of animal trading as a transmission route for MRSA CC398. Nasal samples (60-80 pigs per herd) were collected from 38 herds; in 20 herds, environmental samples were collected as well. Ten MRSA-positive herds (based on the results of nasal swabs of 10 individual pigs per herd) from a prior study were included in the data analysis. Herds were classified as MRSA positive if at least one sample tested positive. The 48 herds were part of 14 complete (40 herds) and 4 incomplete (8 herds) pig production chains. Fifty-six percent of the herds were classified as MRSA positive. MRSA-positive herds were observed at the start (breeding herds), middle (farrowing herds) and the end (finishing herds) of the pig production chain. All of the herds in 8 chains tested MRSA positive;, all of the herds in 5 chains tested MRSA negative and in the remaining 5 chains, MRSA-positive and MRSA-negative herds were detected. Seven spa types were found, which were all previously confirmed to belong to CC398. All of the isolates were susceptible to mupirocin, linezolid, rifampicin, fusidic acid and cotrimoxazole. Resistance against tetracycline, erythromycin and clindamycin was found in 100, 74 and 76% of the isolates, respectively. Seventy-nine percent of herds with a MRSA-positive supplier of pigs were MRSA positive, whereas 23% of herds with a MRSA-negative supplier were MRSA positive (OR=10.8; 95% CI: 1.5-110.1; P=0.011). The presence of entirely MRSA-positive and MRSA-negative chains and the strong association between the MRSA status of herds and their suppliers illustrates a large risk associated with purchasing pigs from MRSA-positive herds; a top-down strategy for future control programs is, therefore, a basic requirement. However, 23% of herds with a MRSA-negative supplier were MRSA positive and furthermore, 46% of the herds at the top of the pig production chain without a supplier tested MRSA positive. This underlined the need for the identification of additional risk factors for MRSA.

[PMID: 19732087]
The aim of the present study was to investigate the antibiotic susceptibility patterns and molecular epidemiology of clinical methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolates recovered in 24 hospitals in 20 cities in Croatia from October to December 2004. A total of 1815 consecutive S. aureus isolates were recovered, 248 of which were MRSA. The MRSA isolates were analysed using spa typing, multilocus sequence typing and SCCmec typing. Furthermore, the presence of Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) genes was determined as a genetic marker for community-associated MRSA. The MRSA prevalence was 14%. Ninety-six per cent of the MRSA isolates were resistant to ciprofloxacin, 95% to clindamycin and azithromycin, 94% to gentamicin, and 93% to erythromycin. The majority of the MRSA isolates (78%) was associated with the ST111-MRSA-I clone. In addition, various other endemic MRSA clones were observed, such as the ST247-MRSA-I (4%), the ST45-MRSA-IV (2%), the ST5-MRSA-I (2%), the ST239-MRSA-III (2%), the ST5-MRSA-II (1%), the ST8-MRSA-IV (1%) and the ST5-MRSA-IV (<1%) clones. Furthermore, we observed one PVL-negative ST80-MRSA-IV isolate. Four PVL-positive MRSA isolates were found, associated with ST8-MRSA-IV, ST80-MRSA-IV and ST80-MRSA-I. The ST111-MRSA-I clone was predominant in Croatia. Future surveillance studies of MRSA are important to elucidate whether changes in the clonal distribution of MRSA will occur, and if the minor endemic MRSA clones observed in the present study will replace the ST111-MRSA-I clone on a large scale.

[PMID: 19162372]
The aim of this study was to assess to what extent patients with meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) at respiratory sites shed viable MRSA into the air of hospital rooms. We also evaluated whether the distance from the patient could influence the level of contamination. Air sampling was performed directly onto MRSA-selective agar in 24 hospital rooms containing patients with MRSA colonization or infection of the respiratory tract. Samplings were performed in duplicate at 0.5, 1 and 2-3 m from the patients' heads. Clinical and environmental isolates were compared using antimicrobial resistance patterns and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. MRSA strains were isolated from 21 out of 24 rooms, in quantities varying from between 1 and 78 cfu/m3. In each of the 21 rooms, at least one of the environmental isolates was identical to a clinical isolate from the patient in that room. There was no significant difference in MRSA counts between the distance from the patient's head and the sampler. This study demonstrates that most patients with MRSA infection or colonisation of the respiratory tract shed viable MRSA into the air of their room. The results emphasise the need to study MRSA in air in more detail in order to improve infection control recommendations.

[PMID: 27736763]
Bloodstream infections with Staphylococcus aureus are clinically significant and are often treated with empirical methicillin resistance (MRSA, methicillin-resistant S. aureus) coverage. However, vancomycin has associated harms. We hypothesized that MRSA screening correlated with resistance in S. aureus bacteremia and could help determine the requirement for empirical vancomycin therapy. We reviewed consecutive S. aureus bacteremias over a 5-year period at two tertiary care hospitals. MRSA colonization was evaluated in three ways: as tested within 30 days of bacteremia (30-day criterion), as tested within 30 days but accounting for any prior positive results (ever-positive criterion), or as tested in known-positive patients, with patients with unknown MRSA status being labeled negative (known-positive criterion). There were 409 S. aureus bacteremias: 302 (73.8%) methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) and 107 (26.2%) MRSA bacteremias. In the 167 patients with MSSA bacteremias, 7.2% had a positive MRSA test within 30 days. Of 107 patients with MRSA bacteremia, 68 were tested within 30 days (54 positive; 79.8%), and another 21 (19.6%) were previously positive. The 30-day criterion provided negative predictive values (NPV) exceeding 90% and 95% if the prevalence of MRSA in S. aureus bacteremia was less than 33.4% and 19.2%, respectively. The same NPVs were predicted at MRSA proportions below 39.7% and 23.8%, respectively, for the ever-positive criterion and 34.4% and 19.9%, respectively, for the known-positive criterion. In MRSA-colonized patients, positive predictive values exceeded 50% at low prevalence. MRSA screening could help avoid empirical vancomycin therapy and its complications in stable patients and settings with low-to-moderate proportions of MRSA bacteremia.

[PMID: 21571749]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an emerging threat to public health, especially in correctional settings. Outbreaks have been seen in jails and prisons in Mississippi, California, Texas, and Georgia in recent years. Also, many correctional settings have seen an increase in MRSA infection greater than in the general population. This article examines the lessons that have been learned about MRSA in correctional settings and ponders what is yet to be learned about this disease in these populations.

[PMID: 19252301]
In a previous study, we reported that two kaempferol glycosides isolated from Laurus nobilis L., kaempferol-3-O-alpha-L-(2'',4''-di-E-p-coumaroyl)-rhamnoside (C2) and kaempferol-3-O-alpha-L-(2''-E-p-coumaroyl-4''-Z-p-coumaroyl)-rhamnoside (C3), showed strong antibacterial activities against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Thereafter we found that these compounds greatly reduced the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of some fluoroquinolones in MRSA. In other words, C2 and C3 greatly potentiated anti-MRSA activity of fluoroquinolones. The effect of C2 and C3 with fluoroquinolones was found to be synergistic. The potentiation activity was observed with hydrophilic fluoroquinolones, such as norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin, but not with hydrophobic quinolones. We also found that norfloxacin reduced MICs of C2 and C3. The effect was synergistic. Possible mechanism of the synergistic effect was discussed.

[PMID: 23756924]
To compare the BD GeneOhm Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) Achromopeptidase (ACP) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with the culture method for the detection of MRSA colonization. One hundred and two patients were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit in King Khalid Hospital, Najran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia from July 2010 to February 2011. Separate swabs from the nose, axilla, and groin of each patient were processed by the culture method (sheep blood agar plate and mannitol salt agar plate) and BD GeneOhm MRSA ACP assay. Of the 287 samples, 62 (21.6%) were MRSA positive by the PCR assay and 26 (9%) were MRSA positive by the culture method. The PCR method showed 88.4% sensitivity and 98.6% negative predictive value. The number of MRSA-PCR positive groin specimens was nearly the same as nasal specimens. The PCR method gave positive results in 22.5% of patients by nasal specimens, 27.5% of patients by nasal and groin specimens, and 30.4% of patients by nasal, groin, and axilla specimens. The PCR method detected 30.4% of patients as MRSA positive while the culture method detected 19.6% of patients as positive for MRSA. The BD GeneOhm MRSA ACP assay has high sensitivity and NPV and hence is a useful screening method to exclude patients who are not colonized with MRSA.

[PMID: 23824338]
Postoperative methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections are occasionally fatal. We hypothesized that nasal MRSA screening might predict the risk of postoperative MRSA infections. The aim of the current study was to elucidate the relationship between the positivity of nasal MRSA screening and postoperative MRSA infections. Six hundred and fourteen surgical patients who were admitted to the intensive care unit and underwent nasal MRSA screening between April 2006 and March 2011 were divided into MRSA-positive and -negative groups. The incidence of postoperative MRSA infections in the MRSA-positive and MRSA-negative groups were compared, and various risk factors for MRSA infections were evaluated. The incidence of postoperative MRSA infections, such as pneumonia and enteritis, in the MRSA-positive group was significantly higher than that in the MRSA-negative group (41.9 vs. 3.1 %). The significant independent risk factors for postoperative MRSA infections were a positive MRSA screening, an operation lasting more than 300 min and an emergency operation. A positive MRSA screening was the most statistically significant risk factor for postoperative MRSA pneumonia and enteritis, but was not a risk factor for MRSA surgical site infections. Nasal MRSA screening can help to identify patients who have an increased risk of developing postoperative MRSA infections, and would enable physicians to take a prompt action if these complications occur.

[PMID: 24322533]
Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) is increasing in prevalence among asymptomatic carriers and in cases of paediatric soft-tissue infections alike. CA-MRSA may express virulence factors such as Panton-Valentine leukocidin, which makes soft-tissue and hard-tissue infections due to such organisms challenging to treat. We report a case of osteomyelitis of the proximal tibia in a 10-year-old boy and discuss its management in what is to the authors' knowledge the first case report of Panton-Valentine leukocidin-positive CA-MRSA osteomyelitis in a child in the UK.

[PMID: 22814471]
We evaluated the new, fully automated molecular BD Max methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) assay for detection of methicillin-resistant S. aureus in a low-prevalence (4.1%) setting. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values were 93.9%, 99.2%, 83.8%, and 99.7%, respectively. The assay reported fewer unresolved results than the BD GeneOhm MRSA ACP assay.

[PMID: 19129414]
The first U.S. multicenter clinical trial to assess the performance of the Cepheid Xpert MRSA assay (Xpert MRSA) was conducted. The assay is a qualitative test designed for the rapid detection of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) directly from nares swabs. This novel test combines integrated nucleic acid extraction and automated real-time PCR for the detection of a MRSA-specific signature sequence. A total of 1,077 nares specimens were collected from seven geographically distinct health care sites across the United States with prevalence rates ranging from 5.2% to 44%. Nares specimens were tested by (i) the Xpert MRSA assay, (ii) direct culture on CHROMagar MRSA medium (direct CM culture), and (iii) broth-enriched culture (Trypticase soy broth with 6.5% sodium chloride) followed by plating onto CHROMagar MRSA medium (broth-enriched CM culture). When direct CM culture was designated the reference method, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) of the Xpert MRSA assay were 94.3%, 93.2%, 73.0%, and 98.8%, respectively. When broth-enriched CM culture was used as the reference method, the clinical sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of the Xpert MRSA assay were 86.3%, 94.9%, 80.5%, and 96.6%, respectively. The BD GeneOhm MRSA (BDGO) assay was performed as a comparative molecular method. No statistical performance differences were observed between the Xpert MRSA and BDGO assays when they were compared to culture methods. From this large-scale, multicenter clinical comparison, we conclude that the Xpert MRSA assay is a simple, rapid, and accurate method for performing active surveillance for MRSA in a variety of health care populations.

[PMID: 20071545]
The efficacy of the BD GeneOhm methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) assay was assessed by analyzing nasal swabs and swabs from other body sites for the presence of MRSA in a low-prevalence area. From 681 patients with a high risk for MRSA carriage, 1,601 specimens were collected and transported in Amies agar. After discordant analysis, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of the BD GeneOhm MRSA assay were 84.3%, 99.2%, 88.4%, and 98.9%, respectively, compared to culture.

[PMID: 26047024]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a common multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogen. We herein discussed MRSA and its infections in Krasnoyarsk, Siberian Russia between 2007 and 2011. The incidence of MRSA in 3,662 subjects was 22.0% and 2.9% for healthcare- and community-associated MRSA (HA- and CA-MRSA), respectively. The 15-day mortality rates for MRSA hospital- and community-acquired pneumonia (HAP and CAP) were 6.5% and 50%, respectively. MRSA CAP cases included pediatric deaths; of the MRSA pneumonia episodes available, ≥27.3% were associated with bacteremia. Most cases of HA-MRSA examined exhibited ST239/spa3(t037)/SCCmecIII.1.1.2 (designated as ST239Kras), while all CA-MRSA cases examined were ST8/spa1(t008)/SCCmecIV.3.1.1(IVc) (designated as ST8Kras). ST239Kras and ST8Kras strongly expressed cytolytic peptide (phenol-soluble modulin α, PSMα; and δ-hemolysin, Hld) genes, similar to CA-MRSA. ST239Kras pneumonia may have been attributed to a unique set of multiple virulence factors (MVFs): toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1), elevated PSMα/Hld expression, α-hemolysin, the staphylococcal enterotoxin SEK/SEQ, the immune evasion factor SCIN/SAK, and collagen adhesin. Regarding ST8Kras, SEA was included in MVFs, some of which were common to ST239Kras. The ST239Kras (strain OC3) genome contained: a completely unique phage, φSa7-like (W), with no att repetition; S. aureus pathogenicity island SaPI2R, the first TSST-1 gene-positive (tst+) SaPI in the ST239 lineage; and a super copy of IS256 (≥22 copies/genome). ST239Kras carried the Brazilian SCCmecIII.1.1.2 and United Kingdom-type tst. ST239Kras and ST8Kras were MDR, with the same levofloxacin resistance mutations; small, but transmissible chloramphenicol resistance plasmids spread widely enough to not be ignored. These results suggest that novel MDR and MVF+ HA- and CA-MRSA (ST239Kras and ST8Kras) emerged in Siberian Russia (Krasnoyarsk) associated with fatal pneumonia, and also with ST239Kras, a new (Siberian Russian) clade of the ST239 lineage, which was created through stepwise evolution during its potential transmission route of Brazil-Europe-Russia/Krasnoyarsk, thereby selective advantages from unique MVFs and the MDR.

[PMID: 25108628]
It was found in the present study that combined use of fusidic acid (FA) and berberine chloride (BBR) offered an in vitro synergistic action against 7 of the 30 clinical methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strains, with a fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) index ranging from 0.5 to 0.19. This synergistic effect was most pronounced on MRSA 4806, an FA-resistant isolate, with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value of 1,024 μg/ml. The time-kill curve experiment showed that FA plus BBR yielded a 4.2 log10 c.f.u./ml reduction in the number of MRSA 4806 bacteria after 24-h incubation as compared with BBR alone. Viable count analysis showed that FA plus BBR produced a 3.0 log10 c.f.u./ml decrease in biofilm formation and a 1.5 log10 c.f.u./ml decrease in mature biofilm in viable cell density as compared with BBR alone. In addition, phase contrast micrographs confirmed that biofilm formation was significantly inhibited and mature biofilm was obviously destructed when FA was used in combination with BBR. These results provide evidence that combined use of FA and BBR may prove to be a promising clinical therapeutic strategy against MRSA.

[PMID: 26812054]
Identifying and tackling the social determinants of infectious diseases has become a public health priority following the recognition that individuals with lower socioeconomic status are disproportionately affected by infectious diseases. In many parts of the world, epidemiologically and genotypically defined community-associated (CA) methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strains have emerged to become frequent causes of hospital infection. The aim of this study was to use spatial models with adjustment for area-level hospital attendance to determine the transmission niche of genotypically defined CA- and health-care-associated (HA)-MRSA strains across a diverse region of South East London and to explore a potential link between MRSA carriage and markers of social and material deprivation. This study involved spatial analysis of cross-sectional data linked with all MRSA isolates identified by three National Health Service (NHS) microbiology laboratories between 1 November 2011 and 29 February 2012. The cohort of hospital-based NHS microbiology diagnostic services serves 867,254 usual residents in the Lambeth, Southwark, and Lewisham boroughs in South East London, United Kingdom (UK). Isolates were classified as HA- or CA-MRSA based on whole genome sequencing. All MRSA cases identified over 4 mo within the three-borough catchment area (n = 471) were mapped to small geographies and linked to area-level aggregated socioeconomic and demographic data. Disease mapping and ecological regression models were used to infer the most likely transmission niches for each MRSA genetic classification and to describe the spatial epidemiology of MRSA in relation to social determinants. Specifically, we aimed to identify demographic and socioeconomic population traits that explain cross-area extra variation in HA- and CA-MRSA relative risks following adjustment for hospital attendance data. We explored the potential for associations with the English Indices of Deprivation 2010 (including the Index of Multiple Deprivation and several deprivation domains and subdomains) and the 2011 England and Wales census demographic and socioeconomic indicators (including numbers of households by deprivation dimension) and indicators of population health. Both CA-and HA-MRSA were associated with household deprivation (CA-MRSA relative risk [RR]: 1.72 [1.03-2.94]; HA-MRSA RR: 1.57 [1.06-2.33]), which was correlated with hospital attendance (Pearson correlation coefficient [PCC] = 0.76). HA-MRSA was also associated with poor health (RR: 1.10 [1.01-1.19]) and residence in communal care homes (RR: 1.24 [1.12-1.37]), whereas CA-MRSA was linked with household overcrowding (RR: 1.58 [1.04-2.41]) and wider barriers, which represent a combined score for household overcrowding, low income, and homelessness (RR: 1.76 [1.16-2.70]). CA-MRSA was also associated with recent immigration to the UK (RR: 1.77 [1.19-2.66]). For the area-level variation in RR for CA-MRSA, 28.67% was attributable to the spatial arrangement of target geographies, compared with only 0.09% for HA-MRSA. An advantage to our study is that it provided a representative sample of usual residents receiving care in the catchment areas. A limitation is that relationships apparent in aggregated data analyses cannot be assumed to operate at the individual level. There was no evidence of community transmission of HA-MRSA strains, implying that HA-MRSA cases identified in the community originate from the hospital reservoir and are maintained by frequent attendance at health care facilities. In contrast, there was a high risk of CA-MRSA in deprived areas linked with overcrowding, homelessness, low income, and recent immigration to the UK, which was not explainable by health care exposure. Furthermore, areas adjacent to these deprived areas were themselves at greater risk of CA-MRSA, indicating community transmission of CA-MRSA. This ongoing community transmission could lead to CA-MRSA becoming the dominant strain types carried by patients admitted to hospital, particularly if successful hospital-based MRSA infection control programmes are maintained. These results suggest that community infection control programmes targeting transmission of CA-MRSA will be required to control MRSA in both the community and hospital. These epidemiological changes will also have implications for effectiveness of risk-factor-based hospital admission MRSA screening programmes.

[PMID: 22176801]
To characterize the patient demographics, clinical features, and antibiotic susceptibility of ocular infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), including community-associated (CA) and healthcare-associated (HA) isolates. Retrospective, observational study. Patients (n = 519) with culture-proven S. aureus ocular infections seen between January 1, 1999, and December 31, 2008, in Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. Data collected included patient demographics and clinical information. Antibiotic susceptibility was verified by disc diffusion method. Proportion of MRSA in S. aureus ocular infections and the clinical characteristics, diagnoses, and antibiotic susceptibility patterns of CA-MRSA versus HA-MRSA ocular infections. We identified 274 patients with MRSA ocular infections, which comprised 181 CA-MRSA and 93 HA-MRSA isolates. The average rate of MRSA in S. aureus infections was 52.8% with a stable trend, whereas the annual ratio of CA-MRSA in ocular MRSA infections averaged 66.1% and tended to increase over the 10-year interval. Patients with ocular CA-MRSA were younger. Lid and lacrimal system disorders were more common, but keratitis, endophthalmitis, and wound infection were less common among CA-MRSA cases than HA-MRSA cases. Both CA-MRSA and HA-MRSA isolates were resistant to clindamycin and erythromycin, but CA-MRSA was more susceptible to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. Community-associated MRSA is an important pathogen of ocular infections; CA-MRSA and HA-MRSA ocular infections differ demographically and clinically, but both strains were multi-resistant in Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, one of the biggest referral centers in Taiwan. In a country with a high prevalence of MRSA, ophthalmologists should be aware of such epidemiologic information.

[PMID: 27450316]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a major cause of both hospital and community infections globally. It's important to illuminate the differences between community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) and hospital-acquired MRSA (HA-MRSA), but there have been confusions on the definition, especially for the MRSA isolates identified within 48 h of admission. This study aimed to determine the molecular characteristics and virulence genes profile of CA and HA-MRSA isolates identified less than 48 h after hospital admission in our region. A total 62 MRSA isolates identified within 48 h after admission and the clinical data were collected. Antimicrobial susceptibility test (AST) of collected isolates were performed according to the guidelines of Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) 2015, and staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec) typing, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and virulence gene profiling were performed to explore the molecular diversity. SCCmec III and sequence type (ST) 239 were the most prevalent SCCmec type and ST in both CA and HA-MRSA groups. HA-MRSA group had higher prevalence of SCCmec III (87.2 %) and ST239 (79.5 %) compared with CA-MRSA (60.9 and 43.4 %, both P < 0.001), while the frequency of SCCmec IV (26.0 %) and ST59 (21.7 %) were higher in CA-MRSA than its counterpart (P < 0.001 and P = 0.003). MRSA-ST239-III was the predominant type in this study (61.3 %, 38/62), especially in HA-MRSA group (76.9 %, 30/39). However, CA-MRSA strains exhibited more diversity in genotypes in this study. Meanwhile, CA-MRSA tended to have lower resistant percentage to non-β-lactams antibiotics but more virulence genes carriage, especially the staphylococcal enterotoxins (SE) genes. Notably, seb gene was only detected in CA-MRSA isolates (52.2 %), likely a significant marker for CA-MRSA isolates. Panton-Valentine leukocidin gene (PVL) was highly detected in both groups, while appeared no significantly different between CA-MRSA (47.8 %) and HA-MRSA (43.6 %). Our findings support a difference in the molecular epidemiology and virulence genes profile of CA-MRSA and HA-MRSA. Furthermore, this study indicates a possible transmission from HA-MRSA to CA-MRSA, which may cause the overlap of the definition.

[PMID: 23405883]
A diverse collection of 261 Staphylococcus aureus strains from human, animal, food, and environmental sources were tested for the presence and type of SCCmec elements, antibiotic susceptibility to various antibiotics, and non-ß-lactam antibiotic resistance genes. About 18.39% (48/261) of strains were methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) including 29.75% (36/121) human strains of which 29 strains were hospital-acquired MRSA (HA-MRSA) and 7 strains were community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) and 19.67% (12/61) animal strains that all were CA-MRSA strains. The percentage of CA-MRSA strains from animals was significantly higher than that from human (p<0.01). Most of MRSA strains and a part of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) strains harbored unique combinations of non-ß-lactamase genes aac(6')/aph(2″), aph(3')-III, ant (4',4″), ermA, ermC, mrsA, tetM, and tetK. Antibiotic resistance genes were detected more frequently in HA-MRSA strains than in CA-MRSA strains (p<0.01). MRSA strains and MSSA strains had 22 and 39 antibiotic profiles to 15 tested antibiotics, respectively. The resistant proportion was higher in HA-MRSA strains than in CA-MSSA strains for various antibiotics, as well as higher in MRSA strains than in MSSA strains. Animal MRSA reservoirs (particularly pigs and cows) might represent an important source of human CA-MRSA. CA-MRSA strains might acquire more different resistance genes gradually, depending on the selective pressure of antibiotics in different regions or environments. CA-MRSA is not yet endemic in China, but could be prevalent in future, contributing to its acquiring more resistance genes and huge animal sources. Infection with multidrug-resistant MSSA strains acquired from food, animal, and human sources might also become a significant problem for human medicine, which warrants further study.

[PMID: 24850346]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections pose a major challenge in health care, yet the limited heterogeneity within this group hinders molecular investigations of related outbreaks. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) has been the gold standard approach but is impractical for many clinical laboratories and is often replaced with PCR-based methods. Regardless, both approaches can prove problematic for identifying subclonal outbreaks. Here, we explore the use of whole-genome sequencing for clinical laboratory investigations of MRSA molecular epidemiology. We examine the relationships of 44 MRSA isolates collected over a period of 3 years by using whole-genome sequencing and two PCR-based methods, multilocus variable-number tandem-repeat analysis (MLVA) and spa typing. We find that MLVA offers higher resolution than spa typing, as it resolved 17 versus 12 discrete isolate groups, respectively. In contrast, whole-genome sequencing reproducibly cataloged genomic variants (131,424 different single nucleotide polymorphisms and indels across the strain collection) that uniquely identified each MRSA clone, recapitulating those groups but enabling higher-resolution phylogenetic inferences of the epidemiological relationships. Importantly, whole-genome sequencing detected a significant number of variants, thereby distinguishing between groups that were considered identical by both spa typing (minimum, 1,124 polymorphisms) and MLVA (minimum, 193 polymorphisms); this suggests that these more conventional approaches can lead to false-positive identification of outbreaks due to inappropriate grouping of genetically distinct strains. An analysis of the distribution of variants across the MRSA genome reveals 47 mutational hot spots (comprising ∼ 2.5% of the genome) that account for 23.5% of the observed polymorphisms, and the use of this selected data set successfully recapitulates most epidemiological relationships in this pathogen group.

[PMID: 25648247]
Since the early 2000s, the incidence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections among the community of people lacking known healthcare risk factors has increased. This MRSA infection is referred to as community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) infection and is distinct from hospital-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA) infection, which occurs among people with known healthcare risk factors. Understanding the epidemiology of CA-MRSA infections is critical; however, this has not been investigated in detail in Japan. Our objective was to investigate the incidence of CA-MRSA infections in a regional hospital. We investigated CA-MRSA isolates and infections in a rural regional hospital by reviewing medical records of one year. Infections were classified as CA-MRSA if no established risk factors were identified. During 2008, 31 Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) isolates were detected in 29 unique patients, with 1 methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) isolates obtained from 19 patients (66%) and MRSA obtained from 10 patients (34%). In the 10 patients with MRSA, the number of HA-MRSA and CA-MRSA cases were nine (32% of patients with S. aureus isolates) and one (3%), respectively. The patient with CA-MRSA was diagnosed with cellulitis due to CA-MRSA. All nine patients with HA-MRSA exhibited colonization. We observed a CA-MRSA case in a regional hospital in Japan, suggesting that incidence trends of CA-MRSA should be considered in future research and treatment.

[PMID: 19828738]
Rapid laboratory methods provide optimal support for active surveillance efforts to screen for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Most laboratories struggle to determine the optimal use of resources, considering options to balance cost, speed, and diagnostic accuracy. To assess the performance of common methods, the first comparison of MRSASelect agar (MS) and CHROMagar MRSA (CA), with and without broth enrichment followed by a 24-h subculture to MS, was performed. Results were compared to those of the Xpert MRSA assay. For direct culture methods, the agreement between MS and CA was 98.8%. At 18 h, direct MS identified 93% of all positive samples from direct culture and 84% of those identified by the Xpert MRSA. For Trypticase soy broth-enriched MS culture, incubated overnight and then subcultured for an additional 24 h, the agreement with Xpert MRSA was 96%. The agreement between direct MS and Xpert MRSA was 100% when semiquantitative culture revealed a bacterial density of 2+ or greater; however, discrepancies between culture and Xpert MRSA arose for MRSA bacterial densities of 1+ or less, indicating low density as a common cause of false-negative culture results. Since 1+ or less was established as the most common MRSA carrier state, broth enrichment or PCR may be critical for the identification of all MRSA carriers who may be reservoirs for transmission. In this active-surveillance convenience sample, the use of broth enrichment followed by subculture to MS offered a low-cost but sensitive method for MRSA screening, with performance similar to that of Xpert MRSA PCR.

[PMID: 25865979]
To assess whether vancomycin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) creeps among clinical isolates of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in a regional hospital in China. Furthermore, to analyze the causes of vancomycin MIC creeps and the relationship between vancomycin MICs and the outcome among patients with MRSA infection. All clinical isolates of MRSA from 2006-2010 were retrieved and tested by the broth microdilution procedure to determine their vancomycin MIC. Meanwhile, related patient records were analyzed. While all isolates were susceptive to vancomycin, the percentage of isolates with a vancomycin MIC = 1 mg/L increased significantly from 2006 (37.0%) to 2010 (75.7%). Meanwhile, vancomycin usage density (DDDs/1000 bed-days) had increased significantly from 2006-2010. Mean linear correlation analysis showed a statistically significant positive correlation (r = 0.905, P < 0.05) between the consumption of vancomycin and the percentage of MRSA isolates with a vancomycin MIC = 1 mg/L. Clinical records revealed high vancomycin MIC was associated with a higher microbiologic failure rate in MRSA bloodstream infections. The data demonstrated vancomycin MIC creep among clinical isolates in our hospital, and the MIC creep may be caused by the increasing usage of vancomycin. Furthermore, the analysis strongly suggested this shift of vancomycin MIC within the susceptible range may be associated with an increasing probability of treatment failure.

[PMID: 20861339]
Universal surveillance upon patient admission is important in reducing the transmission of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and associated disease in hospitals. High costs for the health care system in conjunction with MRSA have promoted the development of rapid screening methods to detect MRSA carriers. This study compared two real-time PCR methods, the BD GeneOhm MRSA assay (BDGO) and the Xpert MRSA assay, with broth-enriched culture to define their performance characteristics and rapidity in an area with low MRSA prevalence. In total, 414 swabs from the nose and 389 swabs from the groin from 425 patients were tested. Of those 425 patients, 378 had swabs from both the nose and groin in parallel. Two hundred thirty-one and 194 patients were randomly assigned to the BDGO group and the Xpert MRSA group, respectively. In general, sensitivity, specificity, and negative predictive value (NPV) were high for the BDGO (100%, 98.5%, and 100%, respectively) and the Xpert MRSA (100%, 98.2%, and 100%, respectively), irrespective of whether or not nasal and inguinal specimens were considered alone or combined. In contrast, the positive predictive value (PPV) was lower: before the resolution of discrepant results, the PPVs for nasal and inguinal specimens alone and combined were 87.5%, 86.7%, and 82.4% for the BDGO and 91.7%, 66.7%, and 92.9% for the Xpert MRSA, respectively. After the resolution of discrepant results, PPVs were 93.8%, 93.3% and 94.1% for the BDGO and 91.7%, 88.9% and 92.9% for the Xpert MRSA, respectively. With the BDGO, 4 of 16 carriers were each identified by nasal or inguinal swabs alone, whereas in the Xpert MRSA group, 4 of 13 carriers were exclusively identified by nasal swabs and 2 of 13 were identified by inguinal swabs alone. Both PCR methods showed no significant difference in the number of discrepant results (odds ratio, 0.70 [P = 0.789]), but specimens from wounds and other body sites (axilla, vagina, and throat) produced discrepancies more often than nasal and groin specimens (odds ratios, 4.724 [P = 0.058] and 12.163 [P < 0.001], respectively). The facts that no false-negative PCR results were detected and increased PPVs were found after the resolution of discrepant results point to PCR as the actual gold standard. Since both sensitivity and NPV were exceptionally high for PCR, backup cultures may, therefore, be unnecessary in an area with low prevalence and with a preemptive isolation strategy but may still be useful for PCR-positive specimens because of the lower PPV for both methods and the possibility of susceptibility testing. The median time for analysis, including extraction, hands-on time, and actual PCR was 2 h 20 min for the Xpert MRSA versus 5 h 40 min for the BDGO. Concerning reporting time, including administration and specimen collection, the Xpert MRSA was faster than the BDGO (7 h 50 min versus 17 h).

[PMID: 19710260]
Detection of methicillin (meticillin)-resistant Staphylococcus aureus colonization was assessed using combined nose and groin swabs in two commercial PCR assays (the Xpert MRSA assay and the BD GeneOhm MRSA assay). Compared to routine culture, both had similar sensitivities (87.0% versus 84.8%, respectively) and specificities (93.8% versus 92.7%, respectively). Combined PCR assays provide a rapid and more-complete assessment of colonization at a cost similar to that of single-site analysis.

[PMID: 25113379]
Prior studies published in the cardiothoracic, orthopedic and gastrointestinal surgery have identified the importance of nasal (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) MRSA screening and subsequent decolonization to reduce MRSA surgical site infection (SSI). This is the first study to date correlating nasal MRSA colonization with postoperative spinal MRSA SSI. To assess the significance of nasal MRSA colonization in the setting of MRSA SSI. A retrospective electronic chart review of patients from year 2011 to June 2013 was conducted for patients with both nasal MRSA colonization within 30 days prior to spinal surgery. Patients who tested positive for MRSA were put on contact isolation protocol. None of these patients received topical antibiotics for decolonization of nasal MRSA. A total of 519 patients were identified; 384 negative (74%), 110 MSSA-positive (21.2%), and 25 (4.8%) MRSA-positive. Culture positive surgical site infection (SSI) was identified in 27 (5.2%) cases and was higher in MRSA-positive group than in MRSA-negative and MSSA-positive groups (12% vs. 5.73% vs. 1.82%; p=0.01). The MRSA SSI rate was 0.96% (n=5). MRSA SSI developed in 8% of the MRSA-positive group as compared to only in 0.61% of MRSA-negative group, with a calculated odds ratio of 14.23 (p=0.02). In the presence of SSI, nasal MRSA colonization was associated with MRSA-positive wound culture (66.67 vs. 12.5%; p<0.0001). Preoperative nasal MRSA colonization is associated with postoperative spinal MRSA SSI. Preoperative screening and subsequent decolonization using topical antibiotics may help in decreasing the incidence of MRSA SSI after spine surgery. Nasal MRSA+ patients undergoing spinal surgery should be informed regarding their increased risk of developing surgical site infection.

[PMID: 12723397]
The susceptibility to arbekacin (ABK) of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was investigated to find out how it related to aac(6')/aph(2") gene. In 49 isolates of MRSA for which MIC of ABK ranged from 0.125 to 64 micrograms/ml, the MICs of ABK for 38 strains carrying aac(6')/aph(2") gene were widely distributed from 0.25 to 64, whereas those for 11 strains without that gene were all < or = 0.5 microgram/ml. Residual rate of ABK activity was higher than that of gentamicin after the reaction with each crude enzyme preparation extracted from 3 isolates of MRSA, carrying aac(6')/aph(2") and aad(4',4") genes. Furthermore, 97 strains of MRSA isolated at Kanagawa prefecture in Japan in 1999 were all sensitive to ABK, although 28 strains of them carried aac(6')/aph(2") gene. These results showed that ABK resistance was not necessarily related to carrying aac(6')/aph(2") gene in clinical isolates of MRSA.

[PMID: 17385151]
To determine the appropriate method to calculate the rate of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection and colonization (hereafter, MRSA rates) for interhospital comparisons, such that the large number of patients who are already MRSA positive on admission is taken into account. A prospective, multicenter, hospital-based surveillance of MRSA-positive case patients from January through December 2004. Data from 31 hospitals participating in the German national nosocomial infections surveillance system (KISS) were recorded during routine surveillance by the infection control team at each hospital. Data for 4,215 MRSA-positive case patients were evaluated. From this data, the following values were calculated. The median incidence density was 0.71 MRSA-positive case patients per 1,000 patient-days, and the median nosocomial incidence density was 0.27 patients with nosocomial MRSA infection or colonization per 1,000 patient-days (95% CI, 0.18-0.34). The median average daily MRSA burden was 1.13 MRSA patient-days per 100 patient-days (95% CI, 0.86-1.51), with the average daily MRSA burden defined as the total number of MRSA patient-days divided by the total number of patient-days times 100. The median MRSA-days-associated nosocomial MRSA infection and colonization rate, which describes the MRSA infection risk for other patients in hospitals housing large numbers of MRSA-positive patients and/or many patients who were MRSA positive on admission, was 23.1 cases of nosocomial MRSA infection and colonization per 1,000 MRSA patient-days (95% CI, 17.4-28.6). The values were also calculated for various MRSA screening levels. The MRSA-days-associated nosocomial MRSA rate allows investigators to assess the extent of MRSA colonization and infection at each hospital, taking into account cases that have been imported from other hospitals, as well as from the community. This information provides an appropriate incentive for hospitals to introduce further infection control measures.

[PMID: 24045390]
to determine the rate of MRSA-carrier among patients, family members and health care providers, and the association between MRSA-carrier family members and health care providers on MRSA infection patient after orthopaedic surgery. this is a cross-sectional analytical study. Samples were taken consecutively during December 2010 to December 2011, consisting of postoperative patients infected with MRSA, attending family members, and the medical officers with history of contact with the patient. Swab culture were taken from nasal and axilla of all subjects. The incidence of MRSA infection, and MRSA-carrier on the patient, family members and medical officers were presented descriptively, while their association with MRSA infection was statistically tested using Fischer exact test. during the study period, there were 759 surgeries, with 4 (0.5%) patients were identified to have MRSA infection. Of these four cases, 48 subjects were enrolled. The rate of MRSA-carrier among patients, family and health care providers were 50%, 25% and 0% respectively. There were no significant association between MRSA and the rates of MRSA-carrier on the family member or health care providers. the incidence of MRSA infection, MRSA-carrier patient, MRSA-carrier health care providers, and family member carrier were 0.5%, 50%, 0%, and 25% respectively. No significant association found between MRSA-carrier on the family member or health care providers and MRSA infection patient. There were no MRSA infection found on the health care provider.

[PMID: 19506056]
Although methicillin (meticillin)-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin (RVS-MRSA; including vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus [VISA] and heterogeneous VISA [hVISA]) have been linked with vancomycin treatment failure, it is unclear whether they are more pathogenic than vancomycin-susceptible MRSA (VS-MRSA). We prospectively assessed patients with clinical MRSA isolates during a 10-month period to determine clinical status (infection versus colonization) and therapeutic outcome before correlating these findings with the results of detailed in vitro assessment of vancomycin susceptibility, including population analysis profile (PAP) testing. hVISA and VISA were defined by standard PAP criteria (area-under-the-curve ratio compared to that of the reference hVISA strain Mu3 [>or=0.9]) and routine CLSI criteria (vancomycin MIC, 4 to 8 microg/ml), respectively. Among the 117 patients assessed, 58 had RVS-MRSA isolates (56 hVISA and 2 VISA) and 59 had VS-MRSA isolates; the patient demographics and comorbidities were similar. RVS-MRSA was associated with a lower rate of infection than VS-MRSA (29/58 versus 46/59; P = 0.003), including a lower rate of bacteremia (3/58 versus 20/59, respectively; P < 0.001). The cure rates in RVS-MRSA and VS-MRSA groups were not statistically different (16/26 versus 31/42; P = 0.43), but the post hoc assessment of treatment regimes and study size made detailed conclusions difficult. The results of the macro method Etest correlated well with the PAP results (sensitivity, 98.3%, and specificity, 91.5%), but broth microdilution and our preliminary RVS-MRSA detection method correlated poorly. All isolates were susceptible to linezolid and daptomycin. These data suggest that detailed prospective laboratory identification of RVS-MRSA isolates may be of limited value and that, instead, such in vitro investigation should be reserved for isolates from patients who are failing appropriate anti-MRSA therapy.

[PMID: 15060266]
This study was performed to understand the epidemiology of community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) infections in southern New England children. A retrospective review was conducted of the medical records of children 0 to 18 years old with MRSA isolated by the Rhode Island Hospital microbiology laboratory (Providence, RI) between 1997 and 2001. A case was classified as either health care-associated MRSA (HCA-MRSA) or CA-MRSA based on time of culture and other strict criteria. The spectrum of illness of the HCA-MRSA and CA-MRSA cases was compared, as were the antibiotic-susceptibility patterns of their isolates. Risk factors for CA-MRSA acquisition were identified, and molecular subtyping of selected isolates was performed. Between 1997 and 2001, S aureus was isolated from 1063 children. Of these children, 57 had MRSA. During this period, both the absolute number of MRSA cases and the proportion of S aureus cases due to MRSA rose more than threefold due to increases in both CA-MRSA and HCA-MRSA infections. Of the 57 MRSA cases, 23 (40%) were CA-MRSA. CA-MRSA patients were more likely to have skin/soft-tissue infections than HCA-MRSA patients (83% vs 38%). Risk factors for acquisition of MRSA including intrafamilial spread, frequent antibiotic exposure, and child-care attendance were identified in 8 of the 23 (35%) CA-MRSA patients. CA-MRSA isolates were more likely to be susceptible to non-beta-lactam antibiotics than HCA-MRSA isolates. All isolates were vancomycin susceptible. MRSA accounts for an increasing proportion of all pediatric S aureus infections in southern New England. A significant percentage of these cases are due to CA-MRSA. Pediatricians should have heightened suspicion for CA-MRSA in children with presumed S aureus infections, especially if they have skin/soft-tissue infections or risk factors for MRSA acquisition.

[PMID: 20524852]
To evaluate the long-term impact of successive interventions on rates of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization or infection and MRSA bacteremia in an endemic hospital-wide situation. Quasi-experimental, interrupted time-series analysis. The impact of the interventions was analyzed by use of segmented regression. Representative MRSA isolates were typed by use of pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. A 950-bed teaching hospital in Seville, Spain. All patients admitted to the hospital during the period from 1995 through 2008. Three successive interventions were studied: (1) contact precautions, with no active surveillance for MRSA; (2) targeted active surveillance for MRSA in patients and healthcare workers in specific wards, prioritized according to clinical epidemiology data; and (3) targeted active surveillance for MRSA in patients admitted from other medical centers. Neither the preintervention rate of MRSA colonization or infection (0.56 cases per 1,000 patient-days [95% confidence interval {CI}, 0.49-0.62 cases per 1,000 patient-days]) nor the slope for the rate of MRSA colonization or infection changed significantly after the first intervention. The rate decreased significantly to 0.28 cases per 1,000 patient-days (95% CI, 0.17-0.40 cases per 1,000 patient-days) after the second intervention and to 0.07 cases per 1,000 patient-days (95% CI, 0.06-0.08 cases per 1,000 patient-days) after the third intervention, and the rate remained at a similar level for 8 years. The MRSA bacteremia rate decreased by 80%, whereas the rate of bacteremia due to methicillin-susceptible S. aureus did not change. Eighty-three percent of the MRSA isolates identified were clonally related. All MRSA isolates obtained from healthcare workers were clonally related to those recovered from patients who were in their care. Our data indicate that long-term control of endemic MRSA is feasible in tertiary care centers. The use of targeted active surveillance for MRSA in patients and healthcare workers in specific wards (identified by means of analysis of clinical epidemiology data) and the use of decolonization were key to the success of the program.

[PMID: 20071548]
There are few more compelling questions in clinical microbiology today than the issue of whether or not to screen for the presence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), with the results being used to institute infection control interventions aimed at preventing transmission of MRSA in health care environments. Numerous different matters must be addressed when considering a screening program. Who is to be screened, what method is to be employed to detect MRSA, and what sites should be sampled? When and how often should the screening be performed? Who is going to pay for the screening, and, finally and perhaps most importantly, how are screening results to be communicated to health care providers and what kind of interventions are best undertaken based on the results? Numerous governmental agencies have mandated MRSA screening programs, and yet several authorities in infection control organizations have questioned the appropriateness of mandated screening. In this Point-Counterpoint feature, Dr. Lance Peterson of Evanston Hospital (Evanston, IL) offers his perspective on why screening for MRSA is to be encouraged. Dr. Daniel Diekema of the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine (Iowa City, IA) offers an opposing view.

[PMID: 17537949]
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an increasing problem. Rapid detection of MRSA-colonized patients has the potential to limit spread of the organism. We evaluated the sensitivities and specificities of MRSA detection by two molecular methods (IDI-MRSA PCR assay and GenoType MRSA Direct PCR assay) and three selective MRSA agars (MRSA ID, MRSASelect, and CHROMagar MRSA), using 205 (101 nasal, 52 groin, and 52 axillary samples) samples from consecutive known MRSA-infected and/or -colonized patients. All detection methods had higher MRSA detection rates for nasal swabs than for axillary and groin swabs. Detection of MRSA by IDI-MRSA was the most sensitive method, independent of the site (94% for nasal samples, 80% for nonnasal samples, and 90% overall). The sensitivities of the GenoType MRSA Direct assay and the MRSA ID, MRSASelect, and CHROMagar MRSA agars with nasal swabs were 70%, 72%, 68%, and 75%, respectively. All detection methods had high specificities (95 to 99%), independent of the swab site. Extended incubation for a further 24 h with selective MRSA agars increased the detection of MRSA, with a corresponding decline in specificity secondary to a significant increase in false-positive results. There was a noticeable difference in test performance of the GenoType MRSA Direct assay in detection of MRSA (28/38 samples [74%]) compared with detection of nonmultiresistant MRSA (17/31 samples [55%]) (susceptible to two or more non-beta-lactam antibiotics). This was not observed with selective MRSA agar plates or IDI-MRSA. Although it is more expensive, in addition to rapid turnaround times of 2 to 4 h, IDI-MRSA offers greater detection of MRSA colonization, independent of the swab site, than do conventional selective agars and GenoType MRSA Direct.

[PMID: 17121622]
Screening specimens were homogenised in saline 0.9% w/v before either direct inoculation or following enrichment in broth on three chromogenic media (MRSA-ID, CHROMagar MRSA and MRSA Select) and ORSAB medium for the detection of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). In total, 102 of 466 specimens yielded MRSA on at least one medium. After incubation for 16-18 h, the sensitivity was 51%, 59%, 47% and 65% on MRSA-ID, CHROMagar MRSA, ORSAB and MRSA Select, respectively, compared with 82%, 75%, 67% and 80%, respectively, after 42 h, and 93%, 95%, 79% and not tested, respectively, following broth enrichment. There were significantly more MRSA colonies on MRSA-Select after 16-18 h than on ORSAB or MRSA ID (p 0.001 and 0.0022, respectively), whereas there were more MRSA colonies after 42 h on MRSA-ID and MRSA-Select than on ORSAB (p 0.0004 and 0.012, respectively). The specificity of the media for identifying MRSA based on the colour of colonies after incubation for 16-18 h was 100%, 99%, 99% and 100%, respectively, compared with 98%, 97%, 98% and 98%, respectively, after 42 h, and 100%, 99%, 100% and not tested, respectively, following broth enrichment. The speed of detection (mean time to report a positive result) was 1.65, 1.72, 2.31 and 1.35 days, respectively. For each of the three media tested following enrichment, the use of an enrichment broth increased the detection rate of MRSA by 16-24%.