[PMID: 28589525]
Cerliponase alfa (Brineura™) is a recombinant human tripeptidyl peptidase-1 (TPP1) being developed by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. for use in patients with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2), a paediatric neurodegenerative disease caused by a deficiency in TPP1. CLN2 is characterised by progressive impairment of motor function, language deficiencies, seizures, ataxia, blindness and early death, and intracerebroventricular infusion of cerliponase alfa has been shown to reduce the progression of functional decline. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of cerliponase alfa leading to its first global approval in the USA for the treatment of motor function loss in paediatric patients ≥3 years of age with CLN2, and subsequent approval in the EU for CLN2 in all ages.

[PMID: 30205177]
Treatment with intracerebroventricular (ICV)-delivered cerliponase alfa enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) in a Phase 1/2 study of 24 subjects with CLN2 disease resulted in a meaningful preservation of motor and language (ML) function and was well tolerated. Treatment was associated with anti-drug antibody (ADA) production in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 6/24 (25%) and in the serum of 19/24 (79%) of clinical trial subjects, respectively, over a mean exposure of 96.4 weeks (range 0.1-129 weeks). Neutralizing antibodies (NAb) were not detected in the CSF of any of the subjects. No events of anaphylaxis were reported. Neither the presence of serum ADA nor drug-specific immunoglobulin E was associated with the incidence or severity of hypersensitivity adverse events. Serum and CSF ADA titers did not correlate with change in ML score. Therefore, the development of an ADA response to cerliponase alfa is not predictive of an adverse safety profile or poor treatment outcome.

[PMID: 28890641]
Sarilumab (Kevzara) for moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis; valbenazine (Ingrezza), the first approval for tardive dyskinesia; and cerliponase alpha (Brineura) for late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type-2 disease.

[PMID: 29688815]
Recombinant human tripeptidyl peptidase 1 (cerliponase alfa) is an enzyme-replacement therapy that has been developed to treat neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2) disease, a rare lysosomal disorder that causes progressive dementia in children. In a multicenter, open-label study, we evaluated the effect of intraventricular infusion of cerliponase alfa every 2 weeks in children with CLN2 disease who were between the ages of 3 and 16 years. Treatment was initiated at a dose of 30 mg, 100 mg, or 300 mg; all the patients then received the 300-mg dose for at least 96 weeks. The primary outcome was the time until a 2-point decline in the score on the motor and language domains of the CLN2 Clinical Rating Scale (which ranges from 0 to 6, with 0 representing no function and 3 representing normal function in each of the two domains), which was compared with the time until a 2-point decline in 42 historical controls. We also compared the rate of decline in the motor-language score between the two groups, using data from baseline to the last assessment with a score of more than 0, divided by the length of follow-up (in units of 48 weeks). Twenty-four patients were enrolled, 23 of whom constituted the efficacy population. The median time until a 2-point decline in the motor-language score was not reached for treated patients and was 345 days for historical controls. The mean (±SD) unadjusted rate of decline in the motor-language score per 48-week period was 0.27±0.35 points in treated patients and 2.12±0.98 points in 42 historical controls (mean difference, 1.85; P<0.001). Common adverse events included convulsions, pyrexia, vomiting, hypersensitivity reactions, and failure of the intraventricular device. In 2 patients, infections developed in the intraventricular device that was used to administer the infusion, which required antibiotic treatment and device replacement. Intraventricular infusion of cerliponase alfa in patients with CLN2 disease resulted in less decline in motor and language function than that in historical controls. Serious adverse events included failure of the intraventricular device and device-related infections. (Funded by BioMarin Pharmaceutical and others; CLN2 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01907087 and NCT02485899 .).