[PMID: 6453959]
Coal workers' pneumoconiosis is a preventable occupational disorder of the respiratory system resulting from exposure to and retention of respirable coal dust. It exists in two distinguishable forms: simple, which is seldom if ever disabling, and complicated, also known as progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), which is sometimes totally disabling and is associated with a high mortality rate. The disease affects a small proportion of active U.S. miners, and only a very small number develop PMF. In its more advanced stages, the disorder is characterized by shortness of breath. Scientific criteria for diagnosis are well established but are not followed in the U.S. because of Federal law and regulation. However, an acceptable scheme for classification of chest radiographs exists. Black lung benefits payable to miners, their survivors and dependents are approaching $2 billion annually, and regulations concerning eligibility for such benefits are intentionally slanted to make it possible for claimants to receive benefits in a manner not consistent with regulations governing similar payments to other occupationally employed persons or in accordance with established medical criteria.

[PMID: 8803434]
A prospective case-control study was undertaken to assess respiratory disability in 133 former coal miners who were claimants for "black lung" benefits. Consecutive assignment was made to either case or control group based on their chest radiograph having shown coal workers' pneumoconiosis or no coal workers' pneumoconiosis. A respiratory occupational survey was completed with physical examination that placed special emphasis on the cardiorespiratory systems. Subjects underwent pulmonary function testing while 92 of these also received arterial blood gases to assess respiratory disability and pulmonary insufficiency. Arterial blood gases were superior to spirometry in assessment of pulmonary insufficiency/disability. Smoking interacts with coal workers' pneumoconiosis to cause pulmonary insufficiency. The most frequent spirometric pattern was obstructive. Disability was caused by occupational injuries and comorbidities, both of which occurred with greater frequency in miners with coal workers' pneumoconiosis than in controls. Pulmonary insufficiency appears to be a better discriminator than respiratory disability in coal miners, suggesting that arterial blood gases replace spirometry in their evaluation. Greater emphasis on smoking intervention among coal miners should be given.

[PMID: 8199664]
It has recently been suggested that the inhalation of coal in the absence of complicated coal workers' pneumoconiosis (CWP) or smoking can lead to disabling airways obstruction. The cause of such obstruction has been variously attributed to emphysema or bronchitis. The frequency of significant airways obstruction in a group of United States coal miners seeking compensation for occupationally induced pulmonary impairment was therefore determined. In a sample of 611 "Black Lung" claimants there was only one subject who was a non-smoker and who in the absence of other non-occupationally related diseases,--for example, asthma and bronchiectasis--had sufficient airways obstruction to render it difficult for him to carry out hard labour. An alternative explanation for his reduced ventilatory capacity other than coal dust or smoking may be available. If the inhalation of coal dust in the absence of smoking and complicated CWP ever induces sufficient ventilatory impairment to preclude a miner from working, it is indeed rare.

[PMID: 8456342]
Highlights in the history of efforts to prevent occupational lung disease among coal miners in the United States are reviewed. The Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969 is summarized, and the sources and effects of its provisions to prevent coal workers' pneumoconiosis are examined. Descriptions follow of the identification of coal workers' pneumoconiosis as a disease, identification of respirable coal mine dust as its cause, and establishment and enforcement of an exposure limit. The development of prevention efforts focusing on surveillance of both exposure and outcome and of enforcement of dust control methods is examined.