[PMID: 34593029]
Mutations in the presenilin (PS/PSEN) genes encoding the catalytic components of γ-secretase accelerate amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau pathologies in familial Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although the mechanisms by which these mutations affect Aβ are well defined, the precise role PS/γ-secretase on tau pathology in neurodegeneration independently of Aβ is largely unclear. Here we report that neuronal PS deficiency in conditional knockout (cKO) mice results in age-dependent brain atrophy, inflammatory responses and accumulation of pathological tau in neurons and glial cells. Interestingly, genetic inactivation of presenilin 1 (PS1) or both PS genes in mutant human Tau transgenic mice exacerbates memory deficits by accelerating phosphorylation and aggregation of tau in excitatory neurons of vulnerable AD brain regions (e.g., hippocampus, cortex and amygdala). Remarkably, neurofilament (NF) light chain (NF-L) and phosphorylated NF are abnormally accumulated in the brain of Tau mice lacking PS. Synchrotron infrared microspectroscopy revealed aggregated and oligomeric β-sheet structures in amyloid plaque-free PS-deficient Tau mice. Hippocampal-dependent memory deficits are associated with synaptic tau accumulation and reduction of pre- and post-synaptic proteins in Tau mice. Thus, partial loss of PS/γ-secretase in neurons results in temporal- and spatial-dependent tau aggregation associated with memory deficits and neurodegeneration. Our findings show that tau phosphorylation and aggregation are key pathological processes that may underlie neurodegeneration caused by familial AD-linked PSEN mutations.

[PMID: 34100423]
The presenilin genes (PSEN1 and PSEN2) are mainly responsible for causing early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease, harboring ~300 causative mutations, and representing ~90% of all mutations associated with a very aggressive disease form. Presenilin 1 is the catalytic core of the γ-secretase complex that conducts the intramembranous proteolytic excision of multiple transmembrane proteins like the amyloid precursor protein, Notch-1, N- and E-cadherin, LRP, Syndecan, Delta, Jagged, CD44, ErbB4, and Nectin1a. Presenilin 1 plays an essential role in neural progenitor maintenance, neurogenesis, neurite outgrowth, synaptic function, neuronal function, myelination, and plasticity. Therefore, an imbalance caused by mutations in presenilin 1/γ-secretase might cause aberrant signaling, synaptic dysfunction, memory impairment, and increased Aβ<sub>42</sub>/Aβ<sub>40</sub> ratio, contributing to neurodegeneration during the initial stages of Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. This review focuses on the neuronal differentiation dysregulation mediated by PSEN1 mutations in Alzheimer's disease. Furthermore, we emphasize the importance of Alzheimer's disease-induced pluripotent stem cells models in analyzing PSEN1 mutations implication over the early stages of the Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis throughout neuronal differentiation impairment.

[PMID: 34662541]
Presenilins (PS) form the active subunit of the gamma-secretase complex, which mediates the proteolytic clearance of a broad variety of type-I plasma membrane proteins. Loss-of-function mutations in PSEN1/2 genes are the leading cause of familial Alzheimer's disease (fAD). However, the PS/gamma-secretase substrates relevant for the neuronal deficits associated with a loss of PS function are not completely known. The members of the neurexin (Nrxn) family of presynaptic plasma membrane proteins are candidates to mediate aspects of the synaptic and memory deficits associated with a loss of PS function. Previous work has shown that fAD-linked PS mutants or inactivation of PS by genetic and pharmacological approaches failed to clear Nrxn C-terminal fragments (NrxnCTF), leading to its abnormal accumulation at presynaptic terminals. Here, we generated transgenic mice that selectively recreate the presynaptic accumulation of NrxnCTF in adult forebrain neurons, leaving unaltered the function of PS/gamma-secretase complex towards other substrates. Behavioral characterization identified selective impairments in NrxnCTF mice, including decreased fear-conditioning memory. Electrophysiological recordings in medial prefrontal cortex-basolateral amygdala (mPFC-BLA) of behaving mice showed normal synaptic transmission and uncovered specific defects in synaptic facilitation. These data functionally link the accumulation of NrxnCTF with defects in associative memory and short-term synaptic plasticity, pointing at impaired clearance of NrxnCTF as a new mediator in AD.

[PMID: 31606858]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most frequent cause of dementia in the elderly. Few cases are familial (FAD), due to autosomal dominant mutations in presenilin-1 (PS1), presenilin-2 (PS2) or amyloid precursor protein (APP). The three proteins are involved in the generation of amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptides, providing genetic support to the hypothesis of Aβ pathogenicity. However, clinical trials focused on the Aβ pathway failed in their attempt to modify disease progression, suggesting the existence of additional pathogenic mechanisms. Ca<sup>2+</sup> dysregulation is a feature of cerebral aging, with an increased frequency and anticipated age of onset in several forms of neurodegeneration, including AD. Interestingly, FAD-linked PS1 and PS2 mutants alter multiple key cellular pathways, including Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling. By generating novel tools for measuring Ca<sup>2+</sup> in living cells, and combining different approaches, we showed that FAD-linked PS2 mutants significantly alter cell Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling and brain network activity, as summarized below.