[PMID: 32381682]
Glucocorticoids (GCs) act through the glucocorticoid receptor (GR, also known as NR3C1) to regulate immunity, energy metabolism and tissue repair. Upon ligand binding, activated GR mediates cellular effects by regulating gene expression, but some GR effects can occur rapidly without new transcription. Here, we show that GCs rapidly inhibit cell migration, in response to both GR agonist and antagonist ligand binding. The inhibitory effect on migration is prevented by GR knockdown with siRNA, confirming GR specificity, but not by actinomycin D treatment, suggesting a non-transcriptional mechanism. We identified a rapid onset increase in microtubule polymerisation following GC treatment, identifying cytoskeletal stabilisation as the likely mechanism of action. HDAC6 overexpression, but not knockdown of αTAT1, rescued the GC effect, implicating HDAC6 as the GR effector. Consistent with this hypothesis, ligand-dependent cytoplasmic interaction between GR and HDAC6 was demonstrated by quantitative imaging. Taken together, we propose that activated GR inhibits HDAC6 function, and thereby increases the stability of the microtubule network to reduce cell motility. We therefore report a novel, non-transcriptional mechanism whereby GCs impair cell motility through inhibition of HDAC6 and rapid reorganization of the cell architecture.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

[PMID: 32528419]
A decline in normal physiological functions characterizes the aging process. While some of these changes are benign, the decrease in the function of the cardiovascular system that occurs during aging leads to the activation of pathological processes associated with an increased risk for heart disease and its complications. Imbalances in endocrine function are also common occurrences during the aging process. Glucocorticoids are primary stress hormones and are critical regulators of energy metabolism, inflammation, and cardiac function. Glucocorticoids exert their actions by binding the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and, in some instances, to the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). GR and MR are members of the nuclear receptor family of ligand-activated transcription factors. There is strong evidence that imbalances in GR and MR signaling in the heart have a causal role in cardiac disease. The extent to which glucocorticoids play a role in the aging heart, however, remains unclear. This review will summarize the positive and negative direct and indirect effects of glucocorticoids on the heart and the latest molecular and physiological evidence on how alterations in glucocorticoid signaling lead to changes in cardiac structure and function. We also briefly discuss the effects of other hormones systems such as estrogens and GH/IGF-1 on different cardiovascular cells during aging. We will also review the link between imbalances in glucocorticoid levels and the molecular processes responsible for promoting cardiomyocyte dysfunction in aging. Finally, we will discuss the potential for selectively manipulating glucocorticoid signaling in cardiomyocytes, which may represent an improved therapeutic approach for preventing and treating age-related heart disease.

[PMID: 31995340]
Glucocorticoids (GC) such as cortisol regulate multiple physiological functions, notably those involved in development, metabolism, inflammatory processes and stress, and exert their effects upon binding to the glucocorticoid receptor (GR, encoded by NR3C1 gene in humans). GC signaling follows several consecutive steps leading to target gene transactivation, including ligand binding, nuclear translocation of ligand-activated GR complexes, DNA binding, and recruitment of functional transcriptional machinery. Generalized glucocorticoid resistance syndrome, due to GR loss-of-function mutations, may be related to the impairment of one of the GC signaling steps. To date, 31 NR3C1 loss-of-function mutations have been reported in patients presenting with various clinical signs such as hypertension, adrenal hyperplasia, hirsutism or metabolic disorders associated with biological hypercortisolism but without Cushing syndrome signs and no negative regulatory feedback loop on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Functional characterization of GR loss-of-function mutations often demonstrates GR haploinsufficiency and a decrease of GR target gene induction in relevant cell types. The main signs at presentation are very variable from resistant hypertension, bilateral adrenal hyperplasia likely related to increased ACTH levels but not exclusively, hirsutism to isolated renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system abnormalities in a context of 11βHSD2 deficiency. Some mutated GR patients are obese or overweight together with a healthier metabolic profile that remains to be further explored in future studies. Deciphering the molecular mechanisms altered by GR mutations should enhance our knowledge on GR signaling and ultimately facilitate management of GC-resistant patients. This review also focuses on the criteria facilitating identification of novel NR3C1 mutations in selected patients.

[PMID: 32607951]
Generalized glucocorticoid resistance is characterized by impaired cortisol signaling, resulting from mutations in the NR3C1 gene coding the human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR). Most of the pathogenic hGR variants are identified in the ligand-binding domain (LBD). However, we report a new case associated with a novel NR3C1 pathogenic variant in the N-terminal domain (NTD) of the hGR. The index case was an Italian 31-year-old woman with a history of chronic fatigue, anxiety, hirsutism, irregular menstrual cycles, and infertility, but no clinical manifestations suggestive of Cushing's syndrome. Standard clinical methods were used to assess the patient's hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Molecular analysis of the NR3C1 gene was performed by Sanger sequencing. In addition, we perform an extensive survey of all clinical pathogenic variants modifying the whole sequence of the NR3C1 gene. Endocrinologic evaluation revealed elevated serum cortisol, plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone, and androstenedione concentration and increased urinary free cortisol excretion. Morning serum cortisol levels remained elevated and were not suppressed during a 2-day, 2-mg dexamethasone suppression test. The identification of the novel p.(Glu123Ter) NR3C1 variant confirmed the diagnosis of glucocorticoid resistance. Our findings improve the understanding of NR3C1 mutational spectrum in patients affected by glucocorticoid resistance syndrome and contribute to precise diagnosis and genetic counseling.