[PMID: 28031292]
HSJ1 (DNAJB2), a member of the DNAJ family of molecular chaperones, is a key player in neuronal proteostasis maintenance. It binds ubiquitylated proteins through its Ubiquitin Interacting Motifs (UIMs) and facilitates their delivery to the proteasome for degradation. Mutations in the DNAJB2 gene lead to inherited neuropathies such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth type-2, distal hereditary motor neuropathies, spinal muscular atrophy with parkinsonism and the later stages can resemble amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. HSJ1 overexpression can reduce aggregation of neurodegeneration-associated proteins in vitro and in vivo; however, the regulation of HSJ1 function is little understood. Here we show that CK2, a ubiquitous and constitutively active protein kinase, phosphorylates HSJ1 within its second UIM, at the dominant site Ser250 and the hierarchical site Ser247. A phospho-HSJ1 specific antibody confirmed phosphorylation of endogenous HSJ1a and HSJ1b. A tandem approach of phospho-site mutation and treatment with CK2 specific inhibitors demonstrated that phosphorylation at these sites is accompanied by a reduced ability of HSJ1 to bind ubiquitylated clients and to exert its chaperone activity. Our results disclose a novel interplay between ubiquitin- and phosphorylation-dependent signalling, and represent the first report of a regulatory mechanism for UIM-dependent function. They also suggest that CK2 inhibitors could release the full neuroprotective potential of HSJ1, and deserve future interest as therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative disease.

[PMID: 21625540]
Homo sapiens J domain protein (HSJ1) is a J-domain containing co-chaperone that is known to stimulate ATPase activity of HSP70 chaperone, while it also harbors two ubiquitin (Ub)-interacting motifs (UIMs) that may bind with ubiquitinated substrates and potentially function in protein degradation. We studied the effects of HSJ1a on the protein levels of both normal and the disease--related polyQ-expanded forms of ataxin-3 (Atx3) in cells. The results demonstrate that the N-terminal J-domain and the C-terminal UIM domain of HSJ1a exert opposite functions in regulating the protein level of cellular overexpressed Atx3. This dual regulation is dependent on the binding of the J-domain with HSP70, and the UIM domain with polyUb chains. The J-domain down-regulates the protein level of Atx3 through HSP70 mediated proteasomal degradation, while the UIM domain may alleviate this process via maintaining the ubiquitinated Atx3. We propose that co-chaperone HSJ1a orchestrates the balance of substrates in stressed cells in a Yin-Yang manner.

[PMID: 22522442]
Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN) form a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders, characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy predominating at the distal part of the limbs, due to the progressive degeneration of motor neurons in the spinal cord. We report here a novel rare variant of dHMN with autosomal recessive inheritance in a large Jewish family originating from Morocco. The disease is characterized by a predominance of paralysis at the lower limbs and an early adulthood onset. We performed a genetic study in this family to identify and characterized the causing mutation. Homozygosity mapping strategy and sequencing of the candidate genes were performed. Expression studies were made on patient fibroblasts. Functional experiments were performed on a cellular model of motor neuron disease. We mapped the disease to the 2q34-q36.1 chromosomal region and identified a homozygous splice mutation in the gene HSJ1 (DNAJB2) decreasing the expression of the 2 main isoforms HSJ1a and HSJ1b. Overexpression of both HSJ1a and HSJ1b reduced inclusion formation induced by the mutated SOD1-A4V in a neuronal cellular model. HSJ1 is a neuronal enriched member of the HSP40/DNAJ co-chaperone family. Previous studies have shown that HSP40 proteins play a crucial role in protein aggregation and neurodegeneration in several neuronal types, in animal models and human diseases. Interestingly, this mutation causing a loss-of-function of HSJ1 is linked to a pure lower motor neuron disease, strongly suggesting that HSJ1 also plays an important and specific role in motor neurons.

[PMID: 25274842]
To determine the nature and frequency of HSJ1 mutations in patients with hereditary motor and hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies. Patients were screened for mutations by genome-wide or targeted linkage and homozygosity studies, whole-exome sequencing, and Sanger sequencing. RNA and protein studies of skin fibroblasts were used for functional characterization. We describe 2 additional mutations in the HSJ1 gene in a cohort of 90 patients with autosomal recessive distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN) and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 (CMT2). One family with a dHMN phenotype showed the homozygous splice-site mutation c.229+1G>A, which leads to retention of intron 4 in the HSJ1 messenger RNA with a premature stop codon and loss of protein expression. Another family, presenting with a CMT2 phenotype, carried the homozygous missense mutation c.14A>G (p.Tyr5Cys). This mutation was classified as likely disease-related by several automatic algorithms for prediction of possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of proteins. Both mutations cosegregated with autosomal recessive inheritance of the disease and were absent from the general population. Taken together, in our cohort of 90 probands, we confirm that HSJ1 mutations are a rare but detectable cause of autosomal recessive dHMN and CMT2. We provide clinical and functional information on an HSJ1 splice-site mutation and report the detailed phenotype of 2 patients with CMT2, broadening the phenotypic spectrum of HSJ1-related neuropathies.