[PMID: 19051310]
Gasdermin (GSDM or GSDMA), expressed in the upper gastrointestinal tract but frequently silenced in gastric cancers (GCs), regulates apoptosis of the gastric epithelium. It has three human homologs, GSDMB, GSDMC, and GSDMD (GSDM family) and they are considered to be involved in the regulation of epithelial apoptosis but not yet known. We investigated the expression pattern of the family genes in the upper gastrointestinal epithelium and cancers. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction revealed that, unlike GSDMA expressed in differentiated cells, GSDMB is expressed in proliferating cells and GSDMD in differentiating cells. GSDMC, meanwhile, is expressed in both differentiating and differentiated cells. Colony formation assay showed that GSDMB, closely related to GSDMA, has no cell-growth inhibition activity in gastric cancer cells, and that GSDMC and GSDMD, respectively, exhibit the activity with different strengths from that of GSDMA. Expression analyses of the four family genes in esophageal and GCs suggested that GSDMC and GSDMD as well as GSDMA are tumor suppressors and that GSDMB, which was amplified and overexpressed in some GCs, could be an oncogene. The results of the expression analysis and colony formation assay suggest that each family gene may have a distinct function in the upper gastrointestinal epithelium.

[PMID: 23979942]
Mouse Gasdermin A3 (Gsdma3) is the causative gene for dominant skin mutations exhibiting alopecia. Mouse has two other Gsdma3-related genes, Gsdma and Gsdma2, whereas human and rat have only one related gene. To date, no skin mutation has been reported for human GSDMA and rat Gsdma as well as mouse Gsdma and Gsdma2. Therefore, it is possible that only Gsdma3 has gain-of-function type mutations to cause dominant skin phenotype. To elucidate functional divergence among the Gsdma-related genes in mice, and to infer the function of the human and rat orthologs, we examined in vivo function of mouse Gsdma by generating Gsdma knockout mice and transgenic mice that overexpress wild-type Gsdma or Gsdma harboring a point mutation (Alanine339Threonine). The Gsdma knockout mice shows no visible phenotype, indicating that Gsdma is not essential for differentiation of epidermal cells and maintenance of the hair cycle, and that Gsdma is expressed specifically both in the inner root sheath of hair follicles and in suprabasal cell layers, whereas Gsdma3 is expressed only in suprabasal layers. By contrast, both types of the transgenic mice exhibited epidermal hyperplasia resembling the Gsdma3 mutations, although the phenotype depended on the genetic background. These results indicate that the mouse Gsdma and Gsdma3 genes share common function to regulate epithelial maintenance and/or homeostasis, and suggest that the function of human GSDMA and rat Gsdma, which are orthologs of mouse Gsdma, is conserved as well.

[PMID: 15737203]
Defolliculated (Dfl) is a spontaneous mouse mutant with a hair-loss phenotype that includes altered sebaceous gland differentiation, short hair shafts, aberrant catagen stage of the hair cycle, and eventual loss of the hair follicle. Recently a similar mutant, finnegan (Fgn), with an identical phenotype was discovered during a phenotypic screen for mutations induced by chemical mutagenesis. The gene underlying the phenotype of both finnegan and defolliculated has been mapped to chromosome 11 and here we show that both mice harbor mutations in gasdermin 3 (Gsdm3), a gene of unknown function. Gsdm3(Dfl) is a B2 insertion near the 3' splice site of exon 7 and Gsdm3(Fgn) is a point mutation T278P. To investigate the role of the gasdermin gene family an antiserum was raised to a peptide highly homologous to all three mouse gasdermins and human gasdermin. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that gasdermins are expressed specifically in cells at advanced stages of differentiation in the upper epidermis, the differentiating inner root sheath and hair shaft and in the most mature sebocytes of the sebaceous gland and preputial, meibomium, ceruminous gland, and anal glands. This expression pattern suggests a role for gasdermins in differentiation of the epidermis and its appendages.

[PMID: 18693275]
Members of the novel gene family Gasdermin (Gsdm) are exclusively expressed in a highly tissue-specific manner in the epithelium of skin and the gastrointestinal tract. Based on their expression patterns and the phenotype of the Gsdma3 spontaneous mutations, it is inferred that the Gsdm family genes are involved in epithelial cell growth and/or differentiations in different tissues. To investigate possible roles of the Gsdm gene family in the development of intestinal tracts, we generated a Gsdmd mutant mouse, which is a solitary member of the Gsdmd subfamily and which is predominantly expressed in the intestinal tract by means of targeted disruption. In the mutant homozygotes, we found no abnormality of intestinal tract morphology. Moreover, in mutant mice, there was normal differentiation of all constituent cell types of the intestinal epithelium. Thus, this study clearly shows that Gsdmd is not essential for development of mouse intestinal tract or epithelial cell differentiation.