[PMID: 29847465]
Sandhoff disease (SD) is a genetic disorder caused by a mutation of the β-subunit gene β-hexosaminidase B (HexB) in humans, which results in the massive accumulation of the ganglioside GM2 and related glycosphingolipids in the nervous system. SD causes progressive neurodegeneration and changes in white matter in human infants. An animal model of SD has been established, Hexb-deficient (Hexb) mice, which shows abnormalities resembling the severe phenotype found in human infants. Previously, we reported that the activation state of microglia caused astrogliosis in the early stage of Hexb mouse development. To study how the symptoms of SD develop, we explored the difference in gene expression between 4-week-old Hexb and Hexb mouse cerebral cortices by microarray analysis. The data indicated not only the upregulation of immune system-related genes but also the downregulation of myelin-related genes in the 4-week-old Hexb mouse cerebral cortices. To test the correlation between inflammation and dysmyelination, we generated double-knockout mice of Hexb and the Fc receptor γ gene (Fcrγ), which is a regulator of autoimmune responses. Dysmyelination recovered in these double-knockout mice. The number of oligodendrocyte progenitors, which expressed platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α, did not change in the 2-week-old mouse brain. These results indicate that microglial activation plays an important role in the myelination process, without influencing the number of oligodendrocyte progenitors, in the development of Hexb mice.

[PMID: 29358305]
Sandhoff disease, one of the GM2 gangliosidoses, is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by the absence of β-hexosaminidase A and B activity and the concomitant lysosomal accumulation of its substrate, GM2 ganglioside. It features catastrophic neurodegeneration and death in early childhood. How the lysosomal accumulation of ganglioside might affect the early development of the nervous system is not understood. Recently, cerebral organoids derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have illuminated early developmental events altered by disease processes. To develop an early neurodevelopmental model of Sandhoff disease, we first generated iPS cells from the fibroblasts of an infantile Sandhoff disease patient, then corrected one of the mutant <i>HEXB</i> alleles in those iPS cells using CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing technology, thereby creating isogenic controls. Next, we used the parental Sandhoff disease iPS cells and isogenic <i>HEXB</i>-corrected iPS cell clones to generate cerebral organoids that modeled the first trimester of neurodevelopment. The Sandhoff disease organoids, but not the <i>HEXB</i>-corrected organoids, accumulated GM2 ganglioside and exhibited increased size and cellular proliferation compared with the <i>HEXB</i>-corrected organoids. Whole-transcriptome analysis demonstrated that development was impaired in the Sandhoff disease organoids, suggesting that alterations in neuronal differentiation may occur during early development in the GM2 gangliosidoses.

[PMID: 29900534]
Approximately 70 lysosomal storage diseases are currently known, resulting from mutations in genes encoding lysosomal enzymes and membrane proteins. Defects in lysosomal enzymes that hydrolyze sphingolipids have been relatively well studied. Gaucher disease is caused by the loss of activity of glucocerebrosidase, leading to accumulation of glucosylceramide. Gaucher disease exhibits a number of subtypes, with types 2 and 3 showing significant neuropathology. Sandhoff disease results from the defective activity of β-hexosaminidase, leading to accumulation of ganglioside GM2. Niemann-Pick type C disease is primarily caused by the loss of activity of the lysosomal membrane protein, NPC1, leading to storage of cholesterol and sphingosine. All three disorders display significant neuropathology, accompanied by neuroinflammation. It is commonly assumed that neuroinflammation is the result of infiltration of monocyte-derived macrophages into the brain; for instance, cells resembling lipid-engorged macrophages ('Gaucher cells') have been observed in the brain of Gaucher disease patients. We now review the evidence that inflammatory macrophages are recruited into the brain in these diseases and then go on to provide some experimental data that, at least in the three mouse models tested, monocyte-derived macrophages do not appear to infiltrate the brain. Resident microglia, which are phenotypically distinct from infiltrating macrophages, are the only myeloid population present in significant numbers within the brain parenchyma in these authentic mouse models, even during the late symptomatic stages of disease when there is substantial neuroinflammation. OPEN SCIENCE BADGES: This article has received a badge for *Open Materials* because it provided all relevant information to reproduce the study in the manuscript. The complete Open Science Disclosure form for this article can be found at the end of the article. More information about the Open Practices badges can be found at https://cos.io/our-services/open-science-badges/. This article is part of the Special Issue "Lysosomal Storage Disorders".

[PMID: 30236619]
Sandhoff disease (SD) results from mutations in the HEXB gene, subsequent deficiency of N-acetyl-β-hexosaminidase (Hex) and accumulation of GM2 gangliosides. SD leads to progressive neurodegeneration and early death. However, there is a lack of established SD biomarkers, while the pathogenesis etiology remains to be elucidated. To identify potential biomarkers and unveil the pathogenic mechanisms, metabolomics analysis with reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) was conducted. A total of 177, 112 and 119 metabolites were found to be significantly dysregulated in mouse liver, mouse brain and human hippocampus samples, respectively (p < .05, ID score > 0.5). Principal component analysis (PCA) analysis of the metabolites showed clear separation of metabolomics profiles between normal and diseased individuals. Among these metabolites, dipeptides, amino acids and derivatives were elevated, indicating a robust protein catabolism. Through pathway enrichment analysis, we also found alterations in metabolites associated with neurotransmission, lipid metabolism, oxidative stress and inflammation. In addition, N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulphate, key component of glycosaminoglycans (GAG) was significantly elevated, which was also confirmed by biochemical assays. Collectively, these results indicated major shifts of energy utilization and profound metabolic impairments, contributing to the pathogenesis mechanisms of SD. Global metabolomics profiling may provide an innovative tool for better understanding the disease mechanisms, and identifying potential diagnostic biomarkers for SD.