[PMID: 34535017]
The contribution of the bone marrow (BM) immune microenvironment to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) development is well-known, but its prognostic significance is still elusive. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), which is negatively regulated by the BIN1 proto-oncogene, is an interferon-γ-inducible mediator of immune tolerance. With the aim to develop a prognostic IDO1-based immune gene signature, biological and clinical data of 982 patients with newly diagnosed, nonpromyelocytic AML were retrieved from public datasets and analyzed using established computational pipelines. Targeted transcriptomic profiles of 24 diagnostic BM samples were analyzed using the NanoString's nCounter platform. BIN1 and IDO1 were inversely correlated and individually predicted overall survival. PLXNC1, a semaphorin receptor involved in inflammation and immune response, was the IDO1-interacting gene retaining the strongest prognostic value. The incorporation of PLXNC1 into the 2-gene IDO1-BIN1 score gave rise to a powerful immune gene signature predicting survival, especially in patients receiving chemotherapy. The top differentially expressed genes between IDO1lowand IDO-1high and between PLXNC1lowand PLXNC1high cases further improved the prognostic value of IDO1 providing a 7- and 10-gene immune signature, highly predictive of survival and correlating with AML mutational status at diagnosis. Taken together, our data indicate that IDO1 is pivotal for the construction of an immune gene signature predictive of survival in AML patients. Given the emerging role of immunotherapies for AML, our findings support the incorporation of immune biomarkers into current AML classification and prognostication algorithms.

[PMID: 34520819]
Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) catalyzing the conversion of tryptophan (Trp) to kynurenine (Kyn) in kynurenine pathway (KP) is involved in the immunosuppression in pancreatic cancer (PC), but the value of IDO1 as an independent prognostic marker for PC is uncertain. Moreover, the correlation between tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO), an isozyme of IDO1, and PC is largely unknown. Using TCGA database, the correlation between IDO1 and/or TDO expression and PC patients' survival was analyzed. The expressions of IDO1 and TDO in PC cells and PC mice were examined. The effects of IDO1, TDO or dual inhibition on IDO1 and TDO effector pathway (Aryl hydrocarbon receptor, AhR) and on migration and invasion of PC cells were investigated. The block effect of IDO1/TDO dual inhibitor RY103 on KP was evaluated. The preclinical efficacy of RY103 and its immunomodulatory effect on KPIC orthotopic PC mice and Pan02 tumor-bearing mice were explored. Results showed that IDO1/TDO co-expression is an independent prognostic marker for PC. RY103 can significantly block KP and target Kyn-AhR pathway to blunt the migration and invasion of PC cells, exhibit preclinical efficacy and ameliorate IDO1/TDO-mediated immunosuppression in PC mice.

[PMID: 34752953]
Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), a known immunosuppressive enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the oxidation of tryptophan (Trp) to kynurenine (Kyn), has received increasing attention as an attractive immunotherapeutic target for cancer therapy. Up to now, eleven small-molecule IDO1 inhibitors have entered clinical trials for the treatment of cancers. In addition, proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) based degraders also provide prospects for cancer therapy. Herein we present a comprehensive overview of the medicinal chemistry strategies and potential therapeutic applications of IDO1 inhibitors in nonclinical trials and IDO1-PROTAC degraders.

[PMID: 34557196]
Immune escape is an early phenomenon in cancer development/progression. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) is a normal endogenous mechanism of acquired peripheral immune tolerance and may therefore be tumor-promoting. This study investigated the clinical relevance of IDO1 expression by immune cells in the lymph nodes and blood and of the serum kynurenine/tryptophan (Kyn/Trp) ratio in 65 systemic treatment naïve stage I-III melanoma patients. Blood samples were collected within the first year of diagnosis. Patients had a median follow-up of 61 months. High basal IDO1 expression in peripheral monocytes and low IFNγ-induced IDO1 upregulation correlated with worse outcome independent from disease stage. Interestingly studied factors were not interrelated. During follow-up, the risk of relapse was 9% (2/22) in the subgroup with high IFNγ-induced IDO1 upregulation in monocytes. In contrast, if IDO1 upregulation was low, relapse occurred in 30% (3/10) of patients with low basal IDO1 expression in monocytes and in 61.5% (8/13) in the subgroup with high basal IDO1 expression in monocytes (Log-Rank test, p=0.008). This study reveals some immune features in the blood of early stage melanoma that may be of relevance for disease outcome. These may offer a target for sub-stratification and early intervention.