[PMID: 23508100]
Self-renewal capacity and pluripotency, which are controlled by the Oct3/4-centered transcriptional regulatory network, are major characteristics of embryonic stem (ES) cells. Nuclear hormone receptor Dax1 is one of the crucial factors in the network. Here, we identified an orphan nuclear receptor, Esrrb (estrogen-related receptor beta), as a Dax1-interacting protein. Interaction of Dax1 and Esrrb was mediated through LXXLL motifs of Dax1 and the activation- and ligand-binding domains of Esrrb. Furthermore, Esrrb enhanced the promoter activity of the Dax1 gene via direct binding to Esrrb-binding site 1 (ERRE1, where "ERRE" represents "Esrrb-responsive element") of the promoter. Expression of Dax1 was suppressed followed by Oct3/4 repression; however, overexpression of Esrrb maintained expression of Dax1 even in the absence of Oct3/4, indicating that Dax1 is a direct downstream target of Esrrb and that Esrrb can regulate Dax1 expression in an Oct3/4-independent manner. We also found that the transcriptional activity of Esrrb was repressed by Dax1. Furthermore, we revealed that Oct3/4, Dax1, and Esrrb have a competitive inhibition capacity for each complex. These data, together with previous findings, suggest that Dax1 functions as a negative regulator of Esrrb and Oct3/4, and these molecules form a regulatory loop for controlling the pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of ES cells.

[PMID: 23169531]
Transcription factors (TF) often bind in heterodimeric complexes with each TF recognizing a specific neighboring cis element in the regulatory region of the genome. Comprehension of this DNA motif grammar is opaque, yet recent developments have allowed the interrogation of genome-wide TF binding sites. We reasoned that within this data novel motif grammars could be identified that controlled distinct biological programs. For this purpose, we developed a novel motif-discovery tool termed fexcom that systematically interrogates ChIP-seq data to discover spatially constrained TF-TF composite motifs occurring over short DNA distances. We applied this to the extensive ChIP-seq data available from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In addition to the well-known and most prevalent sox-oct motif, we also discovered a novel constrained spacer motif for Esrrb and Sox2 with a gap of between 2 and 8 bps that Essrb and Sox2 cobind in a selective fashion. Through the use of knockdown experiments, we argue that the Esrrb-Sox2 complex is an arbiter of gene expression differences between ESCs and epiblast stem cells (EpiSC). A number of genes downregulated upon dual Esrrb/Sox2 knockdown (e.g., Klf4, Klf5, Jam2, Pecam1) are similarly downregulated in the ESC to EpiSC transition and contain the esrrb-sox motif. The prototypical Esrrb-Sox2 target gene, containing an esrrb-sox element conserved throughout eutherian and metatherian mammals, is Nr0b1. Through positive regulation of this transcriptional repressor, we argue the Esrrb-Sox2 complex promotes the ESC state through inhibition of the EpiSC transcriptional program and the same trio may also function to maintain trophoblast stem cells.

[PMID: 22143885]
Despite intense investigation of intrinsic and extrinsic factors that regulate pluripotency, the process of initial fate commitment of embryonic stem (ES) cells is still poorly understood. We used a genome-wide short hairpin RNA screen in mouse ES cells to identify genes that are essential for initiation of differentiation. Knockdown of the scaffolding protein Mek binding protein 1 (Mp1, also known as Lamtor3 or Map2k1ip1) stimulated self-renewal of ES cells, blocked differentiation, and promoted proliferation. Fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) signaling is required for initial fate commitment of ES cells. Knockdown of Mp1 inhibited FGF4-induced differentiation but did not alter FGF4-driven proliferation. This uncoupling of differentiation and proliferation was also observed when oncogenic Ras isoforms were overexpressed in ES cells. Knockdown of Mp1 redirected FGF4 signaling from differentiation toward pluripotency and up-regulated the pluripotency-related genes Esrrb, Rex1, Tcl1, and Sox2. We also found that human germ cell tumors (GCTs) express low amounts of Mp1 in the invasive embryonic carcinoma and seminoma histologies and higher amounts of Mp1 in the noninvasive carcinoma in situ precursor and differentiated components. Knockdown of Mp1 in invasive GCT cells resulted in resistance to differentiation, thereby showing a functional role for Mp1 both in normal differentiation of ES cells and in germ cell cancer.

[PMID: 24929238]
Nanog, a core pluripotency factor, is required for stabilizing pluripotency of inner cell mass (ICM) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and survival of primordial germ cells in mice. Here, we have addressed function and regulation of Nanog in epiblasts of postimplantation mouse embryos by conditional knockdown (KD), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) using in vivo epiblasts, and protein interaction with the Nanog promoter in vitro. Differentiation of Nanog-KD epiblasts demonstrated requirement for Nanog in stabilization of pluripotency. Nanog expression in epiblast is directly regulated by Nodal/Smad2 pathway in a visceral endoderm-dependent manner. Notably, Nanog promoters switch from Oct4/Esrrb in ICM/ESCs to Oct4/Smad2 in epiblasts. Smad2 directly associates with Oct4 to form Nanog promoting protein complex. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Nanog plays a key role in stabilizing Epiblast pluripotency mediated by Nodal/Smad2 signaling, which is involved in Nanog promoter switching in early developing embryos.