[PMID: 25963653]
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is a pregnancy hormone secreted by the placental synctiotrophoblast cell layer that has been linked to fetal growth and various placental, uterine and fetal functions. In order to investigate the effects of hCG on clinical endpoints, knowledge on reference range (RR) methodology and determinants of gestational hCG levels is crucial. Moreover, a better understanding of gestational hCG physiology can improve current screening programs and future clinical management. Serum total hCG levels were determined in 8195 women participating in the Generation R Study. Gestational age specific RRs using 'ultrasound derived gestational age' (US RRs) were calculated and compared with 'last menstrual period derived gestational age' (LMP RRs) and a model-based RR. We also investigated which pregnancy characteristics were associated with hCG levels. Compared to the US RRs, the LMP RRs were lower, most notably for the median and lower limit levels. No considerable differences were found between RRs calculated in the general population or in uncomplicated pregnancies only. Maternal smoking, BMI, parity, ethnicity, fetal gender, placental weight and hyperemesis gravidarum symptoms were associated with total hCG. We provide gestational RRs for total hCG and show that total hCG values and RR cut-offs during pregnancy vary depending on pregnancy dating methodology. This is likely due to the influence of hCG on embryonic growth, suggesting that ultrasound based pregnancy dating might be less reliable in women with high/low hCG levels. Furthermore, we identify different pregnancy characteristics that influence total hCG levels considerably and should therefore be accounted for in clinical studies.

[PMID: 20735820]
hCG is a term referring to 4 independent molecules, each produced by separate cells and each having completely separate functions. These are hCG produced by villous syncytiotrophoblast cells, hyperglycosylated hCG produced by cytotrophoblast cells, free beta-subunit made by multiple primary non-trophoblastic malignancies, and pituitary hCG made by the gonadotrope cells of the anterior pituitary. hCG has numerous functions. hCG promotes progesterone production by corpus luteal cells; promotes angiogenesis in uterine vasculature; promoted the fusion of cytotrophoblast cell and differentiation to make syncytiotrophoblast cells; causes the blockage of any immune or macrophage action by mother on foreign invading placental cells; causes uterine growth parallel to fetal growth; suppresses any myometrial contractions during the course of pregnancy; causes growth and differentiation of the umbilical cord; signals the endometrium about forthcoming implantation; acts on receptor in mother's brain causing hyperemesis gravidarum, and seemingly promotes growth of fetal organs during pregnancy. Hyperglycosylated hCG functions to promote growth of cytotrophoblast cells and invasion by these cells, as occurs in implantation of pregnancy, and growth and invasion by choriocarcinoma cells. hCG free beta-subunit is produced by numerous non-trophoblastic malignancies of different primaries. The detection of free beta-subunit in these malignancies is generally considered a sign of poor prognosis. The free beta-subunit blocks apoptosis in cancer cells and promotes the growth and malignancy of the cancer. Pituitary hCG is a sulfated variant of hCG produced at low levels during the menstrual cycle. Pituitary hCG seems to mimic luteinizing hormone actions during the menstrual cycle.

[PMID: 11380287]
To determine the relative importance of thyroid hormones and human chorionic gonadotropin in the etiology of hyperemesis gravidarum. A prospective study comparing the hormonal status in women with hyperemesis gravidarum (5-18 weeks), with healthy pregnant controls, matched for gestational age. Sensitive thyroid stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine and total beta human chorionic gonadotropin were measured by immunoassays. The hormone results for hyperemesis gravidarum group (n=58) were compared with pregnant control women (n=58) using the Mann Whitney test. Stepwise logistic regression analysis was performed to determine which variables were significantly associated with hyperemesis gravidarum and to estimate the probability of each woman having hyperemesis gravidarum. The strength of the resulting association was tested by generating a receiver operating characteristic curve for predicting hyperemesis gravidarum using these probabilities. Maternal age and all hormones were significantly different between the hyperemetic and control groups. However, logistic regression analysis demonstrated that only maternal age, free thyroxine and thyroid stimulating hormone were significant independent variables. The area beneath the receiver operating characteristic curve for prediction of hyperemesis gravidarum was 0.84. Human chorionic gonadotropin is not independently involved in the etiology of hyperemesis gravidarum but may be indirectly involved by its ability to stimulate the thyroid. Differences in maternal age and thyroid function are highly discriminatory with regard to hyperemesis gravidarum.

[PMID: 21360554]
To evaluate whether hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) affects first-trimester maternal serum PAPP-A and free β-hCG levels. An observational study was conducted in 115 cases of HG and 110 control pregnancies who attended the first-trimester prenatal screening program between January 2006 and July 2010. Maternal serum TSH levels were lower and free T4, and transaminases (ALT, AST) levels were higher in pregnancies complicated with HG compared with controls (p < 0.05 for all). In HG cases, median values of maternal serum PAPP-A were significantly higher with respect to normal pregnancies (1.2 vs 1.0 MoM; p = 0.009). Similarly, median values of free β-hCG were 1.3 MoM in HG pregnancies and 1.0 MoM in controls (p = 0.006). Multivariate analysis revealed that PAPP-A and hCG were independently associated with HG after controlling for TSH, free T4, AST, and ALT. HG is associated with elevated levels of PAPP-A and free β-hCG, and such changes are independent of serum indicators of thyroid and liver function.