[PMID: 15717219]
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant inherited metabolic disorder resulting in advanced vascular atherosclerosis and premature death, primarily from coronary artery disease. The primary defect is a mutation in the gene encoding for the plasma LDL receptor located on the short arm of chromosome 19. Liver transplantation is currently the most effective method of treating this disorder. Living-related liver transplantation (LRLT) has become an excellent modality for treating children, including those with inherited metabolic diseases. In this paper, we describe the first report of a LRLT for familial hypercholesterolemia and review FH and the role of liver transplantation.

[PMID: 9016531]
The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLr) plays a pivotal role in cholesterol homeostasis. Mutations in the LDLr gene (LDLR), which is located on chromosome 19, cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by severe hypercholesterolemia associated with premature coronary atherosclerosis. To date almost 300 mutations have been identified in the LDLR gene. To facilitate the mutational analysis of the LDLR gene, and promote the analysis of the relationship between genotype and phenotype, a software package along with a computerized database (currently listing 210 entries) have been created.

[PMID: 10764678]
Clinical familial hypercholesterolemia has been shown to result from mutations in 2 genes, the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor on chromosome 19 and apolipoprotein B on chromosome 2. However, we have recently described a Utah pedigree in which linkage to both genes was clearly excluded. A multipoint linkage analysis of 583 markers genotyped on 31 (18 affected) members of this pedigree was undertaken to localize a genetic region that may harbor a third gene that could result in clinical familial hypercholesterolemia. A multipoint log of the odds score of 6.8 was obtained for markers on 1p32. Haplotype carriers and affected status are completely concordant (18/18 persons). The phenotype is also expressed in young children (ages 4 and 9). Specific recombinant individuals in the pedigree restrict the region of linkage to an approximately 17 cM interval between polymorphic markers D1S2130 and D1S1596. This region appears to overlap the region found linked to severe hypercholesterolemia in French and Spanish families. The identification of the gene in this region may provide important pathophysiological insights into new mechanisms that may lead to highly elevated LDL cholesterol and other associated dyslipidemic phenotypes.

[PMID: 7585875]
Chromosome 19 is short but has higher relative density of genes than other chromosomes. Increasing number of the genes coding for proteins implicated in the pathogenesis of various human diseases have been mapped on chromosome 19. Mutations of low density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) result in one of the most frequent mendelian inherited disorder-familial hypercholesterolemia. Mutations of insulin receptor (INSR) are causative for rare syndromes of insulin resistance and some of non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). Erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) mutations are causative for rare primary familial and congenital polycythemias (PFCP). Defects of one of the largest gene in the human genome RYR 1 (ryanodine receptor gene) (> 240 kb in size) accounts for majority of malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). All these disorders represent group of receptor diseases. The amplification of GCT trinucleotide repeats in myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene is causative for myotonic dystrophy (DM) and represents a new class of human gene mutations: trinucleotide repeat mutations. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) locus plays a role in pathogenesis of the late onset familial Alzheimer's disease. Translocation of EA2 gene which encodes two helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription proteins and its fusion with PBXI or hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) leads to the leukemogenesis in subgroup of ALL. Interestingly adeno-associated virus (AAV), currently widely used as vector for gene therapy has unique capability of specific integration into human chromosome 19q.