[PMID: 2703281]
The influence of 10 min warming-up at 40% VO2 max on thermal, circulatory, and metabolic responses to an incremental exercise to exhaustion as well as on the anaerobic threshold at the blood lactate level of 4 mmol.l-1 (AT) and the individual anaerobic threshold (IAT) was investigated in eight cross-country skiers. During exercise preceded by warming-up, the mean skin temperature (T sk) and external auditory canal temperature (Tac) did not change significantly in contrast to exercise without warming-up, producing a rise in both T sk and Tac (by approx. 1.2 degrees C and 1.1 degrees C, respectively). Warming-up did not alter the course of the rectal temperature changes during exercise. With warming-up skin humidity rose immediately after the beginning of exercise, whereas the onset of sweating without warming-up appeared much later at higher work intensities. Warming-up did not change the circulatory and ventilatory responses to incremental exercise and the oxygen uptake (VO2) either at submaximal or maximal work loads. With warming-up a significant increase was found in the threshold work load both at the AT and the IAT. The data demonstrated that warming-up has an advantageous effect on the efficiency of thermoregulation in endurance-trained athletes producing an early sweating response to the incremental exercise that results in attenuation of hyperthermia. An increase in the anaerobic threshold during incremental exercise preceded by warming-up may indicate an enhancement of the endurance capacity subsequent to warming-up.

[PMID: 12937031]
The hypothesis that the magnitude of the postexercise onset threshold for sweating is increased by the intensity of exercise was tested in eight subjects. Esophageal temperature was monitored as an index of core temperature while sweat rate was measured by using a ventilated capsule placed on the upper back. Subjects remained seated resting for 15 min (no exercise) or performed 15 min of treadmill running at either 55, 70, or 85% of peak oxygen consumption (V(o2 peak)) followed by a 20-min seated recovery. Subjects then donned a liquid-conditioned suit used to regulate mean skin temperature. The suit was first perfused with 20 degrees C water to control and stabilize skin and core temperature before whole body heating. Subsequently, the skin was heated ( approximately 4.0 degrees C/h) until sweating occurred. Exercise resulted in an increase in the onset threshold for sweating of 0.11 +/- 0.02, 0.23 +/- 0.01, and 0.33 +/- 0.02 degrees C above that measured for the no-exercise resting values (P < 0.05) for the 55, 70, and 85% of V(o2 peak) exercise conditions, respectively. We did note that there was a greater postexercise hypotension as a function of exercise intensity as measured at the end of the 20-min exercise recovery. Thus it is plausible that the increase in postexercise threshold may be related to postexercise hypotension. It is concluded that the sweating response during upright recovery is significantly modified by exercise intensity and may likely be influenced by the nonthermal baroreceptor reflex adjustments postexercise.

[PMID: 9694410]
Because metabolic heat production is proportional to the amount of work performed, the differences in core body temperature (Tcore) of humans exercising at similar absolute exercise intensities are due to differences in their efficiency of heat dissipation. The purpose of this paper is to delineate the effects of training status, heat acclimation, environmental conditions and host factors on the sweating response to exercise. These factors are reviewed in light of their effects on the biophysical enhancement or suppression of sweating, and modifications of the relationship between local sweat rate and Tcore (degrees C). Athletes are advised to optimize those factors that enhance, and eliminate those factors that diminish, the onset and responsiveness of sweating.

[PMID: 7588694]
We measured the aerobic capacity, sweat rate and fluid intake of trained athletes during outdoor exercise and examined the relationship between aerobic capacity and thermoregulatory responses at high ambient temperatures. The maximal aerobic capacity (VO2max) of the subjects, nine male baseball players of college age, was determined by maximal exercise tests on a cycle ergometer. The subjects practised baseball regularly without drinking fluids from 1330 to 1530 hours. After 30 min rest, they played a baseball game with free access to a sports drink at 15 degrees C from 1600 to 1830 hours. At a mean ambient temperature of 36.7 (SEM 0.2) degree C, the mean percentage of body mass loss (delta mb) and increase of oral temperature (delta To) from 1330 to 1530 hours was 3.47 (SEM 0.12)% and 0.81 (SEM 0.14) degree C, respectively. The sweat loss from 1330 to 1830 hours was 56.53 (SEM 1.56)ml.kg-1 of body mass (mb) while the mean fluid consumption was 44.78 (SEM 2.39)ml.kg-1 of mb, with recovery of 76.08 (SEM 2.81)% of sweat loss. The VO2max was significantly inversely correlated with delta mb, fluid intake and rehydration amount, but showed no correlation with delta To. These results would suggest that at a given exercise intensity in subjects with a higher aerobic capacity body temperature is maintained with a lower sweating rate than that in subjects with a lower aerobic capacity.