[PMID: 25186601]
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive glial cell-derived primary tumor. Current standard of care for patients with GBM includes maximal tumor resection plus adjuvant radiotherapy and temozolomide chemotherapy, increasing median overall survival to a mere 15 months from diagnosis. Because these therapies are inherently nonspecific, there is an increased likelihood of off-target and incomplete effects; therefore, targeted modalities are required for enhanced safety and efficacy. Rindopepimut is emerging as a safe and potentially effective drug for the treatment of GBM. Rindopepimut consists of a 14-mer peptide that spans the length of EGF receptor variant III, a mutant variant of EGF receptor found on approximately 30% of primary GBM, conjugated to the carrier protein keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Vaccination with rindopepimut has been shown to specifically eliminate cells expressing EGF receptor variant III. Phase II clinical trials have suggested that vaccination of newly diagnosed GBM patients with rindopepimut plus adjuvant granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor results in prolonged progression-free and overall survival with minimal toxicity. This review will outline the development of rindopepimut, as well as the current status of this vaccine.

[PMID: 23055947]
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor in adults and is universally fatal. Despite surgical resection, radiotherapy, and systemic chemotherapy, the median overall survival is less than 15 months. As current therapies are not tumor-specific, treatment commonly results in toxicity. The epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is a naturally occurring mutant of EGFR and is expressed on approximately 20% to 30% of GBMs. As it is not expressed on normal cells, it is an ideal therapeutic target. Rindopepimut is a peptide vaccine which elicits EGFRvIII-specific humoral and cellular immune responses. Phase I and II clinical trials have demonstrated significantly higher progression-free and overall survival times in vaccinated patients with EGFRvIII-expressing GBM tumors. Side effects are minimal and mainly consist of hypersensitivity reactions. Due to the efficacy and safety of rindopepimut, it is a promising therapy for patients with GBM. Currently, rindopepimut is undergoing clinical testing in an international Phase III trial for newly diagnosed GBM and a Phase II trial for relapsed GBM.

[PMID: 22309662]
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadly of the human brain cancers. The EGF receptor is often amplified in GBM and provides a potential therapeutic target. However, targeting the normal receptor is complicated by its nearly ubiquitous and high level of expression in certain tissues. A naturally occurring deletion mutant of the EGF receptor, EGFRvIII, is a constitutively active variant originally identified in a high percentage of brain cancer cases, and more importantly is rarely found in normal tissue. A peptide vaccine, rindopepimut (CDX-110, Celldex Therapeutics), is directed against the novel exon 1-8 junction produced by the EGFRvIII deletion, and it has shown high efficacy in preclinical models. Recent Phase II clinical trials in patients with newly diagnosed GBM have shown EGFRvIII-specific immune responses and significantly increased time to progression and overall survival in those receiving vaccine therapy, as compared with published results for standard of care. Rindopepimut therefore represents a very promising therapy for patients with GBM.

[PMID: 21154166]
Celldex Therapeutics is developing rindopepimut (CDX-110), a 14-mer injectable peptide vaccine for the potential treatment of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Rindopepimut specifically targets a novel junctional epitope of the EGFR deletion mutant EGFRvIII, which is a constitutively active receptor that is expressed in approximately 60 to 70% of patients with GBM. EGFRvIII expression is correlated with worse prognosis and reduced overall survival. Importantly, EGFRvIII is not expressed in normal brain tissue, making it an excellent therapeutic target. Preclinical studies demonstrated lasting tumor regression and increased survival times, as well as efficient generation of EGFRvIII-specific humoral and cellular immune responses, in animals expressing EGFRvIII and vaccinated with rindopepimut. Phase I and II clinical trials in patients with GBM demonstrated significantly increased median time to progression and overall survival time in those vaccinated with rindopepimut compared with matched historical controls. Only limited side effects have been observed in patients. Given these results, rindopepimut is an extremely promising therapy for patients with GBM. Phase I and II clinical trials in patients with GBM were ongoing at the time of publication. In the future, it may be beneficial to combine rindopepimut with other treatment modalities to further prolong survival.