[PMID: 34339548]
The prevalence of gene mutations in hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) varied between studies. Thus far, data on the genetic background of HLH in Vietnamese patients are limited. We recruited 94 HLH patients and analyzed for the 4 genes using Sanger sequencing technology. Pathogenic variants were observed in 36 (38.29%) patients, including 27 in UNC13D, 5 in STXBP2, 3 in PRF1, and 2 in STX11 (one patient with digenic variants in both UNC13D and STX11). Monoallelic variants accounted for 77.8% of all cases with mutation. A total of 23 different types of pathogenic variants were documented in the 4 genes tested, including 15 in UNC13D, 3 in PRF1, 3 in STXBP2, and 2 in STX11. Interestingly, the novel splicing variant c.3151G>A in UNC13D was recurrently identified in 8 unrelated patients. Vietnamese patients with HLH showed a distinct genetic variant spectrum, in which UNC13D is the predominant genetic lesion associated with HLH.

[PMID: 29216683]
Deleterious mutations in PRF1 result in lethal, childhood disease, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 2 (FHL 2). However, not all mutations in PRF1 are deleterious and result in FHL 2. Currently, these nondeleterious mutations are being investigated in the onset of numerous disorders, such as lymphomas and diabetes. Yet, there is still an overwhelmingly large amount of PRF1 mutations that are not associated with disease. We conducted a post hoc analysis of the PRF1 mutations in the coding region using the recently published Exome Aggregation Consortium genomes, Leiden Open Variation Database, NCBI SNP database, and primary literature to better understand PRF1 variation in the human population. This study catalogs 460 PRF1 mutations in the coding region, and demonstrates PRF1 is more variant then previously predicted. We identify key PRF1 mutations with high allelic frequency and are only found in certain populations. Additionally, we define PRF1 SNVs are geographically distributed. This study concludes with a novel hypothesis that nondeleterious mutation in PRF1, which decreases perforin expression and/or activity, may be an example of selective advantage in the context of environmental stressors prevalent near the equator. Our studies illustrate how perforin deficiency can be protective from injuries resulting in blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption.

[PMID: 33869605]
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a primary immunodefici-ency disease caused by gene defects. The onset of FHL in adolescents and adults may lead clinicians to ignore or even misdiagnose the disease. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to detail the clinical features of type 2 FHL (FHL2) with compound heterozygous perforin (<i>PRF1</i>) defects involving the c.163C>T mutation, in addition to correlation analysis and a literature review. We report a case of a 27-year-old male patient with FHL2, who was admitted with a persistent fever and pancytopenia. Through next-generation sequencing technology of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)-related genes, we found compound heterozygous mutations of <i>PRF1</i>: c.65delC (p.Pro22Argfs*29) (frameshift mutation, paternal) and c.163C>T (p.Arg55Cys) (missense mutation, maternal). Although he did not receive hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, the patient achieved complete remission after receiving HLH-2004 treatment protocol. To date, the patient has stopped taking drugs for 15 mo, is in a stable condition, and is under follow-up observation. The delayed onset of FHL2 may be related to the <i>PRF1</i> mutation type, pathogenic variation pattern, triggering factors, and the temperature sensitivity of some <i>PRF1</i> mutations. For individual, the detailed reason for the delay in the onset of FHL warrants further investigation.

[PMID: 31865540]
The presence of mutations in PRF1, UNC13D, STX11 and STXBP2 genes in homozygosis or compound heterozygosis results in immune deregulation. Most such cases lead to clinical manifestations of haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). In the present study, we analyzed degranulation and cytotoxicity in a pediatric patient with a late presentation of HLH associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection. Remarkably, the results of the degranulation assay showed reduction of CD107a median fluorescence intensity (MFI) and absent cytotoxicity. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous mutations in STXBP2 gene: a previously reported splicing defect in exon 15 (c.1247-1G>C, p.V417LfsX126) and a novel missense mutation in exon 9 (c.728T>G, p.L243R). Transfection experiments of STXBP2-L243R or STXBP2-WT constructs showed an undetectable protein expression of the STXBP2-L243R mutation. The residue L243 is highly preserved evolutionarily; moreover, computational analysis of its structure revealed its participation in the rich network of interactions that stabilizes domains 2 and 3 of the protein. Altogether, we demonstrated by molecular and in silico analysis that the new L243R mutation in STXBP2 plays a pathogenic role that, together with the p.Val417Leufsc mutation, shows the synergistic negative effect of these two mutations on STXBP2 function, leading to a decrease of degranulatory activity in vivo.