[PMID: 29027702]
In eukaryotes, the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) modification of many glycoproteins on the cell surface is highly conserved. The lipid moieties of GPI-anchored proteins undergo remodelling processes during their maturation. To date, the products of the PER1, GUP1 and CWH43 genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been shown to be involved in the lipid remodelling. Here, we focus on the putative GPI remodelling pathway in the methylotrophic yeast Ogataea minuta. We found that the O. minuta homologues of PER1, GUP1 and CWH43 are functionally compatible with those of S. cerevisiae. Disruption of GUP1 or CWH43 in O. minuta caused a growth defect under non-permissive conditions. The O. minuta per1Δ mutant exhibited a more fragile phenotype than the gup1Δ or cwh43Δ mutants. To address the role of GPI modification in O. minuta, we assessed the effect of these mutations on the processing and localization of the O. minuta homologues of the Gas1 protein; in S. cerevisiae, Gas1p is an abundant and well-characterized GPI-anchored protein. We found that O. minuta possesses two copies of the GAS1 gene, which we designate GAS1A and GAS1B. Microscopy and western blotting analysis showed mislocalization and/or lower retention of Gas1Ap and Gas1Bp within the membrane fraction in per1Δ or gup1Δ mutant cells, suggesting the significance of lipid remodelling for GPI-anchored proteins in O. minuta. Localization behaviour of Gas1Bp differed from that of Gas1Ap. Our data reveals, for the first time (to our knowledge), the existence of genes related to GPI anchor remodelling in O. minuta cells.

[PMID: 29393895]
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are lipid anchors allowing the exposure of proteins at the outer layer of the plasma membrane. In fungi, a number of GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) are involved in the remodeling of the cell wall polymers. GPIs follow a specific biosynthetic pathway in the endoplasmic reticulum. After the transfer of the protein onto the GPI-anchor, a lipid remodeling occurs to substitute the diacylglycerol moiety by a ceramide. In addition to GPI-APs, <i>A. fumigatus</i> produces a GPI-anchored polysaccharide, the galactomannan (GM), that remains unique in the fungal kingdom. To investigate the role of the GPI pathway in the biosynthesis of the GM and cell wall organization, the deletion of <i>PER1</i>-coding for a phospholipase required for the first step of the GPI lipid remodeling-was undertaken. Biochemical characterization of the GPI-anchor isolated from GPI-APs showed that the <i>PER1</i> deficient mutant produced a lipid anchor with a diacylglycerol. The absence of a ceramide on GPI-anchors in the <i>Δper1</i> mutant led to a mislocation of GPI-APs and to an alteration of the composition of the cell wall alkali-insoluble fraction. On the other hand, the GM isolated from the <i>Δper1</i> mutant membranes possesses a ceramide moiety as the parental strain, showing that GPI anchor of the GM follow a distinct unknown biosynthetic pathway.

[PMID: 29255114]
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchoring of proteins is a conserved posttranslational modification in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Soon after GPI is attached, an acyl chain on the GPI inositol is removed by post-GPI attachment to proteins 1 (PGAP1), a GPI-inositol deacylase. This is crucial for switching GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) from protein folding to transport states. We performed haploid genetic screens to identify factors regulating GPI-inositol deacylation, identifying seven genes. In particular, calnexin cycle impairment caused inefficient GPI-inositol deacylation. Calnexin was specifically associated with GPI-APs, dependent on <i>N</i>-glycan and GPI moieties, and assisted efficient GPI-inositol deacylation by PGAP1. Under chronic ER stress caused by misfolded GPI-APs, inositol-acylated GPI-APs were exposed on the cell surface. These results indicated that <i>N</i>-glycans participate in quality control and temporal ER retention of GPI-APs, ensuring their correct folding and GPI processing before exiting from the ER. Once the system is disrupted by ER stress, unprocessed GPI-APs become exposed on the cell surface.

[PMID: 30094187]
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchored proteins (GPI-APs) represent a class of soluble proteins attached to the external leaflet of the plasma membrane by a post-translation modification, the GPI anchor. The 28 genes currently involved in the synthesis and remodelling of the GPI anchor add to the ever-growing class of congenital glycosylation disorders. Recent advances in next generation sequencing technology have led to the discovery of Mabry disease and CHIME syndrome genetic aetiology. Moreover, with each described mutation known phenotypes expand and new ones emerge without clear genotype-phenotype correlation. A protein database search was made for human GPI-APs with defined pathology to help building-up a physio-pathological mechanism from a clinical perspective. GPI-APs function in vitamin-B6 and folate transport, nucleotide metabolism and lipid homeostasis. Defining GPI-APs role in disease bears significant clinical implications.