[PMID: 24588595]
As a case study of patent coverage for a repurposed drug, Biogen Idec's approach for Tecfidera(®), an oral formulation of dimethyl fumarate, was analyzed. While mixtures of fumarates have been used for over 50 years to treat psoriasis, Tecifidera is approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Biogen pursued claims to pharmaceutical formulations and useful doses for treating multiple sclerosis, an approach that is relevant to pharmaceutical lifecycle management in general. A survey of recent US, EP, and PCT patent applications indicate other companies are developing competing fumarate formulations. While it is possible to pursue secondary patents for compounds without composition of matter coverage, regulatory data exclusivity provides additional protection to delay competitors.

[PMID: 24259625]
To describe the clinical evidence supporting the safety, efficacy, and clinical utility of oral dimethyl fumarate for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS). A comprehensive PubMed search was conducted in July 2013 using the search terms dimethyl fumarate and Tecfidera. Reference lists of abstracted publications were reviewed to identify relevant works that were not retrieved via the electronic search. Additional information was obtained from the FDA Web site, manufacturer prescribing information, and Clinicaltrials.gov. Clinical trials and review articles that included the use of dimethyl fumarate in the treatment of MS and were available in English were abstracted for review. The safety and efficacy of dimethyl fumarate for the treatment of relapsing remitting MS was confirmed in 2 phase III trials, DEFINE and CONFIRM. Relative to placebo, twice-daily dimethyl fumarate was found to reduce the proportion of patients with relapses at 2 years by 34% to 49% and the annualized relapse rate by 44% to 53%. Although the incidence of serious adverse effects did not differ from that of placebo, intolerable flushing and gastrointestinal adverse effects prompted discontinuation in 3% and 4% of patients, respectively. In March 2013, dimethyl fumarate was approved as a third oral option for patients with relapsing forms of MS. Although no head-to-head trials have been conducted, a comparison of data from phase III trials suggests that the efficacy of dimethyl fumarate is comparable to that of existing oral agents and may offer a preferable safety profile.

[PMID: 26195059]
Dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera™) is an effective therapy for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Our study suggests that this drug may have immunosuppressive properties evidenced by significant sustained reduction in CD8 lymphocyte counts and, to a lesser extent, CD4 lymphocyte counts. This observation is relevant in light of the recent case of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in a patient receiving this drug.

[PMID: 27226838]
Recently, collaboration between regulators and payers was set up and was mainly focused on evidence generation along product clinical development. However, neither the regulatory path nor the new active substance status (NASs) was considered. Granting NASs will provide the product with 8 years of data protection and 2 years of market exclusivity during which no generic could enter the market. To review the economic impact (for payers) of NASs granted by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for dimethyl fumarate (DMF), developed by Biogen and approved for multiple sclerosis (MS) as Tecfidera(®) on 3 February 2014. We reviewed the available DMF-containing products and identified their indication and price through relevant databases and official Web sites. The economic impact of Tecfidera(®) on payers' budgets was calculated assuming NASs was or was not granted. The forecast was identified in Datamonitor. Results identified four products already containing DMF as the main or unique active substance. This would have potentially prevented Tecfidera(®) from being granted NASs. The EMA Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) denied Tecfidera(®) NASs and, following a company appeal, reversed its position opening as polemic. The impact of that decision has been evaluated at €7 to €10 billion over a 10-year period. NASs is a critical decision because it does have a major budget impact for payers, and it prevents generic competition. Current European Union (EU) regulations on that topic are unclear and open up too many interpretations thus distorting fair trade and affecting payers' bills. Greater clarity and more stringent rules are required to prevent mistrust of this EMA decision.