[PMID: 34788003]
Electron transfer dissociation (ETD) is an analytically useful tool for primary structure interrogation of intact proteins, but its utility is limited by higher-order reactions with the products. To inhibit these higher-order reactions, first-generation fragment ions are kinetically excited by applying an experimentally tailored parallel ion parking waveform during ETD (ETD-PIP). In combination with subsequent ion/ion proton transfer reactions, precursor-to-product conversion was maximized as evidenced by the consumption of more than 90% of the 21 kDa Protein G precursor to form ETD product ions. The employment of ETD-PIP increased sequence coverage to 90% from 80% with standard ETD. Additionally, the inhibition of sequential electron transfers was reflected in the high number of complementary ion pairs from ETD-PIP (90%) compared to standard ETD (39%).

[PMID: 33068214]
O-glycosylation is a highly diverse and complex form of protein post-translational modification. Mucin-type O-glycosylation is initiated by the transfer of N-acetyl-galactosamine (GalNAc) to the hydroxyl group of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues through catalysis by a family of glycosyltransferases, the UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (E.C. 2.4.1.41) that are conserved across metazoans. In the last decade, structural characterization of glycosylation has substantially advanced due to the development of analytical methods and advances in mass spectrometry. However, O-glycosite mapping remains challenging since mucin-type O-glycans are densely packed, often protecting proteins from cleavage by proteases. Adding to the complexity is the fact that a given glycosite can be modified by different glycans, resulting in an array of glycoforms rising from one glycosite. In this study, we investigated conditions of solid phase extraction (SPE) enrichment, protease digestion, and Electron-transfer/Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation to optimize identification of O-glycosites in densely glycosylated proteins. Our results revealed that anion-exchange stationary phase is sufficient for glycopeptide enrichment; however, the use of a hydrophobic-containing sorbent was detrimental to the binding of polar-hydrophilic glycopeptides. Different proteases can be employed for enhancing coverage of O-glycosites, while derivatization of negatively charged amino acids or sialic acids would enhance the identification of a short O-glycopeptides. Using a longer than normal electron transfer dissociation (ETD) reaction time, we obtained enhanced coverage of peptide bonds that facilitated the localization of O-glycosites. O-glycosite mapping strategy via proteases, cut-off filtration and solid-phase chemoenzymatic processing. Glycopeptides are enriched by SPE column, followed by release of N-glycans, collection of higher MW O-glycopeptides via MW cut-off filter, O-glycopeptide release via O-protease, and finally detected by LC-MS/MS using EThcD.

[PMID: 31999103]
Electron-based fragmentation methods have revolutionized biomolecular mass spectrometry, in particular native and top-down protein analysis. Here, we report the use of a new electromagnetostatic cell to perform electron capture dissociation (ECD) within a quadrupole/ion mobility/time-of-flight mass spectrometer. This cell was installed between the ion mobility and time-of-flight regions of the instrument, and fragmentation was fast enough to be compatible with mobility separation. The instrument was already fitted with electron transfer dissociation (ETD) between the quadrupole and mobility regions prior to modification. We show excellent fragmentation efficiency for denatured peptides and proteins without the need to trap ions in the gas phase. Additionally, we demonstrate native top-down backbone fragmentation of noncovalent protein complexes, leading to comparable sequence coverage to what was achieved using the instrument's existing ETD capabilities. Limited collisional ion activation of the hemoglobin tetramer before ECD was reflected in the observed fragmentation pattern, and complementary ion mobility measurements prior to ECD provided orthogonal evidence of monomer unfolding within this complex. The approach demonstrated here provides a powerful platform for both top-down proteomics and mass spectrometry-based structural biology studies.

[PMID: 32070774]
Middle-down proteomics has emerged as the method of choice to study combinatorial histone post translational modifications (PTMs). In the common bottom-up workflow, histones are digested into relatively short peptides (4-20 aa), separated using reversed-phase chromatography and analyzed using typical proteomics methods in mass spectrometry. In middle-down, histones are cleaved into longer polypeptides (50-60 aa) mostly corresponding to their N-terminal tails, resolved using weak cation exchange-hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (WCX-HILIC) and analyzed with less conventional mass spectrometry, i.e. using Electron Transfer Dissociation (ETD) for analyte fragmentation. Middle-down is not nearly as utilized as bottom-up for PTM analysis, partially due to its limited reproducibility and robustness. This has also limited the establishment of rigorous benchmarks to discriminate good vs poor quality experiments. Here, we describe critical aspects of the middle-down workflow to assist the user in evaluating the presence of biased and misleading results. Specifically, we tested the use of porous graphitic carbon (PGC) during the desalting step, demonstrating that desalting using only C<sub>18</sub> material leads to sample loss. We also tested different salts in the WCX-HILIC buffers for their effect on retention, selectivity, and reproducibility of analysis of variants of histone tail fragments, in particular replacing ammonium ion with ethylenediammonium ion in buffer A. These substitutions had marked effects on selectivity and retention. Our results provide a streamlined way to evaluate middle-down performance to identify and quantify combinatorial histone PTMs.