[PMID: 34804848]
Temsirolimus is a mTOR inhibitor approved for the first-line treatment of advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma (a/mRCC) with poor prognosis. In treatment of a/mRCC several prognostic scoring systems are used. We assessed the prognostic value of these scores in a large temsirolimus treated cohort and compared the results with the physician's prognosis. A German multicenter registry (STAR-TOR) for a/mRCC patients (NCT00700258) was established to evaluate the efficacy and safety of temsirolimus 25 mg weekly in a routine clinical setting. These prospective data were systematically analyzed and followed-up by an independent clinical research organization to compare established prognostic scores (MSKCC, IMDC and Hudes) with the risk assessment by treating physicians based on their medical expertise and match them with survival outcomes. This interim analysis included 547 patients between 02/2008 and 05/2015 in 87 centers. Either prognostic tool resulted in significant and clinically meaningful differentiation between good, intermediate and poor prognosis. However, physician's prognosis identified more patients with good prognosis (9.1% <i>vs</i>. 1.3%). In patients with good physician's prognosis and intermediate prognosis by MSKCC, overall survival was nearly doubled compared to consensual intermediate prognosis (26.6 <i>vs</i>. 13.6 months), albeit without reaching statistical significance (P=0.09). For poor prognosis assessed by the physician, MSKCC performed statistically better for differentiation between poor and intermediate prognosis with a median overall survival of 10.3 <i>vs</i>. 5.5 months (P<0.01). Physician's prognosis may be able to identify a subset of patients treated with temsirolimus with good prognosis when MSKCC-determines intermediate prognosis while the MSKCC score could identify patients which were falsely placed in the poor risk group by physicians.

[PMID: 31331862]
From 10% to 26% of patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) experience rapidly progressive disease (PD) on treatment with sunitinib. To investigate the benefit of subsequent treatment with another tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) or a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor in such primary refractory patients. A total of 150 mRCC patients with rapidly PD on first-line sunitinib (within two cycles, n=93, or four cycles, n=57) were identified: median age 59yr; nephrectomy 86%; histological subtypes: clear cell (77.8%), papillary (14%), and sarcomatoid features (18%); according to the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and French classifications: good risk (11% and 7%, respectively), intermediate (68% and 63%, respectively), and poor (21% and 29%, respectively). Data were retrospectively collected by a questionnaire from 19 European oncology centers between March 2005 and March 2011. Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were calculated (Kaplan-Meier method). Median OS from the start of first-line treatment was 7.4mo. Second-line treatment was administered to 86 (57%) patients (44 mTOR inhibitors: 23 everolimus and 21 temsirolimus; 39 TKIs alone or in combination; three chemotherapy). Second-line PFS was not significantly different between TKIs and mTOR inhibitors (2.0 vs 0.9mo; p=0.536). Median OS from the start of second-line treatment was 5.0mo for mTOR inhibitors and 6.6mo for TKIs (p=0.15). Treatment with further TKIs or mTOR inhibitors for mRCC patients primarily refractory to first-line sunitinib in the observed time period achieved very minimal benefit, suggesting avoiding TKI rechallenge and possibly preferring alternative strategies, such as immune checkpoint inhibitors, after PD to a treatment line including a TKI in this setting. The present work collected data about 150 patients affected by metastatic renal cell carcinoma, who received one of the current standard of care as first-line treatment, namely, the antiangiogenic drug sunitinib, and experienced rapid worsening of the disease. We investigated and described the subsequent outcome of such patients treated with two different types of drug, administered as second-line therapy, to better understand the best strategy to adopt for patients who got no benefit from sunitinib and to describe the current therapeutic approach in such cases.

[PMID: 34589671]
There is a high need for novel treatment options in relapsed and refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Single agent mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor treatment has shown promising efficacy in this entity. Here, we report on the results of the mTOR-inhibitor temsirolimus combined to standard rituximab-DHAP salvage regimen in a prospective, multicenter, phase II, open-label study. The STORM regimen consisted of rituximab 375 mg/m<sup>2</sup> (day 2) and DHAP (dexamethasone 40 mg day 3-6, cisplatinum 100 mg/m<sup>2</sup> day 3, cytarabine 2 × 2  g/m<sup>2</sup> day 4) with temsirolimus added on day 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle, with 2 to 4 cycles planned. In part I, dose levels of 25, 50, 75, and 100 mg for temsirolimus were predefined. Based on the observed toxicity profile, a temsirolimus dose of 25 mg was defined as recommended dose for the part II extension cohort of the trial. The intention-to-treat cohort comprised 53 patients. Median age was 63 years and median number of prior regimen was 1. All but 1 patient had prior rituximab exposure. Temsirolimus dose was 50 mg on day 1 and 8 in 6 patients from the part I of the trial and 25 mg in the remaining 47 patients. In general, treatment was well tolerated with leucopenia and thrombocytopenia as most frequent severe adverse events. The overall response rate after the last cycle of temsirolimus R-DHAP was 66% with 24% complete responses. The ability to mobilize stem cells was not impaired by the treatment regimen. Twenty-eight patients received consolidation treatment with high-dose therapy (HDT) and stem cell transplantation. Median duration of response was not reached. The total 2-year progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were 53% and 59%. Patients who were consolidated with HDT achieved a 2-year PFS and a 2-year OS of 77.8% and 82.1%, respectively. We conclude that temsirolimus can be safely added to rituximab and DHAP with promising activity.

[PMID: 34565342]
Neuroblastoma (NB) patients with MYCN amplification or overexpression respond poorly to current therapies and exhibit extremely poor clinical outcomes. PI3K-mTOR signaling-driven deregulation of protein synthesis is very common in NB and various other cancers that promote MYCN stabilization. In addition, both the MYCN and mTOR signaling axes can directly regulate a common translation pathway that leads to increased protein synthesis and cell proliferation. However, a strategy of concurrently targeting MYCN and mTOR signaling in NB remains unexplored. This study aimed to investigate the therapeutic potential of targeting dysregulated protein synthesis pathways by inhibiting the MYCN and mTOR pathways together in NB. Using small molecule/pharmacologic approaches, we evaluated the effects of combined inhibition of MYCN transcription and mTOR signaling on NB cell growth/survival and associated molecular mechanism(s) in NB cell lines. We used two well-established BET (bromodomain extra-terminal) protein inhibitors (JQ1, OTX-015), and a clinically relevant mTOR inhibitor, temsirolimus, to target MYCN transcription and mTOR signaling, respectively. The single agent and combined efficacies of these inhibitors on NB cell growth, apoptosis, cell cycle and neurospheres were assessed using MTT, Annexin-V, propidium-iodide staining and sphere assays, respectively. Effects of inhibitors on global protein synthesis were quantified using a fluorescence-based (FamAzide)-based protein synthesis assay. Further, we investigated the specificities of these inhibitors in targeting the associated pathways/molecules using western blot analyses. Co-treatment of JQ1 or OTX-015 with temsirolimus synergistically suppressed NB cell growth/survival by inducing G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis with greatest efficacy in MYCN-amplified NB cells. Mechanistically, the co-treatment of JQ1 or OTX-015 with temsirolimus significantly downregulated the expression levels of phosphorylated 4EBP1/p70-S6K/eIF4E (mTOR components) and BRD4 (BET protein)/MYCN proteins. Further, this combination significantly inhibited global protein synthesis, compared to single agents. Our findings also demonstrated that both JQ1 and temsirolimus chemosensitized NB cells when tested in combination with cisplatin chemotherapy. Together, our findings demonstrate synergistic efficacy of JQ1 or OTX-015 and temsirolimus against MYCN-driven NB, by dual-inhibition of MYCN (targeting transcription) and mTOR (targeting translation). Additional preclinical evaluation is warranted to determine the clinical utility of targeted therapy for high-risk NB patients.