[PMID: 2564419]
Using an interspecific cross, gene linkage relationships among members of the murine complement receptor-related genes, C4bp, Cfh, Mcry, and Mcr2, were analyzed by segregation of RFLP in 200 mice. The human homologues of these genes are tightly linked, composing the RCA locus, which maps to human chromosome (Chr.)1q32, within a large linkage group conserved between human Chr.1q21-32 and mouse Chr.1. RFLP associated with C4bp and Cfh map within this conserved linkage group; Cfh is located 9 cM telomeric to C4bp, which is consistent with linkage data for their human homologues. Mcry and Mcr2, while tightly linked, are located outside the conserved group, 40 cM telomeric to C4bp. These data suggest that a translocation or inversion occurred within the RCA family during the evolution of the mouse, defining a breakpoint of this large conserved linkage group.

[PMID: 2451706]
The organization and physical linkage of four members of a major complement locus, the RCA locus, have been determined using the technique of pulsed field gradient gel electrophoresis in conjunction with Southern blotting. The genes encoding CR1, CR2, DAF, and C4bp were aligned in that order within a region of 750 kb. In addition, the 5' to 3' orientation of the CR1 gene (5' proximal to CR2) was determined using 5'- and 3'-specific DNA probes. The proximity of these genes may be related to structural and functional homologies of the protein products. Overall, a restriction map including 1,500 kb of DNA was prepared, and this map will be important for positioning of additional coding sequences within this region on the long arm of chromosome 1.

[PMID: 19319518]
Genome and expressed sequence tag information of Xenopus tropicalis suggested that short-consensus repeat (SCR)-containing proteins are encoded by three genes that are mapped within a 300-kb downstream of PFKFB2, which is a marker gene for the regulator of complement activation (RCA) loci in human and chicken. Based on this observation, we cloned the three cDNAs of these proteins using 3'- or 5'-RACE technique. Since their primary structures and locations of the proximity to the PFKFB2 locus, we named them amphibian RCA protein (ARC) 1, 2, and 3. Expression in human HEK293 or CHO cells suggested that ARC1 is a soluble protein of Mr approximately 67 kDa, ARC2 is a membrane protein with Mr 44 kDa, and ARC3 a secretary protein with a putative transmembrane region. They were N-glycosylated during maturation. In human and chicken RCA clusters, the order in which genes for soluble, GPI-anchored, and membrane forms of SCR proteins are arranged is from the distant to proximity to the PFKFB2 gene. However, the amphibian ARC1, 2, and 3 resembled one another and did not reflect the same order found in human and chicken RCA genes. This may be due to self-duplication of ARCs to form a family, and it evolved after the amphibia separated from the ancestor of the amniotes, which possessed soluble, GPI-anchored, and membrane forms of SCR protein members. Taken together, frog possesses a RCA locus, but the constitution of the ARC proteins differs from that of the amniotes with a unique self-resemblance.

[PMID: 2164822]
CR1 (CD35) and CR2 (CD21) are structurally related integral transmembrane glycoproteins that function as cellular receptors for human C3b and C3dg, respectively. The primary sequence of the most common structural allotype of CR1 and that of CR2 have been established, and ligand binding on the molecules has been mapped. CR1 and CR2 genes are located in close vicinity in the RCA locus of chromosome 1. CR1 has a wide cellular/tissular distribution and mediates a variety of biologic functions, including the transport of C3-bearing immune complexes on erythrocytes, enhancement of phagocytosis, induction of IL-1 secretion and enhancement of B-cell differentiation. Expression of CR2 is restricted to B lymphocytes and follicular dendritic cells. The receptor modulates B-cell growth. CR2 also serves as the receptor for EBV and determines the cellular tropism of the virus. This review discusses the molecular biology and functional characteristics of CR1 and CR2. It focuses on alterations of expression of the receptors in disease, with particular emphasis on the genetic and acquired factors that contribute to the defective expression of CR1 in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.