[PMID: 24386139]
Antimicrobial peptides have been widely identified from amphibian skins except salamanders. A novel antimicrobial peptide (CFBD) was isolated and characterized from skin secretions of the salamander, Cynops fudingensis. The cDNA encoding CFBD precursor was cloned from the skin cDNA library of C. fudingensis. The precursor was composed of three domains: signal peptide of 17 residues, mature peptide of 41 residues and intervening propeptide of 3 residues. There are six cysteines in the sequence of mature CFBD peptide, which possibly form three disulfide-bridges. CFBD showed antimicrobial activities against Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Candida albicans and Escherichia coli. This peptide could be classified into family of β-defensin based on its sequence similarity with β-defensins from other vertebrates. Evolution analysis indicated that CFBD was close to fish β-defensin. As far as we know, CFBD is the first β-defensin antimicrobial peptide from salamanders.

[PMID: 24557891]
Defensins are endogenous peptides with cysteine-rich antimicrobial ability that contribute to host defence against bacterial, fungal and viral infections. There are three subfamilies of defensins in primates: α, β and θ-defensins. α-defensins are most present in neutrophils and Paneth cells; β-defensins are involved in protecting the skin and the mucous membranes of the respiratory, genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts; and θ-defensins are physically distinguished as the only known fully-cyclic peptides of animal origin, which are first isolated from rhesus macaques. All three kinds of defensins have six conserved cysteines, three intramolecular disulfide bonds, a net positive charge, and β-sheet regions. α and θ-defensins are closely related, comparative amino acid sequences showed that the difference between them is that θ-defensins have an additional stop codon limits the initial defensin domain peptides to 12 residues. Humans, chimpanzees and gorillas do not produce θ-defensin peptides due to a premature stop codon present in the signal sequence of all θ-defensin pseudogenes. By using comprehensive computational searches, here we report the discovery of complete repertoires of the α and θ-defensin gene family in ten primate species. Consistent with previous studies, our phylogenetic analyses showed all primate θ-defensins evident formed one distinct clusters evolved from α-defensins. β-defensins are ancestors of both α and θ-defensins. Human has two copies of DEFA1 and DEFT1P, and two extra DEFA3 and DEFA10P genes compared with gorilla. As different primates inhabit in quite different ecological niches, the production of species-specific α and θ-defensins and these highly evolved θ-defensins in old world monkeys would presumably allow them to better respond to the specific microbial challenges that they face.

[PMID: 25970658]
Human alpha defensins are a class of antimicrobial peptides with additional antiviral activity. Such antimicrobial peptides constitute a major part of mammalian innate immunity. Alpha defensins contain six cysteines, which form three well defined disulfide bridges under oxidizing conditions. Residues C3-C31, C5-C20, and C10-C30 form disulfide pairs in the native structure of the peptide. The major tissue in which HD5 is expressed is the crypt of the small intestine, an anaerobic niche that should allow for substantial pools of both oxidized and (partly) reduced HD5. We used ion mobility coupled to mass spectrometry to track the structural changes in HD5 upon disulfide bond reduction. We found evidence of stepwise unfolding of HD5 with sequential reduction of the three disulfide bonds. Alkylation of free cysteines followed by tandem mass spectrometry of the corresponding partially reduced states revealed a dominant pathway of reductive unfolding. The majority of HD5 unfolds by initial reduction of C5-C20, followed by C10-C30 and C3-C31. We find additional evidence for a minor pathway that starts with reduction of C3-C31, followed by C5-C20 and C10-C30. Our results provide insight into the pathway and conformational landscape of disulfide bond reduction in HD5.

[PMID: 22168415]
Defensins are small, multifunctional cationic peptides. They typically contain six conserved cysteines whose three intramolecular disulfides stabilize a largely β-sheet structure. This review of human α-defensins begins by describing their evolution, including their likely relationship to the Big Defensins of invertebrates, and their kinship to the β-defensin peptides of many if not all vertebrates, and the θ-defensins found in certain non-human primates. We provide a short history of the search for leukocyte-derived microbicidal molecules, emphasizing the roles played by luck (good), preconceived notions (mostly bad), and proper timing (essential). The antimicrobial, antiviral, antitoxic, and binding properties of human α-defensins are summarized. The structural features of α-defensins are described extensively and their functional contributions are assessed. The properties of HD6, an enigmatic Paneth cell α-defensin, are contrasted with those of the four myeloid α-defensins (HNP1-4) and of HD5, the other α-defensin of human Paneth cells. The review ends with a decalogue that may assist researchers or students interested in α-defensins and related aspects of neutrophil function.