[PMID: 25027299]
Ataxin-2 is an evolutionarily conserved protein first identified in humans as responsible for spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2). The molecular basis of SCA2 is the expansion of a polyglutamine tract in Ataxin-2, encoding a Lsm domain that may bind RNA and a PAM2 motif that enables interaction with the poly (A) binding protein. Although the association with SCA2 has been verified, a detailed molecular function for Ataxin-2 has not been established. We have undertaken a survey of Ataxin-2 proteins across all eukaryotic domains. In eukaryotes, except for vertebrates and land plants, a single ortholog was identified. Notably, with the exception of birds, two Ataxin-2 genes exist in vertebrates. Expansion was observed in land plants and a novel class lacking the LsmAD domain was identified. Large polyQ tracts appear limited to primates and insects of the orders Hymenoptera and Diptera. A common feature across Ataxin-2 orthologs is the presence of proline-rich motifs, formerly described in the human protein. Our analysis provides valuable information on the evolution and domain structure of Ataxin-2 proteins. Proline-rich motifs that may mediate protein interactions are widespread in Ataxin-2 proteins, but expansion of polyglutamine tracts associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 2, is present only in primates, as well as some insects. Our analysis of Ataxin-2 proteins provides also a source to examine orthologs in a number of different species.

[PMID: 19625506]
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominantly inherited, neurodegenerative disease caused by an expansion of polyglutamine tracts in the cytosolic protein ataxin-2 (Atx2). Cerebellar Purkinje cells (PCs) are predominantly affected in SCA2. The cause of PC degeneration in SCA2 is unknown. Here we demonstrate that mutant Atx2-58Q, but not wild-type (WT) Atx2-22Q, specifically associates with the cytosolic C-terminal region of type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (InsP(3)R1), an intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) release channel. Association with Atx2-58Q increased the sensitivity of InsP(3)R1 to activation by InsP(3) in planar lipid bilayer reconstitution experiments. To validate physiological significance of these findings, we performed a series of experiments with an SCA2-58Q transgenic mouse model that expresses human full-length Atx2-58Q protein under the control of a PC-specific promoter. In Ca(2+) imaging experiments, we demonstrated that stimulation with 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG) resulted in higher Ca(2+) responses in 58Q PC cultures than in WT PC cultures. DHPG-induced Ca(2+) responses in 58Q PC cultures were blocked by the addition of ryanodine, an inhibitor of the ryanodine receptor (RyanR). We further demonstrated that application of glutamate induced more pronounced cell death in 58Q PC cultures than in WT PC cultures. Glutamate-induced cell death of 58Q PC cultures was attenuated by dantrolene, a clinically relevant RyanR inhibitor and Ca(2+) stabilizer. In whole animal experiments, we demonstrated that long-term feeding of SCA1-58Q mice with dantrolene alleviated age-dependent motor deficits (quantified in beam-walk and rotarod assays) and reduced PC loss observed in untreated SCA2-58Q mice by 12 months of age (quantified by stereology). Results of our studies indicate that disturbed neuronal Ca(2+) signaling may play an important role in SCA2 pathology and also suggest that the RyanR constitutes a potential therapeutic target for treatment of SCA2 patients.

[PMID: 24486837]
The expansion of a polyQ repeat within the ataxin-2 protein causes spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2). However, neither the precise pathological mechanism nor the physiological functions of ataxin-2 are known. Ataxin-2 contains 47 (S/T)P sequences, which are targeted by proline-directed protein kinases such as the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5). We hypothesized that ataxin-2 is phosphorylated by Cdk5. In fact, phosphorylation of ataxin-2 by Cdk5-p25 was shown using two methods: in vitro(32)P labeling and electrophoretic mobility shift on Phos-tag SDS-PAGE. The fractionation of ataxin-2 into three portions, the N-terminal fragment (NF, amino acids 1-507), the middle fragment (MF, amino acids 508-905), and the C-terminal fragment (CF, amino acids 906-1313) showed that NF and MF were phosphorylated slightly and highly, respectively, by Cdk5-p25 when expressed in COS-7 cells. Cdk5-mediated phosphorylation induced the degradation of NF remarkably and MF moderately. Furthermore, toxic ataxin-2-41Q underwent proteasomal degradation after phosphorylation by Cdk5. These results suggest that Cdk5 controls the abundance of both normal and polyQ-expanded ataxin-2 protein in neurons, which implies that Cdk5 activity is a therapeutic approach for SCA2.

[PMID: 10973246]
Instability of CAG DNA trinucleotide repeats is the mutational mechanism for several neurodegenerative diseases resulting in the expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract. Proteins with long polyQ tracts have an increased tendency to aggregate, often as truncated fragments forming ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusion bodies. We examined whether similar features define spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) pathogenesis using cultured cells, human brains and transgenic mouse lines. In SCA2 brains, we found cytoplasmic, but not nuclear, microaggregates. Mice expressing ataxin-2 with Q58 showed progressive functional deficits accompanied by loss of the Purkinje cell dendritic arbor and finally loss of Purkinje cells. Despite similar functional deficits and anatomical changes observed in ataxin-1[Q80] transgenic lines, ataxin-2[Q58] remained cytoplasmic without detectable ubiquitination.