[PMID: 15056980]
Bartter's and Gitelman's syndromes are characterized by hypokalemia, normal to low blood pressure and hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. Recently, investigators have been able to demonstrate mutations of six genes encoding several renal tubular transporters and ion channels that can be held responsible for Bartter's and Gitelman's syndromes. Neonatal Bartter's syndrome is caused by mutations of NKCC2 or ROMK, classic Bartter's syndrome by mutations of ClC-Kb, Bartter's syndrome associated with sensorineural deafness is due to mutations of BSND, Gitelman's syndrome to mutations of NCCT and Bartter's syndrome associated with autosomal dominant hypocalcemia is linked to mutations of CASR. We review the pathophysiology of these syndromes in relation to their clinical presentation.

[PMID: 28555925]
The highly variable phenotypes observed in patients with classic Bartter's syndrome (BS) remain unsatisfactorily explained. The wide spectrum of functional severity of CLCNKB mutations may contribute to the phenotypic variability, and the genotype-phenotype association has not been established. Low-level expression of the human ClC-Kb channel in mammalian cells impedes the functional study of CLCNKB mutations, and the underlying cause is still unclear. The human ClC-Kb channel is highly degraded by proteasome in human embryonic kidney cells. The C-terminal in-frame green fluorescent protein fusion may slow down the proteasome-mediated proteolysis. Barttin co-expression necessarily improves the stability, membrane trafficking and gating of ClC-Kb. CLCNKB mutations in barttin-binding sites, dimer interface or selectivity filter often have severe functional consequences. The remaining chloride conductance of the ClC-Kb mutant channel significantly correlates with the phenotypes, such as age at diagnosis, plasma chloride concentration, and the degree of calciuria in patients with classic BS. Mutations in the CLCNKB gene encoding the human voltage-gated chloride ClC-Kb (hClC-Kb) channel cause classic Bartter's syndrome (BS). In contrast to antenatal BS, classic BS manifests with highly variable phenotypes. The functional severity of the mutant channel has been proposed to explain this phenomenon. Due to difficulties in the expression of hClC-Kb in heterologous expression systems, the functional consequences of mutant channels have not been thoroughly examined, and the genotype-phenotype association has not been established. In this study, we found that hClC-Kb, when expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells, was unstable due to degradation by proteasome. In-frame fusion of green fluorescent protein (GFP) to the C-terminus of the channel may ameliorate proteasome degradation. Co-expression of barttin increased protein abundance and membrane trafficking of hClC-Kb and markedly increased functional chloride current. We then functionally characterized 18 missense mutations identified in our classic BS cohort and others using HEK cells expressing hClC-Kb-GFP. Most CLCNKB mutations resulted in marked reduction in protein abundance and chloride current, especially those residing at barttin binding sites, dimer interface and selectivity filter. We enrolled classic BS patients carrying homozygous missense mutations with well-described functional consequences and clinical presentations for genotype-phenotype analysis. We found significant correlations of mutant chloride current with the age at diagnosis, plasma chloride concentration and urine calcium excretion rate. In conclusion, hClC-Kb expression in HEK cells is susceptible to proteasome degradation, and fusion of GFP to the C-terminus of hClC-Kb improves protein expression. The functional severity of the CLCNKB mutation is an important determinant of the phenotype in classic BS.

[PMID: 19050915]
Progressive renal failure in patients with classic Bartter's syndrome (cBS) due to inactivating mutations in CLCNKB gene is extraordinarily rare. We describe a 17-year-old Chinese boy who presented with progressive muscle weakness and renal failure. He was diagnosed as BS of unknown type at the age of 9 months and treated with indomethacin (2 mg/kg/day) and potassium chloride (KCl) supplementation (1.5 mEq/kg/day) for hypokalemia (2.5 mmol/l). At the age of 12 years, serum K+ was 3.0 mmol/l and creatinine reached 2.0 mg/dl. On admission, his blood pressure was normal but volume status was depleted. Urinalysis was essentially normal. Biochemical studies showed hypokalemia (K+ 2.4 mmol/l) with a high transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG) 9.6, metabolic alkalosis (HCO3- 28.4 mmol/l), normomagnesemia (2.0 mg/dl), severe renal failure (BUN 94 mg/dl, Cr 6.3 mg/dl), and hypocalciuria (urine calcium/creatinine ratio 0.02 mg/mg). Abdominal sonography revealed bilateral small size kidneys without nephrocalcinosis or renal stones. After the withdrawal of indomethacin with regular KCl and adequate fluid supplementation for 1 year, serum creatinine and K+ levels have been maintained at 4.0 mg/dl and 3.3 mmol/l, respectively. Direct sequencing of NKCC2, ROMK, ClC-Kb, and NCCT in this patient disclosed a novel homozygous missense mutation (GGG to GAG, G470E) in CLCNKB. This G470E mutation was not identified in 100 healthy Chinese subjects. Long-term therapy of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), prolonged hypokalemia, chronic volume depletion, and underlying genetic variety may contribute to the deterioration of his renal function. The cautious use of NSAIDs, aggressive correction of hypokalemia, and avoidance of severe volume depletion may prevent the irreversible renal damage in patients with BS due to a Cl- channel defect.

[PMID: 9587066]
The term "Bartter's syndrome" comprises a set of autosomal recessively inherited renal tubular disorders characterized by hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hyperreninism, and hyperaldosteronism but normal blood pressure. Additional clinical and biochemical features led to a classification into phenotypically different tubulopathies: Gitelman's syndrome, hyperprostaglandin E syndrome (antenatal Bartter's syndrome), and classic Bartter's syndrome. Gitelman's syndrome results from mutations in the SLC12A3 gene encoding the human thiazide-sensitive sodium chloride cotransporter, leading to impaired reabsorption of sodium chloride in the distal convoluted tubule. Genetic heterogeneity of hyperprostaglandin E syndrome has been demonstrated by identification of mutations in the SLC12A1 gene as well as in the KCNJ1 gene. Mutations in SLC12A1 coding for the bumetanide-sensitive sodium potassium 2 chloride cotransporter (NKCC2) cause defective reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop. Mutations in KCNJ1 leading to loss of function of the potassium channel ROMK disrupt potassium recycling back to the tubule lumen and inhibit thereby the NKCC2 activity. A third gene for hyperprostaglandin E syndrome has been mapped to the short arm of chromosome 1, and it remains to be evaluated whether other genes are involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. Classic Bartter's syndrome has been demonstrated to result from defective chloride transport across the basolateral membrane in the distal nephron due to mutations in the chloride channel gene CLCNKB. This article reviews the molecular genetic approach that has led to identification of genetic defects underlying the different hypokalemic tubulopathies.