[PMID: 2996987]
The solubility of the EcoRI restriction endonuclease was measured in solutions of varying NaCl concentrations, at different temperatures and in the presence of DNA. The precipitation of the protein was enhanced by low NaCl concentrations, by elevated temperatures, and by the addition of DNA. These observations are discussed in relationship to the interaction of this protein with DNA. The purification of the EcoRI restriction enzyme from a strain of Escherichia coli that over-produces this enzyme was hampered by the insolubility of the protein, and hence the purification procedure was modified to optimize the recovery of active enzyme.

[PMID: 6099579]
Restriction endonucleases play a very important role in genetic engineering and DNA mapping. Among hundreds of restriction endonucleases, the Eco R1 enzyme is the most useful and widely investigated enzyme. After sonication and ultracentrifugation, crude extracts of E. coli RY 13 were purified by employing the polyethyleneimine precipitate, ammonium sulfate precipitate and heparin Sepharose-4B affinity column chromatography. The Eco R1 enzyme were purified at about 42 folds and the specific activity was about 100,000 U/mg of protein. The whole purification procedure was finished within two days. The recovery was about 42%. The enzyme was sufficiently concentrated for direct specific DNA hydrolysis.

[PMID: 3025706]
The restriction endonuclease EcoRI dependent recombination of compatible plasmids has been studied in RecA cells of Escherichia coli. Plasmid RP4 and the isogenic ColE1 type plasmids pSA14 or pSA25, differing in restriction-modification RM EcoRI genes, have been used to study this type of recombination. EcoRI dependent recombination of plasmids is demonstrated in RecA cells and, thus, is independent of general system of homologous recombination. The classes of recombinant plasmids isolated from RecA cells differ from the classes isolated from wild type cells. Levels of tetracycline resistance conferred by plasmid RP4 are shown to be dependent on the alleles of RecA+ gene, being extremely low in RecA cells. This property is demonstrated to be useful for obtaining the multicopy recombinant plasmids resulting from EcoRI dependent recombination in RecA cells of Escherichia coli.

[PMID: 349563]
An endonuclease having EcoRI specificity is produced by bacteria containing the ColE1 plasmid. Such bacterial cells fail to express restriction or modification functions in vivo, and phage or plasmid DNA obtained from ColE1-containing cells has unmodified EcoRI sites that are cleaved in vitro by purified EcoRI endonuclease or by enzyme extracted from bacteria that carry ColE1. No EcoRI DNA methylase activity associated with ColE1 has been detected. The finding of phenotypically cryptic ColE1-dependent EcoRI endonuclease activity and the absence of any detectable EcoRI modification system in ColE1-containing cells suggest a control mechanism that appears to prevent functional expression of the ColE1-determined enzyme in vivo.