[PMID: 24630051]
Mutations in the solute carrier family 9, subfamily A member 6 (SLC9A6) gene, encoding the endosomal Na+/H+ exchanger 6 (NHE6) are associated with Christianson syndrome, a syndromic form of X-linked intellectual disability characterized by microcephaly, severe global developmental delay, autistic behavior, early onset seizures and ataxia. In a 7-year-old boy with characteristic clinical and neuroimaging features of Christianson syndrome and epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spikes and waves during sleep, we identified a novel splice site mutation (IVS10-1G>A) in SLC9A6. These findings expand the clinical spectrum of the syndrome and indicate NHE6 dysfunction as a new cause of electrical status epilepticus during slow-wave sleep (ESES).

[PMID: 20949524]
Christianson syndrome is an X-linked mental retardation syndrome characterized by microcephaly, impaired ocular movement, severe global developmental delay, hypotonia which progresses to spasticity, and early onset seizures of variable types. Gilfillan et al.2008] reported mutations in SLC9A6, the gene encoding the sodium/hydrogen exchanger NHE6, in the family first reported and in three others. They also noted the clinical similarities to Angelman syndrome and found cerebellar atrophy on MRI and elevated glutamate/glutamine in the basal ganglia on MRS. Here we report on nonsense mutations in two additional families. The natural history is detailed in childhood and adult life, the similarities to Angelman syndrome confirmed, and the MRI/MRS findings documented in three affected boys.

[PMID: 24035762]
Neuronal arborization is regulated by cell-autonomous and nonautonomous mechanisms including endosomal signaling via BDNF/TrkB. The endosomal Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger 6 (NHE6) is mutated in a new autism-related disorder. NHE6 functions to permit proton leak from endosomes, yet the mechanisms causing disease are unknown. We demonstrate that loss of NHE6 results in overacidification of the endosomal compartment and attenuated TrkB signaling. Mouse brains with disrupted NHE6 display reduced axonal and dendritic branching, synapse number, and circuit strength. Site-directed mutagenesis shows that the proton leak function of NHE6 is required for neuronal arborization. We find that TrkB receptor colocalizes to NHE6-associated endosomes. TrkB protein and phosphorylation are reduced in NHE6 mutant neurons in response to BDNF signaling. Finally, exogenous BDNF rescues defects in neuronal arborization. We propose that NHE6 mutation leads to circuit defects that are in part due to impoverished neuronal arborization that may be treatable by enhanced TrkB signaling.

[PMID: 25044251]
Recently, Christianson syndrome (CS) has been determined to be caused by mutations in the X-linked Na(+) /H(+) exchanger 6 (NHE6). We aimed to determine the diagnostic criteria and mutational spectrum for CS. Twelve independent pedigrees (14 boys, age = 4-19 years) with mutations in NHE6 were administered standardized research assessments, and mutations were characterized. The mutational spectrum was composed of 9 single nucleotide variants, 2 indels, and 1 copy number variation deletion. All mutations were protein-truncating or splicing mutations. We identified 2 recurrent mutations (c.1498 c>t, p.R500X; and c.1710 g>a, p.W570X). Otherwise, all mutations were unique. In our study, 7 of 12 mutations (58%) were de novo, in contrast to prior literature wherein mutations were largely inherited. We also report prominent neurological, medical, and behavioral symptoms. All CS participants were nonverbal and had intellectual disability, epilepsy, and ataxia. Many had prior diagnoses of autism and/or Angelman syndrome. Other neurologic symptoms included eye movement abnormalities (79%), postnatal microcephaly (92%), and magnetic resonance imaging evidence of cerebellar atrophy (33%). Regression was noted in 50%, with recurrent presentations involving loss of words and/or the ability to walk. Medical symptoms, particularly gastrointestinal symptoms, were common. Height and body mass index measures were below normal ranges in most participants. Behavioral symptoms included hyperkinetic behavior (100%), and a majority exhibited high pain threshold. This is the largest cohort of independent CS pedigrees reported. We propose diagnostic criteria for CS. CS represents a novel neurogenetic disorder with general relevance to autism, intellectual disability, Angelman syndrome, epilepsy, and regression.