[PMID: 28749203]
P53 tumor suppressor gene mutations occur in the majority of human cancers and contribute to tumor development, progression and therapy resistance. Direct functional restoration of p53 as a transcription factor has been difficult to achieve in the clinic. We performed a functional screen using a bioluminescence-based transcriptional read-out to identify small molecules that restore the p53 pathway in mutant p53-bearing cancer cells. We identified CB002, as a candidate that restores p53 function in mutant p53-expressing colorectal cancer cells and without toxicity to normal human fibroblasts. Cells exposed to CB002 show increased expression of endogenous p53 target genes NOXA, DR5, and p21 and cell death which occurs by 16 hours, as measured by cleaved caspases or PARP. Stable knockdown of NOXA completely abrogates PARP cleavage and reduces sub-G1 content, implicating NOXA as the key mediator of cell death induction by CB002. Moreover, CB002 decreases the stability of mutant p53 in RXF393 cancer cells and an exogenously expressed R175H p53 mutant in HCT116 p53-null cells. R175H p53 expression was rescued by addition of proteasome inhibitor MG132 to CB002, suggesting a role for ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the mutant protein. In summary, CB002, a p53 pathway-restoring compound that targets mutant p53 for degradation and induces tumor cell death through NOXA, may be further developed as a cancer therapeutic.

[PMID: 28937686]
The tumor suppressor p53 is a key regulator of apoptosis induced by various cellular stresses. p53 can induce apoptosis by two mechanisms. First, p53 acts as a transcription factor inducing and repressing pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic targets genes, respectively. Second, p53 is able to translocate to the mitochondria, where it interacts with BCL-2 family members to induce membrane permeabilization and cytochrome c release. p53 transcriptional activity is regulated by a set of post-translational modifications that have been well documented. However, how these modifications impact the direct mitochondrial pathway of death remain poorly understood. In this study, we focused on the role of serine 392 phosphorylation in the control of p53-dependent apoptosis. We used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to substitute serine 392 by a non-phosphorylatable alanine in HCT-116 colon carcinoma cells. The S392A mutant displayed normal transcriptional activity following genotoxic stress, but markedly impaired ability to localize to mitochondria. The decreased mitochondrial localization of the S392A mutant correlated with a lower ability to induce apoptosis. Confirmatory observations were made following enforced expression of the S392A p53 mutant or a phospho-mimetic S392E mutant in H1299 lung carcinoma cells. Our observations support the premise that serine 392 phosphorylation of p53 influences its mitochondrial translocation and transcription-independent apoptotic function.

[PMID: 28984872]
The three p53 family members, p53, p63 and p73, are structurally similar and share many biochemical activities. Yet, along with their common fundamental role in protecting genomic fidelity, each has acquired distinct functions related to diverse cell autonomous and non-autonomous processes. Similar to the p53 family, the Hippo signaling pathway impacts a multitude of cellular processes, spanning from cell cycle and metabolism to development and tumor suppression. The core Hippo module consists of the tumor-suppressive MST-LATS kinases and oncogenic transcriptional co-effectors YAP and TAZ. A wealth of accumulated data suggests a complex and delicate regulatory network connecting the p53 and Hippo pathways, in a highly context-specific manner. This generates multiple layers of interaction, ranging from interdependent and collaborative signaling to apparent antagonistic activity. Furthermore, genetic and epigenetic alterations can disrupt this homeostatic network, paving the way to genomic instability and cancer. This strengthens the need to better understand the nuances that control the molecular function of each component and the cross-talk between the different components. Here, we review interactions between the p53 and Hippo pathways within a subset of physiological contexts, focusing on normal stem cells and development, as well as regulation of apoptosis, senescence and metabolism in transformed cells.

[PMID: 29242642]
The tumour suppressor gene TP53 is the most frequently mutated gene in cancer. Wild-type p53 can suppress tumour development by multiple pathways. However, mutation of TP53 and the resultant inactivation of p53 allow evasion of tumour cell death and rapid tumour progression. The high frequency of TP53 mutation in tumours has prompted efforts to restore normal function of mutant p53 and thereby trigger tumour cell death and tumour elimination. Small molecules that can reactivate missense-mutant p53 protein have been identified by different strategies, and two compounds are being tested in clinical trials. Novel approaches for targeting TP53 nonsense mutations are also underway. This Review discusses recent progress in pharmacological reactivation of mutant p53 and highlights problems and promises with these strategies.