[PMID: 30265292]
Mitochondria have evolved diverse forms across eukaryotic diversity in adaptation to anoxia. Mitosomes are the simplest and the least well-studied type of anaerobic mitochondria. Transport of proteins via TIM complexes, composed of three proteins of the Tim17 protein family (Tim17/22/23), is one of the key unifying aspects of mitochondria and mitochondria-derived organelles. However, multiple experimental and bioinformatic attempts have so far failed to identify the nature of TIM in mitosomes of the anaerobic metamonad protist, Giardia intestinalis, one of the few experimental models for mitosome biology. Here, we present the identification of a single G. intestinalis Tim17 protein (GiTim17), made possible only by the implementation of a metamonad-specific hidden Markov model. While very divergent in primary sequence and in predicted membrane topology, experimental data suggest that GiTim17 is an inner membrane mitosomal protein, forming a disulphide-linked dimer. We suggest that the peculiar GiTim17 sequence reflects adaptation to the unusual, detergent resistant, inner mitosomal membrane. Specific pull-down experiments indicate interaction of GiTim17 with mitosomal Tim44, the tethering component of the import motor complex. Analysis of TIM complexes across eukaryote diversity suggests that a "single Tim" translocase is a convergent adaptation of mitosomes in anaerobic protists, with Tim22 and Tim17 (but not Tim23), providing the protein backbone.

[PMID: 21984067]
The apicomplexan parasite Cryptosporidium parvum possesses a mitosome, a relict mitochondrion with a greatly reduced metabolic capability. This mitosome houses a mitochondrial-type protein import apparatus, but elements of the protein import pathway have been reduced, and even lost, through evolution. The small Tim protein family is a case in point. The genomes of C. parvum and related species of Cryptosporidium each encode just one small Tim protein, CpTimS. This observation challenged the tenet that small Tim proteins are always found in pairs as α3β3 hexamers. We show that the atypical CpTimS exists as a relatively unstable homohexamer, shedding light both on the early evolution of the small Tim protein family and on small Tim hexamer formation in contemporary eukaryotes.

[PMID: 20382757]
Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase (PNT) catalyzes the direct transfer of a hydride-ion equivalent between NAD(H) and NADP(H) in bacteria and the mitochondria of eukaryotes. PNT was previously postulated to be localized to the highly divergent mitochondrion-related organelle, the mitosome, in the anaerobic/microaerophilic protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica based on the potential mitochondrion-targeting signal. However, our previous proteomic study of isolated phagosomes suggested that PNT is localized to organelles other than mitosomes. An immunofluorescence assay using anti-E. histolytica PNT (EhPNT) antibody raised against the NADH-binding domain showed a distribution to the membrane of numerous vesicles/vacuoles, including lysosomes and phagosomes. The domain(s) required for the trafficking of PNT to vesicles/vacuoles was examined by using amoeba transformants expressing a series of carboxyl-terminally truncated PNTs fused with green fluorescent protein or a hemagglutinin tag. All truncated PNTs failed to reach vesicles/vacuoles and were retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. These data indicate that the putative targeting signal is not sufficient for the trafficking of PNT to the vesicular/vacuolar compartments and that full-length PNT is necessary for correct transport. PNT displayed a smear of >120 kDa on SDS-PAGE gels. PNGase F and tunicamycin treatment, chemical degradation of carbohydrates, and heat treatment of PNT suggested that the apparent aberrant mobility of PNT is likely attributable to its hydrophobic nature. PNT that is compartmentalized to the acidic compartments is unprecedented in eukaryotes and may possess a unique physiological role in E. histolytica.

[PMID: 28372543]
Mitochondria of opisthokonts undergo permanent fission and fusion throughout the cell cycle. Here, we investigated the dynamics of the mitosomes, the simplest forms of mitochondria, in the anaerobic protist parasite Giardia intestinalis, a member of the Excavata supergroup of eukaryotes. The mitosomes have abandoned typical mitochondrial traits such as the mitochondrial genome and aerobic respiration and their single role known to date is the formation of iron-sulfur clusters. In live experiments, no fusion events were observed between the mitosomes in G. intestinalis. Moreover, the organelles were highly prone to becoming heterogeneous. This suggests that fusion is either much less frequent or even absent in mitosome dynamics. Unlike in mitochondria, division of the mitosomes was absolutely synchronized and limited to mitosis. The association of the nuclear and the mitosomal division persisted during the encystation of the parasite. During the segregation of the divided mitosomes, the subset of the organelles between two G. intestinalis nuclei had a prominent role. Surprisingly, the sole dynamin-related protein of the parasite seemed not to be involved in mitosomal division. However, throughout the cell cycle, mitosomes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), although none of the known ER-tethering complexes was present. Instead, the ER-mitosome interface was occupied by the lipid metabolism enzyme long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase 4. This study provides the first report on the dynamics of mitosomes. We show that together with the loss of metabolic complexity of mitochondria, mitosomes of G. intestinalis have uniquely streamlined their dynamics by harmonizing their division with mitosis. We propose that this might be a strategy of G. intestinalis to maintain a stable number of organelles during cell propagation. The lack of mitosomal fusion may also be related to the secondary reduction of the organelles. However, as there are currently no reports on mitochondrial fusion in the whole Excavata supergroup, it is possible that the absence of mitochondrial fusion is an ancestral trait common to all excavates.