[PMID: 27814624]
Diabetes is generally associated with vasculopathy, which contains both microvascular and macrovascular complications, associated with high morbidity and mortality. Currently, despite interventional therapy, the overall prognosis for patients with diabetic vasculopathy remains unsatisfactory. Angiogenesis and vascular injury and repair are associated with a variety of cells. However, the molecular mechanisms of the cells that are involved in pathogenesis of diabetic vasculopathy remain largely unknown. As novel molecules, microRNAs (miRs) take part in regulating protein-coding gene expression at the post-transcriptional level, and contribute to the pathogenesis of various types of chronic metabolism disease, especially diabetic vasculopathy. This allows miRs to have a direct function in regulation of various cellular events. Additionally, circulating miRs have been proposed as biomarkers for a wide range of cardiovascular diseases. This review elucidates miR-mediated regulatory mechanisms in diabetic vasculopathy. Furthermore, we discuss the current understanding of miRs in diabetic vasculopathy. Finally, we summarize the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for diabetic vasculopathy related to miRs.

[PMID: 27924483]
The discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs) has opened an entire new avenue for drug development. These short (15-22 nucleotides) noncoding RNAs, which function in RNA silencing and posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression, have been shown to critically affect numerous pathways in both development and disease progression. Current miRNA drug development focuses on either reintroducing the miRNA into cells through the use of a miRNA mimic or inhibiting its function via use of a synthetic antagomir. Although these methods have shown some success as therapeutics, they face challenges particularly with regard to cellular uptake and for use as systemic reagents. We recently presented a novel mechanism of inhibiting miR-544 by directed inhibition of miRNA biogenesis. We found that inhibition of DICER processing of miR-544 through the use of a small molecule abolished miR-544 function in regulating adaptation of breast cancer cells to hypoxic stress. Herein, we describe a protocol that utilizes bioinformatics to first identify lead small molecules that bind to DICER cleavage sites in pre-miRNAs and then employ an efficient, high-throughput fluorescent-based screening system to determine the inhibitory potential of the lead compounds and their derivatives.

[PMID: 27734397]
Liver fibrosis occurs during chronic injury and represents, in large part, an exaggerated matrigenic output by hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) which become activated as a result of injury-induced signaling pathways in parenchymal and inflammatory cells (hepatocytes, macrophages, etc.). The molecular components in these pathways (e.g., CCN proteins) are modulated by transcription factors as well as by factors such as microRNAs (miRs) that act posttranscriptionally. MiRs are small (~23 nt) noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression by specifically interacting with the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of target gene mRNA to repress translation or enhance mRNA cleavage. As well as acting in their cells of production, miRs (and other cellular constituents such as mRNAs and proteins) can be liberated from their cells of origin in nanovesicular membrane exosomes, which traverse the intercellular spaces, and can be delivered to neighboring cells into which they release their molecular payload, causing alterations in gene expression in the target cells. Here we summarize some of the experimental approaches for studying miR action and exosomal trafficking between hepatic cells. Insights into the mechanisms involved will yield new information about how hepatic fibrosis is regulated and, further, may identify new points of therapeutic intervention.

[PMID: 27586262]
Bladder cancer (BC) is generally divided into non-muscle-invasive BC (NMIBC) and muscle-invasive BC (MIBC). The standard treatment protocol for MIBC patients is radical cystectomy preceded by neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC). About one-half of the MIBC patients show a priori resistance to chemotherapy, and are therefore exposed to the risks of disease progression and toxicity from ineffective NAC. The discovery of microRNA (miRNA) regulation in tumorigenesis has provided new directions for the development of a new type of BC biomarkers. In this review, we describe the emerging miRNAs as BC biomarkers for different purposes, including diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic response. miRNA expression profile changes with alteration of the tissue phenotype. This phenomenon is utilized to predict tumor diagnosis, cancer subclass, disease stage, prognosis and therapeutic response. We classified the miRNAs which are involved in bladder cancer according to malignant potential, chemoresistance, discrimination between normal to cancerous and clinical outcome. Focusing on the major obstacle regarding MIBC patient's NAC response, we summarized the miRNAs that are deregulated and have the potential to identify the patients resistant to NAC, such as miR-34, miR-100, miR-146b and miR-9 and miR-193a-3p. In conclusion, miRNAs expression profile of bladder cancer patient is a promising tool that can serve as biomarker for different aims. Based on this profile we propose upfront radical cystectomy instead of standard NAC to those MIBC patients who are at higher risk for chemoresistance and poor response.