[PMID: 27025652]
Despite continuing debate about the amyloid β-protein (or Aβ hypothesis, new lines of evidence from laboratories and clinics worldwide support the concept that an imbalance between production and clearance of Aβ42 and related Aβ peptides is a very early, often initiating factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Confirmation that presenilin is the catalytic site of γ-secretase has provided a linchpin: all dominant mutations causing early-onset AD occur either in the substrate (amyloid precursor protein, APP) or the protease (presenilin) of the reaction that generates Aβ. Duplication of the wild-type APP gene in Down's syndrome leads to Aβ deposits in the teens, followed by microgliosis, astrocytosis, and neurofibrillary tangles typical of AD Apolipoprotein E4, which predisposes to AD in > 40% of cases, has been found to impair Aβ clearance from the brain. Soluble oligomers of Aβ42 isolated from AD patients' brains can decrease synapse number, inhibit long-term potentiation, and enhance long-term synaptic depression in rodent hippocampus, and injecting them into healthy rats impairs memory. The human oligomers also induce hyperphosphorylation of tau at AD-relevant epitopes and cause neuritic dystrophy in cultured neurons. Crossing human APP with human tau transgenic mice enhances tau-positive neurotoxicity. In humans, new studies show that low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ42 and amyloid-PET positivity precede other AD manifestations by many years. Most importantly, recent trials of three different Aβ antibodies (solanezumab, crenezumab, and aducanumab) have suggested a slowing of cognitive decline in post hoc analyses of mild AD subjects. Although many factors contribute to AD pathogenesis, Aβ dyshomeostasis has emerged as the most extensively validated and compelling therapeutic target.

[PMID: 27810931]
Calcium homeostasis plays a major role in maintaining neuronal function under physiological conditions. Amyloid-β (Aβ) initiates pathological processes that include disruption in intracellular calcium levels, so amelioration of the calcium alteration could serve as an indirect functional indicator of treatment efficacy. Therefore, calcium dynamics were used as a measure of functional outcome. We evaluated the effects of the anti-Aβ antibody aducanumab on calcium homeostasis and plaque clearance in aged Tg2576 mice with in vivo multiphoton imaging. Acute topical application of aducanumab to the brain resulted in clearance of amyloid plaques. Although chronic systemic administration of aducanumab in 22-month-old mice did not clear existing plaques, calcium overload was ameliorated over time. Therefore, this antibody likely restores neuronal network function that possibly underlies cognitive deficits, indicating promise as a clinical treatment. In addition, functional readouts such as calcium overload may be a more useful outcome measure to monitor treatment efficacy in models of Alzheimer's disease compared with amyloid burden alone. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is currently without a cure. Aducanumab is an anti-amyloid-β antibody being developed for the treatment of AD. Interim analyses of a phase 1b clinical trial have suggested potential beneficial effects on amyloid pathology and cognitive status in patients treated with aducanumab (Sevigny et al., 2016). Here, we show that a murine analog of aducanumab clears amyloid plaques in an acute setting and restores calcium homeostasis disrupted in a mouse model of AD upon chronic treatment. Therefore, we demonstrate that aducanumab reverses a functional outcome measure reflective of neural network activity.

[PMID: 27582220]
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain, accompanied by synaptic dysfunction and neurodegeneration. Antibody-based immunotherapy against Aβ to trigger its clearance or mitigate its neurotoxicity has so far been unsuccessful. Here we report the generation of aducanumab, a human monoclonal antibody that selectively targets aggregated Aβ. In a transgenic mouse model of AD, aducanumab is shown to enter the brain, bind parenchymal Aβ, and reduce soluble and insoluble Aβ in a dose-dependent manner. In patients with prodromal or mild AD, one year of monthly intravenous infusions of aducanumab reduces brain Aβ in a dose- and time-dependent manner. This is accompanied by a slowing of clinical decline measured by Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes and Mini Mental State Examination scores. The main safety and tolerability findings are amyloid-related imaging abnormalities. These results justify further development of aducanumab for the treatment of AD. Should the slowing of clinical decline be confirmed in ongoing phase 3 clinical trials, it would provide compelling support for the amyloid hypothesis.

[PMID: 27251914]
Despite the significant public health issue that it poses, only five medical treatments have been approved for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and these act to control symptoms rather than alter the course of the disease. Studies of potential disease-modifying therapy have generally been undertaken in patients with clinically detectable disease, yet evidence suggests that the pathological changes associated with AD begin several years before this. It is possible that pharmacological therapy may be beneficial in this pre-clinical stage before the neurodegenerative process is established. Techniques providing earlier diagnosis, such as cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and amyloid positron emission tomography neuroimaging, are key to testing this theory in clinical trials. Recent results from trials of agents such as aducanumab are encouraging but must also be interpreted with caution. Such medicines could potentially delay the onset of dementia and would therefore markedly reduce its prevalence. However, we currently remain a good distance away from clinically available disease-modifying therapy.