[PMID: 23738048]
Previous studies have proved that the environmental toxicant, inorganic arsenic, activates nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway in many different cell types. This study tried to explore the hepatic Nrf2 pathway upon arsenic treatment comprehensively, since liver is one of the major target organs of arsenical toxicity. Our results showed that inorganic arsenic significantly induced Nrf2 protein and mRNA expression in Chang human hepatocytes. We also observed a dose-dependent increase of antioxidant response element- (ARE-) luciferase activity. Both the mRNA and protein levels of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) were all upregulated dramatically. On the other hand, entry and accumulation of Nrf2 protein in the nucleus, while exportting the transcriptional repressor BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1) from nucleus to cytoplasm, were also confirmed by western blot and immunofluorescence assay. Our results therefore confirmed the arsenic-induced Nrf2 pathway activation in hepatocytes and also suggested that the translocation of Bach1 was associated with the regulation of Nrf2 pathway by arsenic. Hepatic Nrf2 pathway plays indispensable roles for cellular defenses against arsenic hepatotoxicity, and the interplay of Bach1 and Nrf2 may be helpful to understand the self-defensive responses and the diverse biological effects of arsenicals.

[PMID: 23181164]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor which modulates several critical transcriptional responses, such as the expression of the heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene in response to oxidative stress. In our recent study, we found that Bach1 possesses a novel role in mitotic chromosome alignment during metaphase. Upon BACH1 depletion in HeLa cells, mitotic chromosomes become unstable. This defect was efficiently rescued by expressing Bach1 fragments that lack the DNA binding domain, indicating that its function in mitosis involves a transcription-independent mechanism. The nuclear export signal (NES/CLS) of Bach1 is required for the mitotic function. Bach1 is excluded from the mitotic chromosomes depending on its NES/CLS and the nuclear exporter Crm1. Our findings suggest that Bach1 might mediate the regulation of mitotic chromosomes under conditions of cellular stress.

[PMID: 17257585]
Tin mesoporphyrin (SnMP), a competitive heme oxygenase (HO) inhibitor, also induces HO-1 mRNA and protein expression by a mechanism that is not fully understood. We examined whether the induction by SnMP is mediated by a de-repression of Bach1, a transcription factor that suppresses the HO-1 gene. Incubation of NIH3T3-HO-1-luc cells with SnMP attenuated HO activity with a concomitant increase in HO-1 mRNA and protein and a decrease in Bach1 and HO-2 proteins, which was not due to transcriptional down-regulation, but accelerated protein decay. Similarly, HO-1 protein degradation was increased by SnMP, despite of an elevation in HO-1 transcription. Transfection of Bach1 shRNA in Hepa cells raised basal HO-1 expression significantly, and SnMP treatment further increased HO-1 mRNA. In conclusion, SnMP induces HO-1 expression not only by de-repressing the HO-1 promoter by binding Bach1, but also by accelerating Bach1 degradation.

[PMID: 12511571]
Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) catalyzes heme breakdown, eventually releasing iron, carbon monoxide, and bilirubin IXalpha. HO-1 is induced by its substrate heme and various environmental factors, which represents a protective response against oxidative stresses. Here we show that hypoxia represses HO-1 expression in three human cell types but induces it in rat, bovine, and monkey cells, indicating the inter-species difference in the hypoxic regulation of HO-1 expression. The hypoxia-mediated repression of HO-1 expression is consistently associated with the induction of Bach1, a heme-regulated transcriptional repressor, in human cells. Bach1 is a basic leucine zipper protein, forming a heterodimer with a small Maf protein. Expression of HO-1 was also reduced in human cells when exposed to interferon-gamma or an iron chelator desferrioxamine, each of which induced Bach1 expression. In contrast, induction of HO-1 expression by CoCl(2) is associated with reduced expression of Bach1 mRNA. Thus, expression of HO-1 and Bach1 is inversely regulated. We have identified a Maf recognition element in the human HO-1 gene that is required for repression of a reporter gene by hypoxia and targeted by Bach1. Therefore, Bach1 functions as a hypoxia-inducible repressor for the HO-1 gene, thereby contributing to fine-tuning of oxygen homeostasis in human cells.

[PMID: 15809329]
Bach1 functions as a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and the beta-globin genes. The enhancer regions of these genes contain multiple Maf recognition elements (MAREs) to which Bach1 can bind. Previous studies have shown that increased levels of heme and cadmium induce the nuclear export of Bach1, resulting in cytoplasmic accumulation. By means of a yeast two hybrid screening using Bach1 as bait, we identified the intracellular hyaluronic acid binding protein (IHABP) as a potential regulator of Bach1. IHABP is a microtubule-associated protein that may regulate the organization of the cytoskeletal network. A series of domain analyses revealed that a region of Bach1 previously implicated in cytoplasmic accumulation was necessary for IHABP-binding. A C-terminal region of IHABP was necessary for Bach1-binding. Overexpressed Bach1 colocalized with IHABP in the cytoplasm, forming fiber-like structures on microtubules. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) analysis revealed a dynamic nature of the Bach1-IHABP interaction in living cells. The repression of HO-1 reporter activity by Bach1 was attenuated by co-transfecting IHABP in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, the overexpression of IHABP induced the endogenous HO-1 gene in NIH3T3 cells. The overall results suggest that IHABP regulates the subcelluar localization of Bach1 in order to fine-tune transactivation of Bach1 target genes such as HO-1.

[PMID: 18426999]
Bach1 is a stress-responsive transcriptional factor that is thought to control the expression levels of cytoprotective factors, including heme-oxygenase (HO)-1. In the present study, we investigated the roles of Bach1 in the development of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and remodeling induced by transverse aortic constriction (TAC) in vivo using Bach1 gene-deficient (Bach1(-/-)) mice. TAC for 3 weeks in wild-type control (Bach1(+/+)) mice produced LV hypertrophy and remodeling manifested by increased heart weight, histological findings showing increased myocyte cross-sectional area (CSA) and interstitial fibrosis (picro Sirius red staining), reexpressions of ANP, BNP, and betaMHC genes, and echocardiographic findings showing wall thickening, LV dilatation, and reduced LV contraction. Deletion of Bach1 caused significant reductions in heart weight (by 16%), CSA (by 36%), tissue collagen content (by 38%), and gene expression levels of ANP (by 75%), BNP (by 45%), and betaMHC (by 74%). Echocardiography revealed reduced LV dimension and ameliorated LV contractile function. Deletion of Bach1 in the LV caused marked upregulation of HO-1 protein accompanied by elevated HO activity in both basal or TAC-stimulated conditions. Treatment of Bach1(-/-) mice with tin-protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO, abolished the antihypertrophic and antiremodeling effects of Bach1 gene ablation. These results suggest that deletion of Bach1 caused upregulation of cytoprotective HO-1, thereby inhibiting TAC-induced LV hypertrophy and remodeling, at least in part, through activation of HO. Bach1 repressively controls myocardial HO-1 expression both in basal and stressed conditions, inhibition of Bach1 may be a novel therapeutic strategy to protect the myocardium from pressure overload.

[PMID: 23562577]
Hemeoxygenase (HO) is an enzymatic system that degrades heme. HO-1 is an inducible isoform whereas HO-2 is constitutive. Stroke strongly induces HO-1 expression but the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Cytokines that are up-regulated after ischemia, like interleukin (IL)-10, can induce HO-1 gene expression, which is positively regulated by the transcriptional activator nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and negatively regulated by the transcriptional repressor breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) associated C-terminal helicase 1 (Bach-1). While Nrf2 is activated after ischemia and drugs promoting Nrf2 activation increase HO-1 and are beneficial, the involvement of Bach-1 is unknown. Here we investigated mechanisms involved in HO-1 induction and evaluated the effects of HO activity inhibition in mouse permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). HO-1 was induced after ischemia in IL-10-deficient mice suggesting that post-ischemic HO-1 induction was IL-10-independent. Attenuation of Bach-1 gene repression after ischemia was associated to enhanced HO-1 induction. Administration of the HO activity inhibitor zinc proto-porphyrin IX (ZnPP) i.p. 24h before pMCAO exacerbated ischemia-induced tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and IL-1β, nitro-oxidative stress, and the presence of neutrophils at 8h, and increased infarct volume at day 4. However, ZnPP did not worsen ischemic damage when given 30min before pMCAO. ZnPP induced HO-1 expression in the cerebral vasculature at 24h, when it was still detected by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in plasma. While ZnPP was not found in brain tissue extracts of controls, it could be detected after ischemia, supporting that a small fraction of the injected drug can reach the tissue following blood-brain barrier breakdown. The deleterious effect of inhibiting HO activity in ischemia became apparent in the presence of ZnPP-induced HO-1, which is known to exert effects independent of its enzymatic activity. In conclusion, HO-1 induction after ischemia was associated to down-regulation of transcriptional repressor Bach-1, and induction of HO-1 when HO enzymatic activity was inhibited was related to worst outcome after brain ischemia.

[PMID: 14660636]
The transcription factor Bach1 heterodimerizes with small Maf proteins to repress Maf recognition element (MARE)-dependent gene expression. The repressor activity of Bach1 is inhibited by the direct binding of heme. To investigate the involvement of Bach1 in the heme-dependent regulation of the expression of the beta-globin gene, mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells were cultured with succinylacetone (SA), a specific inhibitor of heme biosynthesis, and the level of beta-globin mRNA was examined. A marked decrease of beta-globin mRNA in SA-treated cells was observed, and this decrease was reversed by the addition of hemin. An iron chelator, desferrioxamine, also lowered the level of beta-globin mRNA. The heme-dependent expression of beta-globin is a transcriptional event since the expression of the human beta-globin gene promoter-reporter gene containing the microlocus control region (microLCR) was inhibited when human erythroleukemia K562 cells and MEL cells were cultured with SA. Hemin treatment restored the decrease in promoter activity caused by SA. The control of the microLCR-beta-globin promoter reporter gene by heme was dependent on DNase I-hypersensitive site 2 (HS2), which contains MARE. The MARE binding activity of Bach1 in K562 and MEL cells increased upon SA treatment, and the increase was diminished by the treatment with hemin. Transient expression of Bach1 suppressed the microLCR activity, and this repressor activity was cancelled by treatment with hemin. The expression of a mutated Bach1 lacking heme-binding sites led to a loss in the heme responsiveness of the microLCR. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Bach1 bound to the MARE of HS2 increased by the treatment of MEL cells with SA, and this was cancelled by hemin. We propose that heme positively regulates the beta-globin gene expression by blocking the interaction of Bach1 with the MARE in the LCR.

[PMID: 24035498]
Modular cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) use substrate binding adaptor proteins to specify target ubiquitylation. Many of the ~200 human CRL adaptor proteins remain poorly studied due to a shortage of efficient methods to identify biologically relevant substrates. Here, we report the development of parallel adaptor capture (PAC) proteomics and its use to systematically identify candidate targets for the leucine-rich repeat family of F-box proteins (FBXLs) that function with SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein (SCF) E3s. In validation experiments, we identify the unstudied F-box protein FBXL17 as a regulator of the NFR2 oxidative stress pathway. We demonstrate that FBXL17 controls the transcription of the NRF2 target HMOX1 via turnover of the transcriptional repressor BACH1 in the absence or presence of extrinsic oxidative stress. This work identifies a role for SCF(FBXL17) in controlling the threshold for NRF2-dependent gene activation and provides a framework for elucidating the functions of CRL adaptor proteins.

[PMID: 15613547]
Both nuclear factor erythroid 2 45 kDa subunit (p45) and BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach) transcription factors can form dimers with one of the small Maf proteins, and these heterodimers bind to the musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene (Maf) recognition element (MARE). MARE is known to act as a critical cis-regulatory element of erythroid and megakaryocytic genes. Although detailed analyses of p45-null mutant mice and small maf compound mutant mice revealed that these factors are both critical for platelet production, the functional contributions of Bach1 and the relationship or redundancy between Bach1 and p45 in megakaryocytes remain to be clarified. To address these issues, we generated transgenic lines of mice bearing human BACH1 cDNA under the control of the GATA-1 locus hematopoietic regulatory domain. The transgenic mouse lines showed significant thrombocytopenia associated with impaired maturation of the megakaryocytes, and they developed myelofibrosis. The megakaryocytes in the transgenic mice exhibited reduced proplatelet formation, and the modal ploidy class of megakaryocytes was 2N, indicating the impairment of endomitosis. Transcription of the p45 target genes was down-regulated and we indeed found that BACH1 binds to the thromboxane synthase gene, one of the target genes for p45 in megakaryocytes. These findings thus provide evidence that BACH1 acts as a transcriptional repressor in the regulation of MARE-dependent genes in megakaryocytes.

[PMID: 19439223]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the heme oxygenase (HO)-1 gene. Bach1-null (Bach1(-/-)) mice are reported to be protected from myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury; however, the effect of Bach1 disruption on another oxidative stress model of hyperoxic lung injury has yet to be determined. To investigate the role of Bach1 in hyperoxic lung injury, Bach1(-/-) mice and wild-type (WT) mice were exposed to 90% O(2). During hyperoxic exposure, the survival of Bach1(-/-) mice was significantly longer than that of WT mice. However, the administration of zinc protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO-1 activity, did not change the mortality in either of the mice, thus suggesting that this protective effect was not mediated by an HO-1 overexpression in Bach1(-/-) mice. The indices of lung injury in the lungs of Bach1(-/-) mice were lower than those of WT mice; unexpectedly, however, the levels of IL-6 in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid from Bach1(-/-) mice were significantly higher than those of WT mice. Interestingly, the intrapulmonary administration of small interfering RNA against IL-6 was shown to reduce the IL-6 levels in BAL fluids and shorten the survival in Bach1(-/-) mice during hyperoxic exposure. In addition, a chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed the binding of Bach1 to the IL-6 promoter and its detachment after oxidative stress. Considering the previous observation that the transgenic mice overexpressing IL-6 are protected from hyperoxic lung injury, these results therefore indicate that IL-6 mediates an increased survival in Bach1(-/-) mice during hyperoxic exposure.

[PMID: 19011633]
Cellular senescence is one of the key strategies to suppress expansion of cells with mutations. Senescence is induced in response to genotoxic and oxidative stress. Here we show that the transcription factor Bach1 (BTB and CNC homology 1, basic leucine zipper transcription factor 1), which inhibits oxidative stress-inducible genes, is a crucial negative regulator of oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence. Bach1-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts showed a propensity to undergo more rapid and profound p53-dependent premature senescence than control wild-type cells in response to oxidative stress. Bach1 formed a complex that contained p53, histone deacetylase 1 and nuclear co-repressor N-coR. Bach1 was recruited to a subset of p53 target genes and contributed to impeding p53 action by promoting histone deacetylation. Because Bach1 is regulated by oxidative stress and heme, our data show that Bach1 connects oxygen metabolism and cellular senescence as a negative regulator of p53.

[PMID: 17701549]
The mammalian transcription factor Bach1 functions as a repressor of the enhancers of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene (Hmox-1) by forming heterodimers with the small Maf proteins such as MafK. The transcription of Hmox-1 is regulated by the substrate of HO-1, heme. Heme induces expression of Hmox-1 in part by inhibiting the binding of Bach1 to the enhancers and inducing the nuclear export of Bach1. A dipeptide motif of cysteine and proline (CP motif) in Bach1 is essential for the heme-mediated regulation. In this study, we show that five molecules of heme bind to Bach1 by the heme-titration assay. The Bach1-heme complex exhibits an absorption spectrum with a major Soret peak at 371 nm and Raman band at 343 cm(-1) in high amounts of heme and a spectrum containing the major Soret peak at 423 nm at low heme concentrations. The spectroscopic characterization indicates that Bach1 has two kinds of heme-binding sites with different coordination structures. Mutagenesis studies have established that four molecules of heme bind to the cysteine residues of four CP motifs in the C terminus of Bach1. These results raise the possibility that two separated activities of Bach1, DNA-binding and nuclear export, are regulated by heme binding at the different CP motifs of Bach1 respectively, but not by cooperative heme-binding.

[PMID: 16824198]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 gene (Hmox-1) and beta-globin gene. Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is an inducible cytoprotective enzyme that degrades pro-oxidant heme to carbon monoxide (CO) and biliverdin/bilirubin, which are thought to mediate anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant actions of HO-1. In the present study, we investigated the role of Bach1 in tissue protection against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in vivo using mice lacking the Bach1 gene (Bach1(-/-)) and wild-type (Bach1(+/+)) mice. In Bach1(-/-) mice, myocardial expression of HO-1 protein was constitutively up-regulated by 3.4-fold compared to that in Bach1(+/+) mice. While myocardial I/R induced HO-1 protein in ischemic myocytes in both strains of mice, the extent of induction was significantly greater in Bach1(-/-) mice than in Bach1(+/+) mice. Myocardial infarction was markedly reduced in size by 48.4% in Bach1(-/-) mice. Pretreatment of Bach1(-/-) mice with zinc-protoporphyrin, an inhibitor of HO activity, abolished the infarction-reducing effect of Bach1 disruption, indicating that reduction in the infarct size was mediated, at least in part, by HO-1 activity. Thus, Bach1 plays a pivotal role in setting the levels of both constitutive and inducible expression of HO-1 in the myocardium. Bach1 inactivation during I/R appears to be a key mechanism controlling the activation level of cytoprotective program involving HO-1.

[PMID: 20127796]
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) directly induces oxidative stress and liver injury. Bach1, a basic leucine zipper mammalian transcriptional repressor, negatively regulates heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), a key cytoprotective enzyme that has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. microRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs ( approximately 22 nt) that are important regulators of gene expression. Whether and how miRNAs regulate Bach1 or HCV are largely unknown. The aims of this study were to determine whether miR-196 regulates Bach1, HMOX1, and/or HCV gene expression. HCV replicon cell lines (Con1 and 9-13) of the Con1 isolate and J6/JFH1-based HCV cell culture system were used in this study. The effects of miR-196 mimic on Bach1, HMOX1, and HCV RNA, and protein levels were measured by way of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting, respectively. The Dual Glo Luciferase Assay System was used to determine reporter activities. miR-196 mimic significantly down-regulated Bach1 and up-regulated HMOX1 gene expression and inhibited HCV expression. Dual luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that transfection of miR-196 mimic resulted in a significant decrease in Bach1 3'-untranslated region (UTR)-dependent luciferase activity but not in mutant Bach1 3'-UTR-dependent luciferase activity. Moreover, there was no detectable effect of mutant miR-196 on Bach1 3'-UTR-dependent luciferase activity. miR-196 directly acts on the 3'-UTR of Bach1 messenger RNA and translationally represses the expression of this protein, and up-regulates HMOX1. miR-196 also inhibits HCV expression in HCV replicon cell lines (genotype 1b) and in J6/JFH1 (genotype 2a) HCV cell culture system. Thus, miR-196 plays a role in both HMOX1/Bach1 expression and the regulation of HCV expression in human hepatocytes. Overexpression of miR-196 holds promise as a potential novel strategy to prevent or ameliorate hepatitis C infection, and to protect against liver injury in chronic HCV infection.

[PMID: 11387216]
Heme controls expression of genes involved in the synthesis of globins and heme. The mammalian transcription factor Bach1 functions as a repressor of the Maf recognition element (MARE) by forming antagonizing hetero-oligomers with the small Maf family proteins. We show here that heme binds specifically to Bach1 and regulates its DNA-binding activity. Deletion studies demonstrated that a heme-binding region of Bach1 is confined within its C-terminal region that possesses four dipeptide cysteine-proline (CP) motifs. Mutations in all of the CP motifs of Bach1 abolished its interaction with heme. The DNA-binding activity of Bach1 as a MafK hetero-oligomer was markedly inhibited by heme in gel mobility shift assays. The repressor activity of Bach1 was lost upon addition of hemin in transfected cells. These results suggest that increased levels of heme inactivate the repressor Bach1, resulting in induction of a host of genes with MARES:

[PMID: 22698995]
The let-7 microRNA (miRNA) plays important roles in human liver development and diseases such as hepatocellular carcinoma, liver fibrosis and hepatitis wherein oxidative stress accelerates the progression of these diseases. To date, the role of the let-7 miRNA family in modulation of heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), a key cytoprotective enzyme, remains unknown. Our aims were to determine whether let-7 miRNA directly regulates Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of the HMOX1 gene, and whether indirect up-regulation of HMOX1 by let-7 miRNA attenuates oxidant injury in human hepatocytes. The effects of let-7 miRNA on Bach1 and HMOX1 gene expression in Huh-7 and HepG2 cells were determined by real-time qRT-PCR, Western blot, and luciferase reporter assays. Dual luciferase reporter assays revealed that let-7b, let-7c, or miR-98 significantly decreased Bach1 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR)-dependent luciferase activity but not mutant Bach1 3'-UTR-dependent luciferase activity, whereas mutant let-7 miRNA containing base complementarity with mutant Bach1 3'-UTR restored its effect on mutant reporter activity. let-7b, let-7c, or miR-98 down-regulated Bach1 protein levels by 50-70%, and subsequently up-regulated HMOX1 gene expression by 3-4 fold, compared with non-specific controls. Furthermore, Huh-7 cells transfected with let-7b, let-7c or miR-98 mimic showed increased resistance against oxidant injury induced by tert-butyl-hydroperoxide (tBuOOH), whereas the protection was abrogated by over-expression of Bach1. In conclusion, let-7 miRNA directly acts on the 3'-UTR of Bach1 and negatively regulates expression of this protein, and thereby up-regulates HMOX1 gene expression. Over-expression of the let-7 miRNA family members may represent a novel approach to protecting human hepatocytes from oxidant injury.

[PMID: 18555605]
Oxidative stress has been implicated in tissue damage from traumatic brain injury. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is an inducible enzyme that degrades prooxidant heme to radical-scavenging biliverdin/bilirubin in order to protect cells from oxidative stress. Although HO-1 is induced after induction of brain damage, the regulatory mechanism of HO-1 in the brain is still unclear. Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the HO-1 gene, and plays a critical role in tissue protection from oxidative stress by reperfusion injury of the myocardium. In this study, we examined the role of Bach1 in HO-1 regulation of the various brain sites by investigating the expression of Bach1 and HO-1 in brain tissues of mice bearing Bach1-deficient (Bach1(-/-)) or wild-type (Bach1(+/+)) genes. While the expression levels of Bach1 mRNA in the olfactory bulb were significantly higher than other brain areas, those at the cortex showed the lowest activity. Bach1(-/-) mice showed significantly higher HO-1 mRNA expression levels than Bach1(+/+) mice in all brain sites studied. Moreover, higher induction of HO-1 was observed around damaged tissues after cold injury in Bach1(-/-) than Bach1(+/+) mice. Thus, Bach1 plays an important role in regulating the constitutive and inducible expression levels of HO-1 in the brain. Although a significantly higher level of HO-1 was observed in Bach1(-/-) than Bach1(+/+) mice, genetic ablation of the Bach1 gene failed to show any tissue protective effect after cold injury was inflicted on the cortex.

[PMID: 11530014]
The Maf recognition element (MARE) is regulated by both activators and repressors. Bach1 and Bach2 repress MARE-dependent transcription by forming heterodimers with Maf-related oncoproteins. In order to gain an understanding of the regulation of bach1 gene expression, we analyzed the structure of the mouse bach1 gene. Comparison of the exon-intron structure of the bach1 gene with those of other NF-E2-related genes indicated that bach1 and bach2 constitute an evolutionarily distinct subfamily among bZip factors. The bach1 promoter region contains two GC boxes that are important for its basal activity and are bound by Sp1 in K562 cell extracts. In addition, we found an evolutionarily conserved MARE-like element located downstream of the transcription initiation site. Deletion of this element resulted in a higher promoter activity in K562 cells. Bach1 trans-activated its own promoter depending on the presence of the MARE-like element in co-transfection assays. However, Bach1 did not bind to the MARE-like element in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). These results suggest that Bach1 activates its own promoter indirectly by inhibiting the putative repressor. Such a positive feedback regulation by the repressor Bach1 may play an important role in maintaining the expression of Bach1 while consolidating repression of other genes with MARE.

[PMID: 19282658]
Bach1 is a basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) protein that forms heterodimers with the small Maf proteins and functions as a repressor of gene expression. One of the target genes of Bach1 is Hmox-1 that encodes heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). HO-1 degrades heme into carbon monoxide (CO), biliverdin, and iron. HO-1 is strongly induced by various stresses as well as its substrate heme, and protects cells and tissues against insults through diverse cytoprotective functions of the reaction products CO and biliverdin. Bach1-deficiency in mice leads to higher expression of Hmox-1 in various tissues. Here we investigated the effects of Bach1-deficiency in mice on tissue injuries: hepatic injury induced by D-galactosamine (GalN) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and mouse paw edema induced by carrageenin, polysaccharide derived from various seaweeds. Bach1-deficiency suppressed induction of plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) activities in response to the GalN/LPS-treatment. However, production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and nitric oxide (NO), both being cytotoxic mediators in LPS-induced hepatic injury, in Bach1-deficient mice and their peritoneal macrophages was similar to wild type controls. In contrast, Bach1-deficiency did not affect extent of mouse paw edema induced by carrageenin, which enhances vascular permeability by activating kinin release. These results indicate that Bach1 plays an inhibitory role in the cytoprotection of LPS-induced liver injury but not in the kinin-mediated inflammatory edema. The inhibitory role for Bach1 may stem from its activity to repress gene expression including HO-1.

[PMID: 18325350]
Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is the first and rate-controlling enzyme in heme degradation. Bach1 is a mammalian transcriptional repressor of HO-1. To understand how zinc mesoporphyrin (ZnMP) induces the expression of HO-1, we investigated the effects of ZnMP on Bach1 mRNA and protein levels in human hepatoma Huh-7 cells by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blots. We found that ZnMP markedly up-regulated HO-1 mRNA and protein levels, and rapidly and significantly decreased Bach1 protein levels by increasing degradation of Bach1 protein [half life (t(1/2)) from 19 h to 45 min], whereas ZnMP did not influence Bach1 mRNA levels. The proteasome inhibitors, epoxomicin and MG132, significantly inhibited degradation of Bach1 by ZnMP in a dose-dependent fashion, indicating that the degradation of Bach1 by ZnMP is proteasome-dependent. Purified Bach1 C-terminal fragment bound heme, but there was no evidence for binding of ZnMP to the heme-binding region of Bach1. In conclusion, ZnMP produces profound post-transcriptional down-regulation of Bach1 protein levels and transcriptional up-regulation of HO-1. Our results indicate that ZnMP up-regulates HO-1 gene expression by markedly increasing Bach1 protein degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner.

[PMID: 20388958]
BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). It plays an important role in the feedback regulation of HO-1 expression, which protects cells from various insults including oxidative stress and inflammatory cytokines. However, the role of Bach1 in intestinal inflammation remains unclear. In this study, the role of Bach1 in intestinal mucosal injury was elucidated using 8-week-old female C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1-deficient C57BL/6 mice. Intestinal mucosal injuries induced by a single subcutaneous administration of indomethacin were evaluated macroscopically, histologically, and biochemically. Mucosal protein content and chemokine mRNA levels were determined by real-time PCR. Our results showed that the indomethacin-induced intestinal injury was remarkably improved in Bach1-deficient mice. Histological examination showed that the area of injured lesion was decreased in Bach1-deficient mice compared to wild-type mice. Administration of indomethacin induced expression of inflammatory chemokines such as KC, MIP1alpha and MCP1, which was suppressed in Bach1-deficient mice. Myeloperoxidase activity in the intestinal mucosa was also significantly decreased in Bach1-deficient mice. Additionally, Bach1 deficiency enhanced immunopositivity of HO-1 in the intestinal mucosa after indomethacin administration. Disruption of the Bach1 gene thus caused inhibition of mucosal injury, indicating that inhibition of Bach1 may be a novel therapeutic strategy for treating indomethacin-induced intestinal injury.

[PMID: 15464985]
The transcriptional factor Bach1 forms a heterodimer with small Maf family, and functions as a repressor of the Maf recognition element (MARE) in vivo. To investigate the involvement of Bach1 in the heme-dependent regulation of the expression of the alpha-globin gene, human erythroleukemia K562 cells were cultured with succinylacetone (SA), a heme biosynthetic inhibitor, and the level of alpha-globin mRNA was examined. A decrease of alpha-globin mRNA was observed in SA-treated cells, which was restored by the addition of hemin. The heme-dependent expression of alpha-globin occurred at the transcriptional level since the expression of human alpha-globin gene promoter-reporter gene containing hypersensitive site-40 (HS-40) was decreased when K562 cells were cultured with SA. Hemin treatment restored the decrease of the promoter activity by SA. The regulation of the HS-40 activity by heme was dependent on the NF-E2/AP-1 (NA) site, which is similar to MARE. The NA site-binding activity of Bach1 in K562 increased upon SA-treatment, and the increase was diminished by the addition of hemin. The transient expression of Bach1 and mutated Bach1 lacking CP motifs suppressed the HS-40 activity, and cancellation of the repressor activity by hemin was observed when wild-type Bach1 was expressed. The expression of NF-E2 strengthened the restoration of the Bach1-effect by hemin. Interestingly, nuclear localization of Bach1 increased when cells were treated with SA, while hemin induced the nuclear export of Bach1. These results indicated that heme plays an important role in the induction of alpha-globin gene expression through disrupting the interaction of Bach1 and the NA site in HS-40 enhancer in erythroid cells.

[PMID: 16530877]
Hepatitis C infection induces hepatic oxidative stress. Heme oxygenase (HO), the rate-controlling enzyme of heme catabolism, plays a key role as a protector against oxidative, and other stresses. Other recent work has implicated Bach1, a heme binding protein that represses gene expression, in the regulation of HO-1 gene expression. We investigated the effects of HCV polyprotein expression on expression of HO-1 and Bach1 genes in human hepatoma cells (Huh-7 cells). HO-1 was up-regulated in the cell line expressing HCV proteins from core up to the aminoterminal domain of NS3. Addition of increasing concentrations of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) led to down-regulation of HO-1 in cells expressing HCV proteins. In contrast, Bach1 was significantly down-regulated in these cells. Sodium arsenite, a strong inducer of oxidative stress and HO-1, reduced Bach1 expression in wild type Huh-7 cells, and NAC partially abrogated this decrease. Huh-7 cells expressing HCV proteins show significant up-regulation of the HO-1 gene, and reciprocal down-regulation of the Bach1 gene. Exogenous oxidative stressors and anti-oxidants can modulate expression of these genes. These and other results suggest a key role of down-regulation of Bach1 and up-regulation of HO-1 in diminishing cytotoxic effects of HCV proteins in human hepatocytes.

[PMID: 23880309]
BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of antioxidative enzymes, such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). Oxidative stress is reportedly involved in insulin secretion impairment and obesity-associated insulin resistance. However, the role of Bach1 in the development of diabetes is unclear. HO-1 expression in the liver, white adipose tissue, and pancreatic islets was markedly upregulated in Bach1-deficient mice. Unexpectedly, glucose and insulin tolerance tests showed no differences in obese wild-type (WT) and obese Bach1-deficient mice after high-fat diet loading for 6 wk, suggesting minimal roles of Bach1 in the development of insulin resistance. In contrast, Bach1 deficiency significantly suppressed alloxan-induced pancreatic insulin content reduction and the resultant glucose elevation. Furthermore, TUNEL-positive cells in pancreatic islets of Bach1-deficient mice were markedly decreased, by 60%, compared with those in WT mice. HO-1 expression in islets was significantly upregulated in alloxan-injected Bach1-deficient mice, whereas expression of other antioxidative enzymes, e.g., catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase, was not changed by either alloxan administration or Bach1 deficiency. Our results suggest that Bach1 deficiency protects pancreatic β-cells from oxidative stress-induced apoptosis and that the enhancement of HO-1 expression plays an important role in this protection.

[PMID: 16724942]
Oxidative stress is involved in the mechanism of atherosclerotic lesion formation and in the mechanisms underlying the development of other pathogenic conditions of the cardiovascular system, including endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, and heart failure. Reducing oxidative stress may be a reasonable therapeutic approach to treat cardiovascular diseases. HO-1 is a cytoprotective enzyme that is induced in response to oxidative stress and degrades heme into carbon monoxide (CO) and bilirubin, both of which have cytoprotective effects. A substantial body of evidence suggests that introduction of HO-1, either pharmacologically or by a gene delivery technique, confers cytoprotection in ischemic heart disease and atherosclerosis in animals. Recent studies have revealed that CO has anti-inflammatory properties and that administration of CO provides protection against atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease. Discovery of Bach1, a transcriptional repressor of HO-1, has greatly contributed to the understanding of the regulation of HO-11 expression, providing a clue to a development of alternative method to enhance HO activity. Bach1 normally represses HO-1 expression. However, upon exposure to oxidative stress, Bach1 loses its repressive activity and is exported out of the nucleus, which in turn results in the upregulation of HO-1. Bach1 knockout mice, expressing an increased amount of HO-1, are resistant to pro-atherosclerotic and ischemic stresses. These findings indicate that inhibition of Bach1 may be a novel approach to enhance protection against stress. In summary, the Bach1-HO-1 system is an important defense mechanism against oxidative stress. Development of a safe and effective method to enhance this pathway, such as Bach1 inhibitor, may be of great clinical relevance.

[PMID: 20501657]
Bach1 is a member of the basic leucine zipper transcription factor family, and the Bach1/small Maf heterodimer specifically represses transcriptional activity directed by the Maf recognition element (MARE). Because Bach1 is a repressor of the oxidative stress response, we examined the function(s) of Bach1 in keratinocytes subjected to oxidative stress. Oxidative stress induced by H(2)O(2) led to an increase in MARE activity and expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), an inducible antioxidant defense enzyme. Bach1 depletion by small interfering RNAs or by deletion of Bach1 enhanced HO-1 expression in the absence of H(2)O(2), indicating that Bach1 is a critical repressor of HO-1 in keratinocytes. Although Bach1-deficient or -reduced keratinocytes expressed higher levels of HO-1 than control cells in response to H(2)O(2), Bach1 down-regulation did not attenuate the production of reactive oxygen species by H(2)O(2). In contrast, Bach1 overexpression abolished HO-1 induction by H(2)O(2), which led to increased reactive oxygen species accumulation. HO-1 was induced during keratinocyte differentiation, but MARE activity did not change during differentiation. Furthermore, Bach1 overexpression did not inhibit differentiation-associated induction of HO-1 expression, suggesting that HO-1 induction in differentiation is independent of Bach1. Thus, in response to oxidative stress, Bach1 regulates the oxidation state through the negative control of HO-1 expression prior to terminal keratinocyte differentiation. However, Bach1-mediated repression is negated during keratinocyte differentiation.

[PMID: 16487043]
Heme--as a prosthetic group of proteins required for oxygen transport and storage, respiration, and biosynthetic pathways--is essential for practically all forms of life. Additionally, the degradation products of heme (i.e., carbon monoxide, biliverdin, and bilirubin) produced by the enzymatic actions of heme oxygenase (HO) and biliverdin reductase, possess various biological activities in vivo. In mammalian cells, heme also functions as an intracellular regulator of gene expression by virtue of its ability to bind to Bach1, a transcription factor that functions in association with small Maf proteins. Normally, such complexes function as repressors by binding to specific target sequences, the Maf recognition element (MARE), within enhancers of genes encoding proteins such as HO-1 and beta-globin. By binding to Bach1, heme induces selective removal of the repressor from the gene enhancers permitting subsequent occupancy of the MAREs by activators that, interestingly, also contain small Maf proteins. Thus small Maf proteins play dual functions in gene expression: complexes with Bach1 repress MARE-dependent gene expression, whereas heterodimers with NF-E2 p45 or related factors (Nrf1, Nrf2, and Nrf3) activate MARE-driven genes. By modulating the equilibrium of the small Maf heterodimer network, heme regulates expression of the cytoprotective enzyme HO-1 during the stress response and of beta-globin during erythroid differentiation. Implications of such heme-regulated gene expression in human diseases including atherosclerosis are discussed.

[PMID: 18948842]
Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), the rate-limiting enzyme of heme degradation and antioxidant defense protein, is induced in the lungs of animals exposed to hyperoxia. However, high levels of HO-1 expression may be deleterious, thus necessitating tight regulation. Previous reports show maturational differences in rat HO-1 regulation in hyperoxia, as newborns do not up-regulate HO-1mRNA compared with adults. To better understand the differential response of lung HO-1 to hyperoxia, we exposed newborn and adult mice to >95% oxygen. The newborn lungs had reduced HO-1 mRNA induction compared with adults and newborn transgenic mice over-expressing luciferase driven by the 15 kb HO-1 promoter (HO-1/Luc Tg) had less increased light emission in hyperoxia compared with adults. Compared with adults, levels of the repressor of HO-1 transcription, Bach1, were higher in the neonatal lung as was nuclear protein-DNA binding to the antioxidant response element (ARE) from HO-1. Furthermore, at baseline and in hyperoxia, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed increased Bach1 binding to the HO-1 distal enhancers (DEs) in the neonates compared with adults. These data suggest that elevated levels of Bach1 may help to limit HO-1 induction in the newborn at baseline and in response to oxidative stress.

[PMID: 21555518]
The regulation of gene expression in response to environmental signals and metabolic imbalances is a key step in maintaining cellular homeostasis. BTB and CNC homology 1 (BACH1) is a heme-binding transcription factor repressing the transcription from a subset of MAF recognition elements at low intracellular heme levels. Upon heme binding, BACH1 is released from the MAF recognition elements, resulting in increased expression of antioxidant response genes. To systematically address the gene regulatory networks involving BACH1, we combined chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of BACH1 target genes in HEK 293 cells with knockdown of BACH1 using three independent types of small interfering RNAs followed by transcriptome profiling using microarrays. The 59 BACH1 target genes identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing were found highly enriched in genes showing expression changes after BACH1 knockdown, demonstrating the impact of BACH1 repression on transcription. In addition to known and new BACH1 targets involved in heme degradation (HMOX1, FTL, FTH1, ME1, and SLC48A1) and redox regulation (GCLC, GCLM, and SLC7A11), we also discovered BACH1 target genes affecting cell cycle and apoptosis pathways (ITPR2, CALM1, SQSTM1, TFE3, EWSR1, CDK6, BCL2L11, and MAFG) as well as subcellular transport processes (CLSTN1, PSAP, MAPT, and vault RNA). The newly identified impact of BACH1 on genes involved in neurodegenerative processes and proliferation provides an interesting basis for future dissection of BACH1-mediated gene repression in neurodegeneration and virus-induced cancerogenesis.

[PMID: 20345481]
Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 has anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic activities. However, little is known about the regulation of HO-1 in human primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. Here we investigated the expression of HO-1 in primary and established AML cells as well as other types of leukemic cells and normal monocytes, and its regulatory mechanism by the transcriptional repressor, BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1), and the activator, nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 related factor 2 (Nrf2). Leukemic cell lines such as U937 expressed little HO-1, whereas most freshly isolated AML cells and monocytes expressed substantial amounts of HO-1, along with Bach1 and Nrf2. When U937 cells were treated with phorbol myristate acetate (PHA) or gamma-interferon, they significantly expressed both HO-1 and Bach1, like primary AML cells. Treatment with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) enhanced HO-1 expression in U937 cells but suppressed it in primary monocytes and PMA-treated U937 cells. In HO-1-expressing cells, Bach1 was localized in the cytoplasm, but Nrf2 was localized in the nuclei. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay of these cells revealed the preferential binding of Nrf2 over Bach1 to Maf-recognition elements, the enhancer regions of the HO-1 gene. The downregulation of the HO-1 gene with siRNA increased a cytotoxic effect of an anticancer drug on primary AML cells, whereas the downregulation of Bach1 increased HO-1 expression, leading to enhanced survival. These and other results show that Bach1 plays a critical role in regulating HO-1 gene expression in AML cells and its expression suppresses their survival by downregulating HO-1 expression. Thus, functional upregulation of Bach1 is a potential strategy for antileukemic therapy.

[PMID: 19035757]
Oxidative stress contributes to secondary injury after spinal cord injury (SCI). The expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which protects cells from various insults including oxidative stress, is upregulated in injured spinal cords. Mice deficient in Bach1 (Bach1-/-), a transcriptional repressor of the HO-1 and beta-globin genes, express high levels of HO-1 mRNA and protein in various organs. The authors hypothesized that HO-1 modulates the secondary injury process after SCI in Bach1(-/-) mice. Male C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1(-/-) C57BL/6 mice were subjected to moderate SCI, and differences in hindlimb motor function, and electrophysiological, molecular biological, and histopathological changes were assessed for 2 weeks. Functional recovery was greater, and motor evoked potentials were significantly larger in Bach1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice throughout the observation period. The expression of HO-1 mRNA in the spinal cord was significantly increased in both mice until 3 days after injury, and it was significantly higher in Bach1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice at every assessment point. Histological examination using Luxol fast blue staining at 1 day after injury showed that the injured areas were smaller in Bach1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice. The HO-1 immunoreactivity was not detected in uninjured spinal cord, but 3 days postinjury the number of HO-1-immunoreactive cells was obviously higher in the injured area in both mice, particularly in Bach1(-/-) mice. The HO-1 was primarily induced in microglia/macrophage in both mice. These results suggest that HO-1 modulates the secondary injury process, and high HO-1 expression may preserve spinal cord function in the early stages after SCI in Bach1(-/-) mice. Treatment that induces HO-1 expression at these early stages may preserve the functional outcome after SCI.

[PMID: 18550526]
Intracellular heme is a redox active molecule that can be detrimental to cells at high concentrations or under oxidizing conditions. To prevent accumulation, the inducible enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) catalyzes degradation of heme. In the absence of elevated intracellular heme or oxidative stress, the basic region leucine zipper transcriptional regulator BACH1 binds HMOX1 antioxidant response elements and represses transcription. Conversely, increased intracellular heme or sulfhydryl oxidation inactivate BACH1, permitting transcriptional induction of HMOX1. Here, we investigate the effect of BACH1 inactivation on the induction of HMOX1 and as a mechanism for broader gene induction. We show that BACH1 is inactivated at low micromolar arsenite concentrations and that BACH1 inactivation is necessary and sufficient for transcriptional induction of HMOX1. Because BACH1 is thought to interact with antioxidant response element motifs, we further examined the role of BACH1 as a regulator of inducible antioxidant gene expression by assessing the global profile of gene expression following BACH1 knockdown using small interfering RNA. The loss of BACH1 function in human keratinocytes results almost exclusively in HMOX1 induction, suggesting that BACH1 may function as a rheostat regulating levels of intracellular free heme.

[PMID: 16894358]
Heme (iron protoporphyrin IX) is an essential molecule for numerous living organisms. Not only does it serve as a prosthetic group in enzymes, it also acts as a signaling molecule that controls diverse molecular and cellular processes ranging from signal transduction to protein complex assembly. Deficient heme synthesis or function impacts the hematopoietic, hepatic and nervous systems in humans. Recent studies have revealed a series of heme-regulated transcription factors and signal transducers including Hap1, a heme-activated transcription factor that mediates the effects of oxygen on gene transcription in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Bach1, a transcriptional repressor that is negatively regulated by heme in mammalian cells; IRR, an iron regulatory protein that mediates the iron-dependant regulation of heme synthesis in the bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum; and heme-regulated inhibitor, an eucaryotic initiation factor 2alpha kinase that coordinates protein synthesis with heme availability in reticulocytes. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge about how heme controls the activity of these transcriptional regulators and signal transducers, and discuss diseases associated with defective heme synthesis, degradation and function.

[PMID: 23446334]
BTB and CNC homolog 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), which plays an important role in the protection of cells and tissues against acute and chronic inflammation. However, the role of Bach1 in the gastrointestinal mucosal defense system remains little understood. HO-1 supports the suppression of experimental colitis and localizes mainly in macrophages in colonic mucosa. This study was undertaken to elucidate the Bach1/HO-1 system's effects on the pathogenesis of experimental colitis. This study used C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1-deficient C57BL/6 mice in which colonic damage was induced by the administration of an enema of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS). Subsequently, they were evaluated macroscopically, histologically, and biochemically. Peritoneal macrophages from the respective mice were isolated and analyzed. Then, wild-type mice were injected with peritoneal macrophages from the respective mice. Acute colitis was induced similarly. TNBS-induced colitis was inhibited in Bach1-deficient mice. TNBS administration increased the expression of HO-1 messenger RNA and protein in colonic mucosa in Bach1-deficient mice. The expression of HO-1 mainly localized in F4/80-immunopositive and CD11b-immunopositive macrophages. Isolated peritoneal macrophages from Bach1-deficient mice highly expressed HO-1 and also manifested M2 macrophage markers, such as Arginase-1, Fizz-1, Ym1, and MRC1. Furthermore, TNBS-induced colitis was inhibited by the transfer of Bach1-deficient macrophages into wild-type mice. Deficiency of Bach1 ameliorated TNBS-induced colitis. Bach1-deficient macrophages played a key role in protection against colitis. Targeting of this mechanism is applicable to cell therapy for human inflammatory bowel disease.

[PMID: 15743416]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the cytoprotective enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). Although HO-1 protects against atherosclerosis, the function of Bach1 in this process is poorly understood. We isolated peritoneal macrophages and aortic smooth muscle cells (SMC) from wild-type and bach1-deficient mice. bach1-Deficient macrophages expressed increased levels of HO-1 and showed elevated phagocytic activity when incubated with 0.75 microm microspheres. In SMC, bach1-ablation resulted in increased expression of HO-1 and decreased proliferation in bromodeoxyuridine incorporation assay as compared with wild-type cells. The up-regulated phagocytic activity and reduced SMC proliferation of bach1-deficient cells were not restored by Zinc (II) protoporphyrin IX, an inhibitor of HO, suggesting that HO-independent mechanisms are also involved in the regulation of phagocytosis of macrophages and proliferation of SMC by Bach1. In wild-type mice, cuff placement around femoral artery caused pronounced intimal proliferation without affecting the media, thus resulting in intimal to medial (I/M) volume ratio of 65.6%. bach1-deficient mice had less degree of intimal growth (I/M ratio of 45.6%). These results indicate that Bach1 plays a critical role in the regulation of HO-1 expression, macrophage function, SMC proliferation and neointimal formation. Bach1 may regulate gene expression in these cells during inflammation and atherogenesis.

[PMID: 22127667]
Reducing inflammation and osteoclastogenesis by heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) induction could be beneficial in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the function of HO-1 in bone metabolism remains unclear. This study was undertaken to clarify the effects of HO-1 and its repressor Bach1 in osteoclastogenesis. In vitro osteoclastogenesis was compared in Bach1-deficient and wild-type mice. Osteoclasts (OCs) were generated from bone marrow-derived macrophages by stimulation with macrophage colony-stimulating factor and RANKL. Osteoclastogenesis was assessed by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining and expression of OC-related genes. Intracellular signal pathways in OC precursors were also assessed. HO-1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was transduced into Bach1(-/-) mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages to examine the role of HO-1 in osteoclastogenesis. In vivo inflammatory bone loss was evaluated by local injection of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) into calvaria. Transcription of HO-1 was down-regulated by stimulation with RANKL in the early stage of OC differentiation. Bach1(-/-) mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages were partially resistant to the RANKL-dependent HO-1 reduction and showed impaired osteoclastogenesis, which was associated with reduced expression of RANK and components of the downstream TNF receptor-associated factor 6/c-Fos/NF-ATc1 pathway as well as reduced expression of Blimp1. Treatment with HO-1 shRNA increased the number of OCs and expression of OC-related genes except for the Blimp1 gene during in vitro osteoclastogenesis from Bach1(-/-) mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages. TNFα-induced bone destruction was reduced in Bach1(-/-) mice in vivo. The present findings demonstrate that Bach1 regulates osteoclastogenesis under inflammatory conditions, via both HO-1-dependent and HO-1-independent mechanisms. Bach1 may be worthy of consideration as a target for treatment of inflammatory bone loss in diseases including RA.

[PMID: 17682061]
The transcription repressor Bach1 is a sensor and effector of heme that regulates the expression of heme oxygenase 1 and globin genes. Heme binds to Bach1, inhibiting its DNA binding activity and inducing its nuclear export. We found that hemin further induced the degradation of endogenous Bach1 in NIH 3T3 cells, murine embryonic fibroblasts, and murine erythroleukemia cells. In contrast, succinylacetone, an inhibitor of heme synthesis, caused accumulation of Bach1 in murine embryonic fibroblasts, indicating that physiological levels of heme regulated the Bach1 turnover. Polyubiquitination and rapid degradation of overexpressed Bach1 were induced by hemin treatment. HOIL-1, an ubiquitin-protein ligase which recognizes heme-bound, oxidized iron regulatory protein 2, was found to bind with Bach1 when both were overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells. HOIL-1 stimulated the polyubiquitination of Bach1 in a purified in vitro ubiquitination system depending on the intact heme binding motifs of Bach1. Expression of dominant-negative HOIL-1 in murine erythroleukemia cells resulted in higher stability of endogenous Bach1, raising the possibility that the heme-regulated degradation involved HOIL-1 in murine erythroleukemia cells. These results suggest that heme within a cell regulates the polyubiquitination and degradation of Bach1.

[PMID: 19119918]
Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is an inducible cytoprotective enzyme that degrades heme to iron, carbon monoxide (CO), and biliverdin, the latter two of which are thought to mediate the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant actions of HO-1. Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of the HO-1 gene (Hmox-1). Previous reports have demonstrated that the genetic ablation of Bach1 engenders an increased HO-1 expression and a marked reduction in the degree of oxidative tissue damage in vivo. However, the function of Bach1 in spinal cord injury is still not understood. In the present study, we examined whether Bach1 deficiency increases HO-1 expression and reduces neural tissue damage in a spinal cord injury model using Bach1 knock-out (KO) mice and wild-type (WT) mice. The expression of HO-1 protein in the spinal cord was significantly higher in the Bach1 KO mice than in the WT mice before and after injury. The KO mice also had significantly higher Basso mouse scale scores for locomotor function and larger areas of spared white matter than the WT mice at 6 weeks after injury. Neuronal loss and apoptotic cell death in the injured spinal cord was significantly reduced in the KO mice in comparison to the WT mice. These results suggest that Bach1 deficiency engenders a constitutively higher expression of HO-1 and a dramatic increase in cytoprotection against spinal cord injury.

[PMID: 17901053]
Ferritin gene transcription is regulated by heme as is ferritin mRNA translation, which is mediated by the well studied mRNA.IRE/IRP protein complex. The heme-sensitive DNA sequence in ferritin genes is the maf recognition/antioxidant response element present in several other genes that are induced by heme and repressed by Bach1. We now report that chromatin immunoprecipitated with Bach1 antiserum contains ferritin DNA sequences. In addition, overexpression of Bach1 protein in the transfected cells decreased ferritin expression, indicating insufficient endogenous Bach1 for full repression; decreasing Bach1 with antisense RNA increased ferritin expression. Thioredoxin reductase1, a gene that also contains a maf recognition/antioxidant response element but is less studied, responded similarly to ferritin, as did the positive controls heme oxygenase1 and NADP(H) quinone (oxido) reductase1. Bach1-DNA promoter interactions in cells were confirmed in vitro with soluble, recombinant Bach1 protein and revealed a quantitative range of Bach1/DNA stabilities: ferritin L approximately ferritin H approximately beta-globin, beta-globin approximately 2-fold >heme oxygenase1 = quinone reductase beta-globin approximately 4-fold >thioredoxin reductase1. Such results indicate the possibility that modulation of cellular Bach1 concentrations will have variable effects among the genes coordinately regulated by maf recognition/antioxidant response elements in iron/oxygen/antioxidant metabolism.

[PMID: 21473739]
BTB and CNC homologue 1 (Bach1) is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). This study hypothesized that Bach1 plays an important role in the indomethacin-induced apoptosis in the case of small-intestinal mucosal injury. Eight-week-old male C57BL/6 (wild-type) and homozygous Bach1-deficient C57BL/6 mice were included in this study. Mucosal injuries induced by subcutaneously administering indomethacin were evaluated macroscopically, histologically and biochemically. Indomethacin-induced injuries were improved in Bach1-deficient mice. Immunohistochemistry showed an increase in the number of HO-1-positive cells, which were mainly F4/80 positive macrophages, in Bach1-deficient mice. Indomethacin administration increased the expression of HO-1 mRNA and protein in the small intestine in Bach1-deficient mice. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL) staining showed that the extent of apoptosis was suppressed in Bach1-deficent mice. In conclusion, deficiency of the Bach1 gene inhibited apoptosis and thus suppressed mucosal injury, indicating that Bach1 is a novel therapeutic target for indomethacin-induced intestinal injury.

[PMID: 22847612]
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), by-products of aerobic respiration, promote genetic instability and contribute to the malignant transformation of cells. Among the genes related to ROS metabolism, Bach1 is a repressor of the oxidative stress response, and a negative regulator of ROS-induced cellular senescence directed by p53 in higher eukaryotes. While ROS are intimately involved in carcinogenesis, it is not clear whether Bach1 is involved in this process. We found that senescent Bach1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) underwent spontaneous immortalization the same as did the wild-type cells. When transduced with constitutively active Ras (H-Ras(V12)), the proliferation and colony formation of these cells in vitro were markedly reduced. When transplanted into athymic nude mice, the growth and vascularization of tumors derived from Bach1-deficient cells were also decreased. Gene expression profiling of the MEFs revealed a new H-Ras(V12) signature, which was distinct from the previously reported signatures in epithelial tumors, and was partly dependent on Bach1. The Bach1-deficient cells showed diminished phosphorylation of MEK and ERK1/2 in response to H-Ras(V12), which was consistent with the alterations in the gene expression profile, including phosphatase genes. Finally, Bach1-deficient mice were less susceptible to 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxidide (4-NQO)-induced tongue carcinoma than wild-type mice. Our data provide evidence for a critical role of Bach1 in cell transformation and tumor growth induced by activated H-Ras(V12).

[PMID: 17942419]
Oxidative stress activates the transcription factor NRF2, which in turn binds cis-acting antioxidant response element (ARE) enhancers and induces expression of protective antioxidant genes. In contrast, the transcriptional repressor BACH1 binds ARE-like enhancers in cells naïve to oxidative stress and antagonizes NRF2 binding until it becomes inactivated by pro-oxidants. Here, we describe the dynamic roles of BACH1 and NRF2 in the transcription of the heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) gene. HMOX1 induction, elicited by arsenite-mediated oxidative stress, follows inactivation of BACH1 and precedes activation of NRF2. BACH1 repression is dominant over NRF2-mediated HMOX1 transcription and inactivation of BACH1 is a prerequisite for HMOX1 induction. In contrast, thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1) is regulated by NRF2 but not by BACH1. By comparing the expression levels of HMOX1 with TXNRD1, we show that nuclear accumulation of NRF2 is not necessary for HMOX1 induction; rather, BACH1 inactivation permits NRF2 already present in the nucleus at low basal levels to bind the HMOX1 promoter and elicit HMOX1 induction. Thus, BACH1 confers an additional level of regulation to ARE-dependent genes that reveals a new dimension to the oxidative stress response.

[PMID: 22289179]
The transcriptional repressor Bach1 mediates various stress responses. Despite its role in transcription, Bach1 is predominantly exported to the cytoplasm in a Crm1-dependent manner, but the functional role of its cytoplasmic retention is still unclear. We found that Bach1 was also excluded from mitotic chromatin by a C-terminal cytoplasmic localization sequence dependent and leptomycin B sensitive process. Bach1 depletion resulted in disordered mitotic chromosome alignment, which was rescued by Bach1 mutants lacking the BTB or DNA binding domains, suggesting its transcription-independent mechanism. We thus revealed a novel role of Bach1 in the regulation of mitotic chromosome dynamics.

[PMID: 21982894]
Heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is a stress-inducible enzyme that degrades redox-active heme-producing biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and Fe(2+). It protects cells under various stress conditions and mediates anti-inflammatory and vasodilatory effects in the endothelium. The expression of HMOX1, the HO-1 gene, is highly inducible and its transcriptional regulation is complex. HMOX1 is induced by various proinflammatory stimuli via NF-κB in human endothelial cells, but functional NF-κB-binding elements have not been identified from the human gene. However, the regulation of HMOX1 by the antioxidant-response element is firmly established, with the transcription factor BACH1 serving as a repressor and Nrf2 as an enhancer. miR-155 is one of the TNFα-inducible endothelial microRNAs predicted to bind to the BACH1 mRNA. Oligonucleotides mimicking miR-155 efficiently inhibited BACH1 protein translation, resulting in a concentration-dependent increase in HMOX1 mRNA and protein expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Moreover, endogenous miR-155 was upregulated by TNFα via an NF-κB-dependent mechanism with a subsequent increase in HMOX1 expression. We propose that increased HMOX1 expression in endothelial cells by TNFα results from miR-155-induced repression of BACH1 rather than direct induction of HMOX1 via NF-κB, and that miR-155 is cytoprotective during inflammation by elevating HO-1 expression in endothelial cells.

[PMID: 14580148]
Heme must be synthesized and degraded within an individual nucleated cell. Heme degradation is catalyzed by the two isozymes of heme oxygenase, heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and HO-2, eventually yielding biliverdin/bilirubin, CO, and iron. These products possess important physiological roles but are potentially toxic to cells. Characteristically, human HO-1 contains no Cys residues, whereas HO-2 contains the potential heme-binding motifs of the Cys-Pro dipeptide. Expression of HO-1 is inducible or repressible, depending on cell types or cellular microenvironments, but expression levels of HO-2 are fairly constant. Thus, the main regulation of heme catabolism is a problem of the balance between induction and repression of HO-1. Notably, HO-1 expression is induced by heme in all mammalian cells examined, but is repressed by hypoxia in certain types of cultured human cells. The recent discovery of Bach1 as a heme-regulated and hypoxia-inducible repressor for transcription of the HO-1 gene has provided a missing link in the feedback control of heme catabolism. On the other hand, the human HO-1 gene promoter contains the (GT)n repeat polymorphism and a single nucleotide polymorphism (-427A --> T), both of which may contribute to fine-tuning of the transcription. Importantly, long (GT)n alleles are associated with susceptibility to smoking-induced emphysema or coronary artery disease, but may provide with resistance to cerebral malaria. The latter finding suggests a novel therapeutic strategy with inhibitors of HO-1 for the treatment of cerebral malaria. We discuss the potential regulatory role of Bach1 and HO-2 in heme catabolism and update the understanding of the regulation of HO-1 expression.

[PMID: 22107958]
Up-regulation of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) by ultraviolet A (UVA; 320-380 nm) irradiation of human skin cells protects them against oxidative stress. The role of Nrf2 in up-regulation of HO-1 and other phase II genes is well established. The mechanism underlying Bach1-mediated HO-1 repression is less well understood although cellular localization seems to be crucial. Because prolonged HO-1 overexpression is likely to be detrimental, it is crucial that activation of the gene is transient. We now show that UVA irradiation of cultured human skin fibroblasts enhances accumulation of Bach1 mRNA and protein severalfold. Endogenous Bach1 protein accumulates in the nucleus after 8h and may occupy MARE sites after HO-1 activation thus providing a compensatory mechanism to control HO-1 overexpression. Overexpression of Bach1, together with MafK, represses basal and UVA-mediated HO-1 protein expression, whereas silencing of the Bach1 gene by Bach1-specific siRNAs causes robust enhancement of constitutive HO-1 levels. UVA treatment of cells in which Bach1 has been silenced leads to higher levels of induction of the HO-1 protein. Although Bach1 protein is exported from the nucleus 12h after UVA irradiation, the release of free cellular heme from microsomal heme-containing proteins is immediate rather than delayed. Although heme does promote the export of Bach1 via the Crm1/exportin 1 pathway and is involved in the delayed UVA-mediated export of the protein, it is not clear how this occurs.

[PMID: 15855052]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1, one of the most inducible phase 2 proteins. Bach1 binds in conjunction with a small Maf protein to tandem repeats of the antioxidant response element (ARE) and quenches the target gene expression. On the other hand, the transactivator Nrf2 binds and up-regulates the ARE-governed gene expression. By using a sulfhydryl oxidizing agent, diamide, here we provide evidence which indicates that the Bach1 function is regulated by the redox state. Diamide showed restricted Nrf2 nuclear translocation and ARE-driven reporter activity but reversed the ARE transcriptional activity suppressed by ectopically expressed Bach1. Substitution of the conserved cysteine residue in the DNA binding domain of Bach1 to serine (C574S mutant) caused a refractory response to the diamide-mediated reactivation of the Bach1-suppressed reporter activity. Moreover, diamide induced cytoplasmic translocation of the GFP-Bach1 fusion protein but failed to translocate the fusion protein consisting of the C574S mutant. These data suggest that redox regulation of Bach1 is an alternative mechanism to induce multiple ARE-governed genes.

[PMID: 22735309]
Phenylpropanoids have several highly significant biological properties in both plants and animals. Four phenylpropanoid glycosides (PPGs), verbascoside (VB), forsythoside B (FB), echinacoside (EC) and campneoside I (CP), were purified and tested for their capability to activate NRF2 and induce phase II cytoprotective enzymes in a human keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT). All four substances showed similar strong antioxidant and radical-scavenging activities as determined by diphenylpicrylhydrazyl assay. Furthermore, in HaCaT cells, FB and EC are strong activators of NRF2, the nuclear transcription factor regulating many phase II detoxifying and cytoprotective enzymes, such as heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1). In HaCaT cells, FB and EC (200 μM) induced nuclear translocation of NRF2 protein after 24 h and reduced nuclear protein levels of BACH1, a repressor of the antioxidant response element. FB and EC greatly HMOX1 mRNA levels by more than 40-fold in 72 h. Cytoplasmic HMOX1 protein levels were also increased at 48 h after treatment. VB was less active compared to FB and EC, and CP was slightly active only at later times of treatment. We suggest that hydroxytyrosol (HYD) could be a potential bioactive metabolite of PPGs since HYD, in equimolar amounts to PGGs, is able to both activate HO-1 transcription and modify Nrf2/Bach1 nuclear protein levels. This is in agreement with the poor activity of CP, which contains a HYD moiety modified by an O-methyl group. In conclusion, FB and EC from plant cell cultures may provide long-lasting skin protection by induction of phase II cytoprotective capabilities.

[PMID: 15068251]
There is a series of about 12 transcription factors expressed on chromosome 21. These transcription factors (TFs) are major candidates for playing a pathogenetic role for the abnormal wiring of the brain in fetal Down Syndrome (DS) as approximately 5,000 TFs are developmentally involved in the complex architecture of the human brain. TF derangement in DS has been already reported and we decided to contribute to the problem by studying four TFs encoded on chromosome 21 in fetal DS brain. We used fetal cortex of 8 DS fetuses and 6 controls (females) from the 18-19th week of gestation. Brain homogenates were subject to immunoblotting using goat-anti-BACH1, rabbit anti-heme oxygenase 1 (HO1), rabbit anti-ERG, rabbit anti-RUNX1 and goat anti-SIM2 l. Antibodies against beta-actin were used to normalise cell loss and antibodies against neuron-specific enolase were used to compensate neuronal loss. BACH1 was significantly overexpressed in fetal DS (p < 0.008) as compared to controls whereas RUNX1 and ERG proteins were comparable between groups, and SIM2 l was not detectable in any specimen. BACH1 was even significantly increased in the DS panel when normalised versus the housekeeping protein beta-actin (p < 0.01) or the neuron specific enolase (p < 0.01). HO-1 was found comparable between groups. BACH1, a member of the family of BTB-basic leucine zipper transcription factors, regulates gene expression through the NF-E2 site. More specifically, BACH1 suppresses expression of HO1. Increased BACH1, however, did not lead to decreased HO1, which would have explained oxidative stress observed in fetal DS.

[PMID: 21373270]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1, a.k.a. HSP-32), which is an inducible enzyme and has anti-oxidation/anti-inflammatory properties shown in various models of organ injuries. Since oxidative stress plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), HO-1 induction would be expected to prevent the development of NASH. In this study, we investigated the influence of Bach1 ablation in mice on the progression of NASH in methionine-choline deficient (MCD) diet model. Bach1 ablation resulted in significant induction of HO-1 mRNA and its activity in the liver. When fed MCD diet, Bach1(-/-) mice exhibited negligible hepatic steatosis compared to pronounced steatohepatitis in wild type mice with 6-fold increase in hepatic triglyceride content. Whereas feeding of MCD diet decreased mRNA expressions of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) α and microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) in wild type mice, there were no change in Bach1(-/-) mice. In addition, hepatic concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA), a biomarker for oxidative stress as well as plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was significantly lower in Bach1(-/-) mice. These findings suggest that Bach1 ablation exerts hepatoprotective effect against steatohepatitis presumably via HO-1 induction and may be a potential therapeutic target.

[PMID: 21812759]
A central mechanism in cellular defence against oxidative or electrophilic stress is mediated by transcriptional induction of genes via the ARE (antioxidant-response element), a cis-acting sequence present in the regulatory regions of genes involved in the detoxification and elimination of reactive oxidants and electrophiles. The ARE binds different bZIP (basic-region leucine zipper) transcription factors, most notably Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2) that functions as a transcriptional activator via heterodimerization with small Maf proteins. Although ARE activation by Nrf2 is relatively well understood, the mechanisms by which ARE-mediated signalling is down-regulated are poorly known. Transcription factor BACH1 [BTB (broad-complex, tramtrack and bric-a-brac) and CNC (cap'n'collar protein) homology 1] binds to ARE-like sequences, functioning as a transcriptional repressor in a subset of ARE-regulated genes, thus antagonizing the activator function of Nrf2. In the present study, we have demonstrated that BACH1 itself is regulated by Nrf2 as it is induced by Nrf2 overexpression and by Nrf2-activating agents in an Nrf2-dependent manner. Furthermore, a functional ARE site was identified at +1411 from the transcription start site of transcript variant 2 of BACH1. We conclude that BACH1 is a bona fide Nrf2 target gene and that induction of BACH1 by Nrf2 may serve as a feedback-inhibitory mechanism for ARE-mediated gene regulation.

[PMID: 15734732]
The antioxidant response element (ARE) and Nrf2 are known to regulate the expression and coordinated induction of genes encoding detoxifying enzymes including NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase1 (NQO1) in response to antioxidants. In this report, we demonstrate that overexpression of the transcription factor Bach1 in Hep-G2 cells negatively regulated NQO1 gene expression and induction in response to antioxidant t-BHQ. Bandshift and supershift assays revealed that Bach1 binds to the ARE as a heterodimer with small Maf proteins but not as a homodimer or heterodimer with Nrf2. The transfection and ChIP assays revealed that Bach1 and Nrf2 competed with each other to regulate ARE-mediated gene expression. Heme, a negative regulator of Bach1 relieved the Bach1 repression of NQO1 gene expression in transfected cells. The transcription of Bach1 and Nrf2 did not change in response to t-BHQ. Immunofluorescence assays and Western blot analysis revealed that both Bach1 and Nrf2 localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus of the untreated cells. The treatment of cells with t-BHQ resulted in the nuclear accumulation of both Bach1 and Nrf2. Interestingly, the t-BHQ-induced nuclear accumulation of Bach1 was significantly delayed over that of Nrf2. These results led to the conclusion that a balance of Nrf2 versus Bach1 inside the nucleus influences up- or down-regulation of ARE-mediated gene expression. The results further suggest that antioxidant-induced delayed accumulation of Bach1 contributes to the down-regulation of ARE-regulated genes, presumably to reduce the antioxidant enzymes to normal levels.

[PMID: 14504288]
The export of certain nuclear proteins is involved in the regulation of various nuclear functions, including transcription. In some cases, the export of target proteins is induced upon environmental or cellular cues, resulting in conditional gene expression. The small Maf proteins appear to be critical regulators of heme oxygenase (HO)-1, an anti-oxidant defense enzyme that degrades heme into iron, carbon monoxide, and biliverdin. Although ho-1 is repressed by Bach1/small Maf heterodimers, it is activated by Nrf2/small Maf heterodimers, indicating that Bach1 and Nrf2 compete with each other. We anticipated that the nuclear concentration of Bach1 might be regulated to ensure that the entire system effectively responds to various stimuli. We carried out detailed domain analysis of Bach1 in an effort to understand how various inducers of HO-1 inactivate Bach1. We show here that cadmium, a strong inducer of HO-1, activates the nuclear export of Bach1. This cadmium-induced export of Bach1 was mediated in trans by its C-terminal region that is conserved between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear export of Bach2 was also induced by cadmium, indicating that the cadmium responsibility is shared between Bach1 and Bach2. The nuclear export of Bach1 was dependent on Crm1/Exportin-1 as well as the extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2) activity. These results indicate that the nuclear export of Bach1 constitutes an important regulatory mechanism to relieve the Bach1-mediated repression of genes such as ho-1.

[PMID: 19591297]
The tumor suppressor p53 induces cellular senescence, an irreversible form of proliferation arrest, to inhibit carcinogenesis as well as aging of organs and a body. While the major cause of cellular senescence and aging is oxidative stress, little is known about how the p53 activity is regulated under such conditions. Bach1 inhibits expression of oxidative stress responsive genes by competing with Nrf2, the key activator of oxidative stress response. Bach1 inhibits p53-dependent cellular senescence induced by oxidative stress. Bach1 forms a protein complex with p53, is recruited to p53 target genes, and inhibits their expression. These findings provide completely novel insights into how the activity of p53 is regulated under oxidative stress. Since p53 is the critical tumor suppressor with huge clinical implications, the newly identified mechanism should open new research fields.

[PMID: 16771696]
It has been reported that beta-carotene is able to increase lung cancer risk in chronic smokers, but the mechanism for this association remains unknown. This article reports the first evidence that beta-carotene, combined with cigarette smoke condensate (TAR), regulates heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) via its transcriptional factor Bach1 and modulates cell growth. Both immortalized rat fibroblasts (RAT-1) and human lung cancer cells (Mv1Lu) exposed to TAR (25 microg/ml), exhibited an initial (6 h) induction of HO-1, followed by a late (24 h) repression due to the activation of Bach1. Heme oxygenase-1 repression was much more consistent when TAR was administered in combination with beta-carotene (1 microM) for 24 h; at this concentration the carotenoid per se did not have any effect on HO-1. Interestingly, the HO-1 repression following TAR plus beta-carotene treatment caused a resynchronization of RAT-1 cell-cycle with a significant increase in the S-phase, and this was probably due to the decreased intracellular levels of carbon monoxide and bilirubin, both of which have antiproliferative effects. The role of HO-1 repression in increasing cell growth was also confirmed in Mv1Lu cells by the "knock down" of the Bach1 gene, thus demonstrating as HO-1 repression is a conserved mechanism by which cells can react to oxidative stress.

[PMID: 15175654]
Bach1 is a transcriptional repressor of heme oxygenase-1 and beta-globin genes, both of which are known to be transcriptionally induced by heme. To test the hypothesis that heme regulates the activity of Bach1, we expressed wild type and mutated versions of Bach1 together with or without its heterodimer partner MafK in human 293T and GM02063 cells and examined their subcellular localization. Inhibition of heme synthesis enhanced the nuclear accumulation of Bach1, whereas treating cells with hemin resulted in nuclear exclusion of Bach1. While the cadmium-inducible nuclear export signal (NES) of Bach1 was dispensable for the heme response, a region containing two of the heme-binding motifs was found to be critical for the heme-induced nuclear exclusion. This region functioned as a heme-regulated NES dependent on the exporter Crm1. These results extend the regulatory roles for heme in protein sorting, and suggest that Bach1 transduces metabolic activity into gene expression.

[PMID: 19897490]
Antioxidants cause stabilization and nuclear translocation of NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), where it binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE) and induces up-regulation of defensive genes that protect cells against oxidative and electrophilic stress. Bach1, the negative regulator of Nrf2, competes with Nrf2 for binding to the ARE in the human NQO1 promoter. In this study, we demonstrate that Bach1 exits the nucleus within 1-2 h upon antioxidant treatment. Genistein, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases, blocked nuclear export of Bach1. Site-directed mutagenesis and immunoprecipitation assays identified tyrosine 486 that was phosphorylated in response to the antioxidant and was essential for nuclear export of Bach1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed a competitive interplay between Bach1 and Nrf2 at 1-2 and 4 h for binding to the human NQO1 ARE. Luciferase and real time PCR assays showed a significant decrease in antioxidant induction of reporter activity and mRNA levels in cells transfected with mutant Bach1 compared with wild type. This decrease was due to the absence of nuclear export of the mutant protein. Bach1 levels inside the nucleus returned to normal at 4 h after antioxidant treatment in the absence but not in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. In addition, antioxidant treatment increased the transcription of Bach1 as shown by pulse chase and real time PCR experiments. Taken together, these results indicate that increased synthesis of Bach1 restored its nuclear levels to normal at 4 h. In conclusion, antioxidant-induced tyrosine 486 phosphorylation leads to nuclear exit of Bach1, thus allowing Nrf2 access to the ARE.

[PMID: 12356737]
Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) protects cells from various insults including oxidative stress. Transcriptional activators, including the Nrf2/Maf heterodimer, have been the focus of studies on the inducible expression of ho-1. Here we show that a heme-binding factor, Bach1, is a critical physiological repressor of ho-1. Bach1 bound to the multiple Maf recognition elements (MAREs) of ho-1 enhancers with MafK in vitro and repressed their activity in vivo, while heme abrogated this repressor function of Bach1 by inhibiting its binding to the ho-1 enhancers. Gene targeting experiments in mice revealed that, in the absence of Bach1, ho-1 became expressed constitutively at high levels in various tissues under normal physiological conditions. By analyzing bach1/nrf2 compound-deficient mice, we documented antagonistic activities of Bach1 and Nrf2 in several tissues. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that small Maf proteins participate in both repression and activation of ho-1. Thus, regulation of ho-1 involves a direct sensing of heme levels by Bach1 (by analogy to lac repressor sensitivity to lactose), generating a simple feedback loop whereby the substrate effects repressor-activator antagonism.