[PMID: 22435548]
The nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling pathway is a busy ground for the action of the ubiquitin-proteasome system; many of the signaling steps are coordinated by protein ubiquitination. The end point of this pathway is to induce transcription, and to this end, there is a need to overcome a major obstacle, a set of inhibitors (IκBs) that bind NF-κB and prohibit either the nuclear entry or the DNA binding of the transcription factor. Two major signaling steps are required for the elimination of the inhibitors: activation of the IκB kinase (IKK) and degradation of the phosphorylated inhibitors. IKK activation and IκB degradation involve different ubiquitination modes; the latter is mediated by a specific E3 ubiquitin ligase SCF(β-TrCP) . The F-box component of this E3, β-TrCP, recognizes the IκB degron formed following phosphorylation by IKK and thus couples IκB phosphorylation to ubiquitination. SCF(β-TrCP) -mediated IκB ubiquitination and degradation is a very efficient process, often resulting in complete degradation of the key inhibitor IκBα within a few minutes of cell stimulation. In vivo ablation of β-TrCP results in accumulation of all the IκBs and complete NF-κB inhibition. As many details of IκB-β-TrCP interaction have been worked out, the development of β-TrCP inhibitors might be a feasible therapeutic approach for NF-κB-associated human disease. However, we may still need to advance our understanding of the mechanism of IκB degradation as well as of the diverse functions of β-TrCP in vivo.

[PMID: 17001349]
Mutational activation of BRAF is a frequent event in human malignant melanomas suggesting that BRAF-dependent signaling is conducive to melanoma cell growth and survival. Previously published work reported that melanoma cells exhibit constitutive anti-apoptotic nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) transcription factor activation triggered by proteolysis of its inhibitor IkappaB. IkappaB degradation is dependent upon its phosphorylation by the IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex and subsequent ubiquitination facilitated by beta-Trcp E3 ubiquitin ligase. Here, we report that melanocytes expressing a conditionally oncogenic form of BRAF(V600E) exhibit enhanced beta-Trcp expression, increased IKK activity and a concomitant increase in the rate of IkappaBalpha degradation. Conversely, inhibition of BRAF signaling using either a broad-spectrum Raf inhibitor (BAY 43-9006) or by selective knock-down of BRAF(V600E) expression by RNA interference in human melanoma cells leads to decreased IKK activity and beta-Trcp expression, stabilization of IkappaB, inhibition of NF-kappaB transcriptional activity and sensitization of these cells to apoptosis. Taken together, these data support a model in which mutational activation of BRAF in human melanomas contributes to constitutive induction of NF-kappaB activity and to increased survival of melanoma cells.

[PMID: 16778892]
Although constitutive activation of beta-catenin/Tcf signalling is implicated in the development of human cancers, the mechanisms by which the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway promotes tumorigenesis are incompletely understood. Messenger RNA turnover has a major function in regulating gene expression and is responsive to developmental and environmental signals. mRNA decay rates are dictated by cis-acting elements within the mRNA and by trans-acting factors, such as RNA-binding proteins (reviewed in refs 2, 3). Here we show that beta-catenin stabilizes the mRNA encoding the F-box protein betaTrCP1, and identify the RNA-binding protein CRD-BP (coding region determinant-binding protein) as a previously unknown target of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription factor. CRD-BP binds to the coding region of betaTrCP1 mRNA. Overexpression of CRD-BP stabilizes betaTrCP1 mRNA and elevates betaTrCP1 levels (both in cells and in vivo), resulting in the activation of the Skp1-Cullin1-F-box protein (SCF)(betaTrCP) E3 ubiquitin ligase and in accelerated turnover of its substrates including IkappaB and beta-catenin. CRD-BP is essential for the induction of both betaTrCP1 and c-Myc by beta-catenin signalling in colorectal cancer cells. High levels of CRD-BP that are found in primary human colorectal tumours exhibiting active beta-catenin/Tcf signalling implicates CRD-BP induction in the upregulation of betaTrCP1, in the activation of dimeric transcription factor NF-kappaB and in the suppression of apoptosis in these cancers.

[PMID: 10837071]
NF-kappaB (nuclear factor-kappaB) is a collective name for inducible dimeric transcription factors composed of members of the Rel family of DNA-binding proteins that recognize a common sequence motif. NF-kappaB is found in essentially all cell types and is involved in activation of an exceptionally large number of genes in response to infections, inflammation, and other stressful situations requiring rapid reprogramming of gene expression. NF-kappaB is normally sequestered in the cytoplasm of nonstimulated cells and consequently must be translocated into the nucleus to function. The subcellular location of NF-kappaB is controlled by a family of inhibitory proteins, IkappaBs, which bind NF-kappaB and mask its nuclear localization signal, thereby preventing nuclear uptake. Exposure of cells to a variety of extracellular stimuli leads to the rapid phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and ultimately proteolytic degradation of IkappaB, which frees NF-kappaB to translocate to the nucleus where it regulates gene transcription. NF-kappaB activation represents a paradigm for controlling the function of a regulatory protein via ubiquitination-dependent proteolysis, as an integral part of a phosphorylationbased signaling cascade. Recently, considerable progress has been made in understanding the details of the signaling pathways that regulate NF-kappaB activity, particularly those responding to the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1. The multisubunit IkappaB kinase (IKK) responsible for inducible IkappaB phosphorylation is the point of convergence for most NF-kappaB-activating stimuli. IKK contains two catalytic subunits, IKKalpha and IKKbeta, both of which are able to correctly phosphorylate IkappaB. Gene knockout studies have shed light on the very different physiological functions of IKKalpha and IKKbeta. After phosphorylation, the IKK phosphoacceptor sites on IkappaB serve as an essential part of a specific recognition site for E3RS(IkappaB/beta-TrCP), an SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase, thereby explaining how IKK controls IkappaB ubiquitination and degradation. A variety of other signaling events, including phosphorylation of NF-kappaB, hyperphosphorylation of IKK, induction of IkappaB synthesis, and the processing of NF-kappaB precursors, provide additional mechanisms that modulate the level and duration of NF-kappaB activity.

[PMID: 20028970]
Clusterin (CLU) is a ubiquitous protein that has been implicated in tumorigenesis, apoptosis, inflammation, and cell proliferation. We and others have previously shown that CLU is an inhibitor of the NF-kappaB pathway. However, the exact form of CLU and the region(s) of CLU involved in this effect were unknown. Using newly generated molecular constructs encoding for CLU and various regions of the molecule, we demonstrated that the presecretory form of CLU (psCLU) form bears the NF-kappaB regulatory activity. Sequence comparison analysis showed sequence motif identity between CLU and beta-transducin repeat-containing protein (beta-TrCP), a main E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in IkappaB-alpha degradation. These homologies were localized in the disulfide constraint region of CLU. We generated a specific molecular construct of this region, named DeltaCLU, and showed that it has the same NF-kappaB regulatory activity as CLU. Neither the alpha-chain nor the beta-chain of CLU had any NF-kappaB regulatory activity. Furthermore, we showed that following tumor necrosis factor-alpha stimulation of transfected cells, we could co-immunoprecipitate phospho-IkappaB-alpha with DeltaCLU. Moreover, we showed that DeltaCLU could localize both in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. These results demonstrate the identification of a new CLU activity site involved in NF-kappaB pathway regulation.