[PMID: 16835897]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), characterized by skin neurofibromas and an excess of café-au-lait spots, is due to mutations in the neurofibromin (NF1) gene. Identifying the genetic defect in individuals with the disease represents a significant challenge because the gene is extremely large with a high incidence of sporadic mutations across the entire gene ranging from single nucleotide substitutes to large deletions. In the present study, we have used a combination of techniques (heteroduplex analysis, sequencing, loss of heterozygosity and quantification of gene dosage) to define the genetic defect in 68 individuals from a cohort of 107 NF1 Taiwanese patients of Chinese origin. Fifty-eight were initially identified using heteroduplex analytical techniques and confirmed by sequence analysis. A further five were identified by direct sequence analysis alone. The reminders were shown to carry large deletions in the NF1 gene by demonstrating loss of heterozygosity that was confirmed by gene dosage measurements using quantitative-PCR techniques. Mis-sense, non-sense, frame-shift or splice-site mutations were identified across the entire gene of which the majority (45/68) were novel in nature. The detection rate with the various analytical techniques and the types of mutation detected are consistent with published data involving both individuals and large cohort studies from other ethnic backgrounds.

[PMID: 16323217]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common tumor predisposition syndrome affecting approximately 1 in 4,000 persons. It is an autosomal-dominant disorder with half of the cases resulting from spontaneous mutations. This genetic defect leads to the formation of benign tumors or neurofibromas of the peripheral nervous system. Dermal neurofibromas may cause local discomfort and itching but are rarely associated with neurological deficit and do not undergo malignant change. The more extensive plexiform neurofibromas produce neurological complications in 27%-43% of patients with NF1 and may undergo malignant degeneration in 5% of cases. Patients with NF1 who develop pain or new neurological symptoms should have a rapid and thorough assessment for malignancy. In this report, we illustrate this point by presenting a patient who developed acute shoulder pain and weakness due to malignant degeneration of a plexiform neurofibroma involving the left brachial plexus, and review the literature on this subject.

[PMID: 21567923]
Neurofibromatosis type 1 and Noonan syndrome are both common genetic disorders with autosomal dominant inheritance. Similarities between neurofibromatosis type 1 and Noonan syndrome have been noted for over 20 years and patients who share symptoms of both conditions are often given the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome (NFNS). The molecular basis of these combined phenotypes was poorly understood and controversially discussed over several decades until the discovery that the syndromes are related through disturbances of the Ras pathway. We present an infant male with coarse facial features, severe supravalvar pulmonic stenosis, automated atrial tachycardia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, airway compression, severe neurological involvement, and multiple complications that lead to death during early infancy. The severity of clinical presentation and significant dysmorphic features suggested the possibility of a double genetic disorder in the Ras pathway instead of NFNS. Molecular analysis showed a missense mutation in exon 25 of the NF1 gene (4288A>G, p.N1430D) and a pathogenic mutation on exon 8 (922A>G, p.N308D) of the PTPN11 gene. Cardiovascular disease has been well described in patients with Noonan syndrome with PTPN11 mutations but the role of haploinsufficiency for neurofibromin in the heart development and function is not yet well understood. Our case suggests that a double genetic defect resulting in the hypersignaling of the Ras pathway may lead to complex cardiovascular abnormalities, cardiomyopathy, refractory arrhythmia, severe neurological phenotype, and early death.

[PMID: 14722917]
One of the main features of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is benign neurofibromas, 10-20% of which become transformed into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). The molecular basis of NF1 tumorigenesis is, however, still unclear. Ninety-one tumors from 31 NF1 patients were screened for gross changes in the NF1 gene using microsatellite/restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) markers; loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was found in 17 out of 91 (19%) tumors (including two out of seven MPNSTs). Denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) was then used to screen 43 LOH-negative and 10 LOH-positive tumors for NF1 microlesions at both RNA and DNA levels. Thirteen germline and 12 somatic mutations were identified, of which three germline (IVS7-2A>G, 3731delT, 6117delG) and eight somatic (1888delG, 4374-4375delCC, R2129S, 2088delG, 2341del18, IVS27b-5C>T, 4083insT, Q519P) were novel. A mosaic mutation (R2429X) was also identified in a neurofibroma by DHPLC analysis and cloning/sequencing. The observed somatic and germline mutational spectra were similar in terms of mutation type, relative frequency of occurrence, and putative underlying mechanisms of mutagenesis. Tumors lacking mutations were screened for NF1 gene promoter hypermethylation but none were found. Microsatellite instability (MSI) analysis revealed MSI in five out of 11 MPNSTs as compared to none out of 70 neurofibromas (p=1.8 x 10(-5)). The screening of seven MPNSTs for subtle mutations in the CDKN2A and TP53 genes proved negative, although the screening of 11 MPNSTs detected LOH involving either the TP53 or the CDKN2A gene in a total of four tumors. These findings are consistent with the view that NF1 tumorigenesis is a complex multistep process involving a variety of different types of genetic defect at multiple loci.

[PMID: 2129297]
The locus for the gene causing neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) was bracketed to a region on the long arm of chromosome 17 by means of genetic linkage analysis. When the limits of resolution for genetic mapping were reached physical mapping methods were used to map the NF1 gene precisely, with reference to translocation breakpoints in NF1 affected individuals who harboured constitutional chromosomal translocations on chromosome 17. The region of DNA located between two translocation breakpoints has been cloned and a DNA sequence encoding a 11-13 kb mRNA identified. That this sequence shows deletions and point mutations in NF1 affected individuals and not in normal controls provides strong evidence that it is indeed the NF1 gene. The genetic defect in NF2 has been mapped to chromosome 22 by studies of chromosomal loss in tumours associated with this disease. Subsequent linkage analysis of NF2 pedigrees has confirmed this location. DNA markers that bracket the NF2 locus to a region of 5-10 Mb have been identified.