[PMID: 30318934]
Arecoline has biomedical importance, but it has untoward side effects on endocrine functions. The aim is to investigate its role on adrenal activity under thermal stress by ultrastructural and hormonal parameters in mice. Cold (4 °C) or heat (37 °C) stress, or arecoline (10 mg/kg body wt), each for 7 days in cold or heat stress stimulated adrenocortical activity ultrastructurally with an elevation of corticosterone level. Adrenomedullary activity was suppressed in cold stress with depletion of catecholamine levels. In heat stress, adrenomedullary activity was stimulated ultrastructurally with an elevation of catecholamine levels. Arecoline treatment alone, or in cold or heat stress suppressed adrenomedullary activity, judged by ultrastructural and hormonal parameters. Arecoline treatment caused hypoglycemia with an elevation of glycogen level, but cold or heat stress, or arecoline treatment in thermal stress caused hyperglycemia, with a fall in glycogen profile. Thus, arecoline in thermal stress plays a dual role on adrenal function and glucose-glycogen homeostasis in mice.

[PMID: 32347034]
As a consequence of global warming, the increase in the average annual temperature is observed, while the living organisms actively adapt to these changes. High environmental temperature initiates numerous physiological, autonomic, and behavioral responses, and activates the stress response. Thus, the aim of the study was to investigate effect of a moderate increase in ambient temperature on the activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis by determining histological changes in adrenal glands and hormonal levels in adult male rats. In this experimental study, the morpho-functional state of adrenal glands was estimated by stereological evaluation of parameters, including the adrenal volume, adrenocortical cell/nuclear size and number, and the volume density of vascular tissues after four days of exposure to a moderate increase in ambient temperature of 35 ± 1˚C. Novelli histochemical and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) immunohistochemical staining provided insight into the adrenal gland vascular network. Additionally, the adrenal levels of aldosterone, corticosterone, and pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) were determined as crucial indicators of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenocortical (HPA) axis activity. Prolonged exposure to a moderate increase in ambient temperature for four days resulted in a significant increase in ACTH level up to 24%, which altered adrenal glands both structurally and functionally. The adrenocortical volume and number of cells in all cortical zones were markedly increased (P<0.05). A statistically significant increase was shown in the level of aldosterone (16%) and corticosterone (25%) in serum levels of individuals. Increased activity of the HPA axis reflects the response to a moderate increase in ambient temperature during four days, showing the capacity of the HPA axis to adapt the organism to daily temperature changes.

[PMID: 31953122]
Following a stressful event, the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis mediates the release of the stress hormone cortisol (corticosterone in rodents; CORT). Elevated CORT binds to glucocorticoid receptors to mediate physiological responses including facilitating memory formation. Previous work from our laboratory demonstrated that male rats exposed to chronic stress demonstrate enhanced contextual fear memories and sensitized CORT responses to subsequent stress exposure; however, this is unknown in female rats. The experiments here tested whether chronic stress enhances fear memory formation in female rats and whether the sensitized CORT response in chronic stress rats contributes to their enhanced fear memory. Studies first examined CORT responses to contextual fear conditioning in male and female rats and examined whether chronic stress enhanced the formation of contextual fear memories 24 h later. Studies then used metyrapone, a CORT synthesis inhibitor, to investigate whether blockade of plasma CORT would eliminate the chronic stress-induced enhancement in contextual fear memory. Results show that female rats have greater CORT responses than males, and chronic stress sensitizes the CORT response to fear conditioning in both sexes. However, female rats do not show enhanced contextual fear memory following chronic stress. Chronically stressed male rats show greater memory acquisition and show greater contextual fear memory 24 h later following fear conditioning. Metyrapone dampens contextual fear memory in all rats but does not eliminate the enhancement in freezing behavior in chronic stress rats. Collectively, these studies indicate sensitized CORT responses in chronically stressed rats is likely not the mechanism by which chronic stress facilitates memory formation.

[PMID: 32047871]
In full-term elective caesarian sections, fetal flow of adrenal substrate steroids to products differs by sex, with males (M) in molar equilibrium whereas females (F) add net molarity and synthesize more cortisol. Using the same sampling design, paired, full-term, arterial, and venous umbilical cord samples and intrapartum chart records were obtained at the time of vaginal delivery (N = 167, 85 male) or emergency C-section (N = 38, 22 male). Eight steroids were quantified by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (adrenal glucocorticoids [cortisol, corticosterone], sequential cortisol precursor steroids [17-hydroxyprogesterone, 11-deoxycortisol], cortisol and corticosterone metabolites [cortisone and 11-dehydrocorticosterone], and gonadal steroids [androstenedione, testosterone]). Fetal sex was not significant in any analytic models. Going through both phase 1 and phase 2 labor increased fetal adrenal steroidogenesis and decreased male testosterone relative to emergency C-sections that do not reach stage 2 of labor (ie, head compressions) and elective C-sections with no labor. Sum adrenal steroid molarity arriving in venous serum was almost double the equivalent metric for deliveries without labor. No effects of operative vaginal delivery were noted. Maternal regional anesthetic suppressed venous concentrations, and fetal synthesis replaced that steroid. Approximate molar equivalence between substrate pool depletion and net glucocorticoid synthesis was seen. Paired venous and arterial umbilical cord serum has the potential to identify sex differences that underlie antenatal programming of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in later life. However, stage 2 labor before the collection of serum, and regional anesthetic for the mother, mask those sex differences.

[PMID: 31972205]
Higher levels of glucocorticoids (GCs), and impaired regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may cause or exacerbate the occurrence of metabolic and psychiatric disorders. It has been reported that ginseng saponin extract (GSE) has an inhibitory effect on the hyperactivity of the HPA axis induced by stresses and increased corticosterone level induced by intraperitoneal injection of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) in mice. However, the molecular mechanisms by which GSE and its active ginsenosides inhibit corticosterone secretion remain elusive. Y1 mouse adrenocortical cells were treated with ACTH for up to 60 min to establish a cell model of corticosterone secretion. After treatment with different concentrations of GSE or ginsenoside monomers for 24 h prior to the addition of ACTH, analyses of cAMP content, PKA activity, and the levels of steroidogenesis regulators, melanocortin-2 receptor (MC2R), and melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein (MRAP) in ACTH-induced Y1 cells were performed. We demonstrated that GSE inhibits ACTH-stimulated corticosterone production in Y1 cells by inhibiting factors critical for steroid synthesis. Ginsenoside Rd, an active ingredient of GSE, inhibits corticosterone secretion in the cells and impedes ACTH-induced corticosterone biosynthesis through down-regulation of proteins in the cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathway. In addition, Western blot and qPCR analyses showed that ginsenoside Rd attenuated the induction of MC2R and MRAP by ACTH. Our findings indicate that ginsenoside Rd inhibits ACTH-induced corticosterone production through blockading the MC2R-cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway in adrenocortical cells. Overall, this mechanism may represent an important therapeutic option for the treatment of stress-related disorders, further supporting the pharmacological benefits of ginseng.