[PMID: 28650254]
In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), it is of major importance to identify non-responders to tumour necrosis factor-α inhibitors (TNFi) before starting treatment, to prevent a delay in effective treatment. We developed a protein score for the response to TNFi treatment in RA and investigated its predictive value. In RA patients eligible for biological treatment included in the BiOCURA registry, 53 inflammatory proteins were measured using xMAP® technology. A supervised cluster analysis method, partial least squares (PLS), was used to select the best combination of proteins. Using logistic regression, a predictive model containing readily available clinical parameters was developed and the potential of this model with and without the protein score to predict European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) response was assessed using the area under the receiving operating characteristics curve (AUC-ROC) and the net reclassification index (NRI). For the development step (n = 65 patient), PLS revealed 12 important proteins: CCL3 (macrophage inflammatory protein, MIP1a), CCL17 (thymus and activation-regulated chemokine), CCL19 (MIP3b), CCL22 (macrophage-derived chemokine), interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-6, IL-7, IL-15, soluble cluster of differentiation 14 (sCD14), sCD74 (macrophage migration inhibitory factor), soluble IL-1 receptor I, and soluble tumour necrosis factor receptor II. The protein score scarcely improved the AUC-ROC (0.72 to 0.77) and the ability to improve classification and reclassification (NRI = 0.05). In validation (n = 185), the model including protein score did not improve the AUC-ROC (0.71 to 0.67) or the reclassification (NRI = -0.11). No proteomic predictors were identified that were more suitable than clinical parameters in distinguishing TNFi non-responders from responders before the start of treatment. As the results of previous studies and this study are disparate, we currently have no proteomic predictors for the response to TNFi.

[PMID: 27631111]
In clinical practice, approximately one-third of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) respond insufficiently to TNF-α inhibitors (TNFis). The aim of the study was to explore the use of a metabolomics to identify predictors for the outcome of TNFi therapy, and study the metabolomic fingerprint in active RA irrespective of patients' response. In the metabolomic profiling, lipids, oxylipins, and amines were measured in serum samples of RA patients from the observational BiOCURA cohort, before start of biological treatment. Multivariable logistic regression models were established to identify predictors for good- and non-response in patients receiving TNFi (n = 124). The added value of metabolites over prediction using clinical parameters only was determined by comparing the area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC), sensitivity, specificity, positive- and negative predictive value and by the net reclassification index (NRI). The models were further validated by 10-fold cross validation and tested on the complete TNFi treatment cohort including moderate responders. Additionally, metabolites were identified that cross-sectionally associated with the RA disease activity score based on a 28-joint count (DAS28), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP). Out of 139 metabolites, the best-performing predictors were sn1-LPC(18:3-ω3/ω6), sn1-LPC(15:0), ethanolamine, and lysine. The model that combined the selected metabolites with clinical parameters showed a significant larger AUC-ROC than that of the model containing only clinical parameters (p = 0.01). The combined model was able to discriminate good- and non-responders with good accuracy and to reclassify non-responders with an improvement of 30% (total NRI = 0.23) and showed a prediction error of 0.27. For the complete TNFi cohort, the NRI was 0.22. In addition, 88 metabolites were associated with DAS28, ESR or CRP (p<0.05). Our study established an accurate prediction model for response to TNFi therapy, containing metabolites and clinical parameters. Associations between metabolites and disease activity may help elucidate additional pathologic mechanisms behind RA.

[PMID: 29808722]
Several studies have employed microarray-based profiling to predict response to tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors (TNFi) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA); yet efforts to validate these targets have failed to show predictive abilities acceptable for clinical practice. The eighty most extreme responders and nonresponders to TNFi therapy were selected from the observational BiOCURA cohort. RNA sequencing was performed on mRNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collected before initiation of treatment. The expression of pathways as well as individual gene transcripts between responders and nonresponders was investigated. Promising targets were technically replicated and validated in n = 40 new patients using qPCR assays. Before therapy initiation, nonresponders had lower expression of pathways related to interferon and cytokine signaling, while also showing higher levels of two genes, GPR15 and SEMA6B (p = 0.02). The two targets could be validated, however, additional analyses revealed that GPR15 and SEMA6B did not independently predict response, but were rather dose-dependent markers of smoking (p < 0.0001). The study did not identify new transcripts ready to use in clinical practice, yet GPR15 and SEMA6B were recognized as candidate explanatory markers for the reduced treatment success in RA smokers.

[PMID: 27558398]
In rheumatoid arthritis, prediction of response to TNF-alpha inhibitor (TNFi) treatment would be of clinical value. This study aims to discover miRNAs that predict response and aims to replicate results of two previous studies addressing this topic. From the observational BiOCURA cohort, 40 adalimumab- (ADA) and 40 etanercept- (ETN) treated patients were selected to enter the discovery cohort and baseline serum profiling on 758 miRNAs was performed. The added value of univariately selected miRNAs (p < 0.05) over clinical parameters in prediction of response was determined by means of the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC). Validation was performed by TaqMan single qPCR assays in 40 new patients. Expression of miR-99a and miR-143 predicted response to ADA, and miR-23a and miR-197 predicted response to ETN. The addition of miRNAs increased the AUC-ROC of a model containing only clinical parameters for ADA (0.75 to 0.97) and ETN (0.68 to 0.78). In validation, none of the selected miRNAs significantly predicted response. miR-23a was the only overlapping miRNA compared to the two previous studies, however inversely related with response in one of these studies. The reasons for the inability to replicate previously proposed miRNAs predicting response to TNFi and replicate those from the discovery cohort were investigated and discussed. To date, no miRNA consistently predicting response to TNFi therapy in RA has been identified. Future studies on this topic should meet a minimum of standards in design that are addressed in this study, in order to increase the reproducibility.

[PMID: 27749223]
Despite the success of TNF-alpha inhibitor (TNFi) treatment in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a substantial number of patients necessitate discontinuation. Prediction thereof would be clinically relevant and guide the decision whether to start TNFi treatment. Data were used from the observational BiOCURA cohort, in which patients initiating biological treatment were enrolled and followed up for one year. In the model development cohort (n=192), a model predicting TNFi discontinuation was built using Cox-regression with backward selection (p<0.05). The parameters of the model were tested again in a model refinement cohort (n=60), for significance (p<0.05) and consistency of effect. In addition, we performed a systematic review to put our study results into perspective. Of the 252 patients who initiated TNFi treatment, 103 (41%) had to discontinue treatment. Discontinuation was predicted at baseline by female gender, current smoking, high visual analogue scale of general health, and higher number of previously used biological disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (bDMARDs). At refinement, smoking status and number of previously used bDMARDs remained with re-estimated hazard ratios (HRs) in the total cohort of 1.74 (95%-CI 1.15-2.63, p<0.01) and 1.40 (95%-CI 1.1-1.68, p<0.01), respectively. Using these two predictors, we developed a simple score predicting discontinuation (PPV=72.3%). From literature, predictors were pack years of smoking, number of previously used bDMARDs, lack of any concomitant DMARD therapy and in particular lack of concomitant methotrexate (MTX). TNFi discontinuation is predicted by current smoking and number of previously used bDMARDs, as well as by pack years of smoking and lack of any concomitant DMARD/MTX therapy.