[PMID: 34657891]
According to the FDA, aducanumab (Aduhelm), the recently approved anti-Alzheimer drug, reduces the level of cerebral amyloid plaques-a hallmark finding in patients with Alzheimer's disease-and this will result in a reduction in clinical decline. The authors of this article are not convinced that amyloid deposits are a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease and are of the opinion that the apparent reduction in amyloid accumulation following aducanumab treatment is likely instead a result of continued and advanced cerebral cell death and, thus, not a sign of improvement but of an even more advanced disease.

[PMID: 34217830]
On June 7th 2021, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted approval for Aduhelm (aducanumab) for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease under its accelerated approval program. Aducanumab is the first putative disease-modifying therapy (DMT) approved for the treatment of AD with a great potential for clinical benefit over current symptomatic therapies. The scientific community has been largely confounded by this historical decision since this has been based on the reduction of a surrogate marker (amyloid beta) and not on data showing clinical efficacy. Here we provide a regulatory perspective on the topic and discuss potential similarities and differences between the FDA's and EMA's evaluative processes.

[PMID: 34324167]
Aducanumab (aducanumab-avwa; Aduhelm™) is a human, immunoglobulin gamma 1 (IgG1) monoclonal antibody directed against aggregated soluble and insoluble forms of amyloid β. It has been co-developed by Biogen and Eisai under license from Neurimmune for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. In June 2021, aducanumab received its first approval in the USA for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. According to the US FDA prescribing information, treatment should be initiated in patients with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia stage of disease, the population in which treatment was initiated in clinical trials. There are no safety or effectiveness data on initiating treatment at earlier or later stages of the disease than were studied. Aducanumab is under regulatory review in Japan and in Europe. Its long-term safety and tolerability is being evaluated in a multinational phase 3b clinical study in patients with early Alzheimer's disease (mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease). This article summarizes the milestones in the development of aducanumab leading to this first approval for Alzheimer's disease.

[PMID: 34554982]
Aducanumab (Aduhelm), the first new drug to treat Alzheimer's disease since 2003, has received accelerated approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).This drug's approval has been highly contentious in the medical and scientific community owing to contradictory study findings and the FDA's advisory panel not recommending its approval.

[PMID: 34585212]
Aducanumab has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Clinicians require guidance on the appropriate use of this new therapy. An Expert Panel was assembled to construct Appropriate Use Recommendations based on the participant populations, conduct of the pivotal trials of aducanumab, updated Prescribing Information, and expert consensus. Aducanumab is an amyloid-targeting monoclonal antibody delivered by monthly intravenous infusions. The pivotal trials included patients with early AD (mild cognitive impairment due to AD and mild AD dementia) who had confirmed brain amyloid using amyloid positron tomography. The Expert Panel recommends that use of aducanumab be restricted to this population in which efficacy and safety have been studied. Aducanumab is titrated to a dose of 10 mg/kg over a 6-month period. The Expert Panel recommends that the aducanumab be titrated to the highest dose to maximize the opportunity for efficacy. Aducanumab can substantially increase the incidence of amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) with brain effusion or hemorrhage. Dose interruption or treatment discontinuation is recommended for symptomatic ARIA and for moderate-severe ARIA. The Expert Panel recommends MRIs prior to initiating therapy, during the titration of the drug, and at any time the patient has symptoms suggestive of ARIA. Recommendations are made for measures less cumbersome than those used in trials for the assessment of effectiveness in the practice setting. The Expert Panel emphasized the critical importance of engaging in a process of patient-centered informed decision-making that includes comprehensive discussions and clear communication with the patient and care partner regarding the requirements for therapy, the expected outcome of therapy, potential risks and side effects, and the required safety monitoring, as well as uncertainties regarding individual responses and benefits.