[PMID: 26131212]
The present study aims to investigate the correlation of polymorphisms of SLCO1B1 gene with the toxicity during therapy with the high-dose methotrexate (MTX) chemotherapy in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We analyzed 2 polymorphisms (rs4149081 and rs11045897) in SLCO1B1 gene in 280 Chinese pediatric B-ALL patients, using MTX plasma concentration as an objective and quantifiable marker of toxicity. We utilized Enzyme-multiplied immunoassay technique (EMIT) to measure the plasma concentration of MTX. The polymerase chain reaction-allele specific (PCR-AS) method was utilized to perform the genotyping. We found there was a statistically significant association between MTX plasma concentration and the SLCO1B1 rs11045879 CC genotype (P<0.05). We also found the rs4149081 AA genotype was associated with high-MTX plasma concentrations. A-C haplotype carriers have a higher risk for MTX delayed clearance but G-T haplotype was associated with a lower risk for MTX delayed clearance. The rs4149081 AA genotype and the rs11045897 CC genotype could be indicators for high-MTX plasma concentrations in children with ALL.

[PMID: 27595674]
Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) may be at increased risk for statin-associated muscle symptoms because they require long-term treatment with high-intensity statin therapy. We sought to determine (1) whether other predisposing factors, including the well-known genetic variant associated with statin-associated muscle symptoms-solute carrier organic anion transporter family, member 1B1 (SLCO1B1) rs4149056-also increase the risk of statin-associated muscle symptoms in FH patients, and (2) the natural history and management for FH patients with statin-associated muscle symptoms. We queried electronic records (2004-2014) of 278 genetically screened FH patients (113 men, 165 women; mean [SD] pretreatment low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL-C] 259 [72] mg/dL) recruited from lipid clinics in the Dallas, TX, area from 2004 to 2014. Statin-associated muscle symptoms were defined as muscle symptoms arising while taking a statin and interrupting therapy. The risk of muscle symptoms was associated with age (odds ratio 1.6 [95% CI 1.2-2.2]), body mass index in non-African Americans (0.90 [0.83-0.97]), and hypertension (0.4 [0.2-0.9]). Simvastatin was the most commonly used statin, and it was the statin most associated with muscle symptoms. Among FH patients with muscle symptoms, 41% (n = 40) reestablished statin therapy ("eventually tolerant") and 29% (n = 28) never reestablished statin therapy ("never tolerant"). Rosuvastatin (43%) and pravastatin (30%) were the most common eventually tolerated statins, and eventually tolerant patients achieved lower treated LDL-C levels (eventually tolerant 127 vs never tolerant 192 mg/dL, P < .001). Never tolerant patients also developed muscle symptoms on nonstatins (16% vs 50%, P = .003). SLCO1B1 rs4149056 genotyping revealed 224 wild-type patients (TT) and 49 heterozygotes (TC). SLCO1B1 genotype was not associated with the risk of statin-associated muscle symptoms (odds ratio 1.40 [95% CI 0.74-2.64]). Age, not SLCO1B1 rs4149056 genotype, was the strongest risk factor for statin-associated muscle symptoms in FH patients. After developing muscle symptoms, many patients reestablished statin therapy and achieved significant LDL-C reductions. Overall, 10% of all FH patients had statin-associated muscle symptoms and never reestablished statin therapy. Such patients developed muscle symptoms even on nonstatin lipid-lowering drugs and continued to have elevations in LDL-C. Further insight is needed into the relationship between FH and statin-associated muscle symptoms so all FH patients can be adequately treated.

[PMID: 25181036]
Personalized medicine is an emerging field with a goal of applying genomic information as a predictor of disease risk as well as individualization of drug therapy. For optimization of drug therapy, significant progress has been made in the past decade in linking genetic variation in genes associated with drug disposition to prediction of drug response and adverse reactions. For most drugs in clinical use, the interplay of many factors, including genetics, demographics, drug-drug interactions, disease states and the environment, result in the interindividual variability observed during drug therapy. Broadly speaking, such determinants of drug response are mediated through modulation of drug concentrations reflective of pharmacokinetic factors, as well as drug targets, often referred to as pharmacodynamics. It is clear that for personalized medicine to become clinically meaningful, genomic as well as clinical and environmental influences must be considered together. We show, for a number of drugs in clinical use, that genomics-guided treatment options not only are becoming feasible but are also on the cusp of showing superiority in terms of clinical outcomes as well as cost-benefit. One of the most widely studied drugs with regard to genomics-guided dosing options is the oral anticoagulant, warfarin. Genetic polymorphisms in the gene encoding cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) and those in the target gene responsible for the warfarin anticoagulant effect, vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKORC1), account for much of the variability in the warfarin maintenance dose; however, routine genotyping in warfarin therapy remains controversial. We will outline the importance of understanding all of the variables that mediate warfarin response as the prerequisite to successful utilization of genotype-guided warfarin therapy. Similarly, HMG Co-A reductase inhibitors, commonly known as statins, also display wide interindividual variability in plasma concentration, response and toxicity due in part to polymorphisms in transporter genes, including SLCO1B1 and ABCG2. Genetic factors are also important considerations in treatment with other therapeutic agents discussed, including clopidogrel and tamoxifen. Implementation of personalized medicine-based treatment options for these and other drugs, the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of which are impacted by functional genetic variations, will require overcoming a number of challenges, including cost, turnaround time, and demonstration of clinical benefit, as well as better training of health care professionals about genomics in general, and pharmacogenomics in particular.

[PMID: 25150868]
This chapter provides a review of the pharmacogenetics of membrane transporters, including ABC transporters and OATPs. Membrane transporters are heavily involved in drug disposition, by actively transporting substrate drugs between organs and tissues. As such, polymorphisms in the genes encoding these proteins may have a significant effect on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and activity of compounds. Although few drug transporter polymorphisms have transitioned from the bench to the bedside, this chapter discusses clinical development of transporter pharmacogenetic markers. Finally, development of SLCO1B1 genotyping to avoid statin induced adverse drug reactions is discussed as a model case for transporter pharmacogenetics clinical development.

[PMID: 25563221]
Statin adherence is often limited by side effects. The SLCO1B1*5 variant is a risk factor for statin side effects and exhibits statin-specific effects: highest with simvastatin/atorvastatin and lowest with pravastatin/rosuvastatin. The effects of SLCO1B1*5 genotype guided statin therapy (GGST) are unknown. Primary care patients (n = 58) who were nonadherent to statins and their providers received SLCO1B1*5 genotyping and guided recommendations via the electronic medical record (EMR). The primary outcome was the change in Beliefs about Medications Questionnaire, which measured patients' perceived needs for statins and concerns about adverse effects, measured before and after SLCO1B1*5 results. Concurrent controls (n = 59) were identified through the EMR to compare secondary outcomes: new statin prescriptions, statin utilization, and change in LDL-cholesterol (LDL-c). GGST patients had trends (p = 0.2) towards improved statin necessity and concerns. The largest changes were the "need for statin to prevent sickness" (p < 0.001) and "concern for statin to disrupt life" (p = 0.006). GGST patients had more statin prescriptions (p < 0.001), higher statin use (p < 0.001), and greater decrease in LDL-c (p = 0.059) during follow-up. EMR delivery of SLCO1B1*5 results and recommendations is feasible in the primary care setting. This novel intervention may improve patients' perceptions of statins and physician behaviors that promote higher statin adherence and lower LDL-c.