[PMID: 33193411]
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants can lead to dramatic reductions in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reservoirs. This effect is partially mediated by donor T cells recognizing lymphocyte-expressed minor histocompatibility antigens (mHAgs). The potential to mark malignant and latently infected cells for destruction makes mHAgs attractive targets for cellular immunotherapies. However, testing such HIV reservoir reduction strategies will likely require preclinical studies in non-human primates (NHPs). In this study, we used a combination of alloimmunization, whole exome sequencing, and bioinformatics to identify an mHAg in Mauritian cynomolgus macaques (MCMs). We mapped the minimal optimal epitope to a 10-mer peptide (SW10) in apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3C (APOBEC3C) and determined the major histocompatibility complex class I restriction element as Mafa-A1<sup>∗</sup>063, which is expressed in almost 90% of MCMs. APOBEC3C SW10-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells recognized immortalized B cells but not fibroblasts from an mHAg-positive MCM. These results provide a framework for identifying mHAgs in a non-transplant setting and suggest that APOBEC3C SW10 could be used as a model antigen to test mHAg-targeted therapies in NHPs.

[PMID: 30431097]
Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-associated mortality worldwide. Cytotoxin‑associated gene A (CagA) has been reported to be associated with gastric diseases. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 1 (Tet1) are important tumor‑suppressor genes. The present study aimed to investigate the underlying functions of CagA in human gastric cancer, and to explore the associations between CagA, PTEN and Tet1 in gastric cancer. For that purpose, CagA overexpression and Tet1 interference recombinant lentiviral plasmids were constructed. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was utilized to screen gene expression in HGC‑27 human gastric cancer cells overexpressing CagA. qPCR and western blotting were used to detect gene and protein expression, respectively. In addition, the methylation status of PTEN was detected by methylation‑specific PCR. The expression levels of PTEN, Tet1, apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic subunit (APOBEC)3A, APOBEC3C and APOBEC3F were significantly decreased in the CagA overexpression group compared with in the negative control group in HGC‑27 cells. Compared with in the negative control group, the mRNA and protein expression levels of PTEN were markedly decreased in cells with Tet1 interference. The decreased expression of PTEN was associated with increased methylation levels in the cells. In addition, the protein expression levels of PTEN were significantly decreased in HGC‑27 cells when CagA was overexpressed. The expression levels of PTEN and Tet1 were also markedly decreased in CagA+ gastric cancer tissues compared with in non‑cancerous tissues. The decreased expression of PTEN in CagA+ gastric cancer tissues was associated with increased methylation levels. In conclusion, overexpression of CagA significantly decreased the expression of PTEN, Tet1, APOBEC3A, APOBEC3C and APOBEC3F in human gastric cancer. In addition, CagA increased DNA methylation and decreased PTEN expression, which was reversed by Tet1 overexpression. The present study may facilitate future therapeutic approaches targeting human gastric cancer.

[PMID: 31664825]
The artemisinin class of anticancer compounds is well known for oxidative DNA-damage-mediated growth arrest, followed by cell death. However, the nature of this genotoxic stress for cancer therapeutics remains elusive. Here we show that artesunate (Art), a water-soluble artemisinin analog, triggers inducible anticancer responses directly implicated in the DNA-damage-intended therapy. We observed that the level of the antiviral enzyme APOBEC3C (apolipoprotein-B mRNA-editing catalytic polypeptide-like 3C (A3C)) preferentially increased upon the treatment with Art against tumor xenografts of p53-deficient H1299 cells. Using gain-of-function experiments, A3C could improve the therapeutic efficacy of Art, as determined by cell proliferation and colony formation assays. Furthermore, elevated A3C provoked a minor accumulation of γH2AX foci and the phosphorylation of RPA32 and Chk1, which strongly sensitized H1299 cells to Art. The employment of A3C also caused an increase in the synergistic interaction between Art and Chk1 inhibition. Besides, A3C overexpression delayed the cell cycle at the S phase, accompanied by attenuated G2/M arrest in the presence of Art. The enzymatic inactivation of A3C by the mutation of zinc-coordinating residues (C97S and C100S) indicated that A3C sensitized Art in a deaminase-dependent manner. Furthermore, we showed that using small interfering RNA against A3C can induce the chemoresistance of Art. These studies combine to suggest that upregulated A3C is involved in the Art-induced DNA damage response as a consequent event to improve the overall cytotoxic responses of Art.

[PMID: 31519749]
Insect-borne flaviviruses produce a 300-500-base long noncoding RNA, termed subgenomic flavivirus RNA (sfRNA), by stalling the cellular 5'-3'-exoribonuclease 1 (XRN1) via structures located in their 3' UTRs. In this study, we demonstrate that sfRNA production by Zika virus represses XRN1 analogous to what we have previously shown for other flaviviruses. Using protein-RNA reconstitution and a stringent RNA pulldown assay with human choriocarcinoma (JAR) cells, we demonstrate that the sfRNAs from both dengue type 2 and Zika viruses interact with a common set of 21 RNA-binding proteins that contribute to the regulation of post-transcriptional processes in the cell, including splicing, RNA stability, and translation. We found that four of these sfRNA-interacting host proteins, DEAD-box helicase 6 (DDX6) and enhancer of mRNA decapping 3 (EDC3) (two RNA decay factors), phosphorylated adaptor for RNA export (a regulator of the biogenesis of the splicing machinery), and apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic subunit 3C (APOBEC3C, a nucleic acid-editing deaminase), inherently restrict Zika virus infection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the regulations of cellular mRNA decay and RNA splicing are compromised by Zika virus infection as well as by sfRNA alone. Collectively, these results reveal the large extent to which Zika virus-derived sfRNAs interact with cellular RNA-binding proteins and highlight the potential for widespread dysregulation of post-transcriptional control that likely limits the effective response of these cells to viral infection.

[PMID: 32345636]
Humans encode proteins, called restriction factors, that inhibit replication of viruses such as HIV-1. The members of one family of antiviral proteins, <i>apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3</i> (APOBEC3; shortened here to A3), act by deaminating cytidines to uridines during the reverse transcription reaction of HIV-1. The <i>A3</i> locus encodes seven genes, named <i>A3A</i> to <i>A3H</i> These genes have either one or two cytidine deaminase domains, and several of these A3s potently restrict HIV-1. A3C, which has only a single cytidine deaminase domain, however, inhibits HIV-1 only very weakly. We tested novel double domain protein combinations by genetically linking two <i>A3C</i> genes to make a synthetic tandem domain protein. This protein created a "super restriction factor" that had more potent antiviral activity than the native A3C protein, which correlated with increased packaging into virions. Furthermore, disabling one of the active sites of the synthetic tandem domain protein resulted in an even greater increase in the antiviral activity-recapitulating a similar evolution seen in A3F and A3G (double domain A3s that use only a single catalytically active deaminase domain). These A3C tandem domain proteins do not have an increase in mutational activity but instead inhibit formation of reverse transcription products, which correlates with their ability to form large higher-order complexes in cells. Finally, the A3C-A3C super restriction factor largely escaped antagonism by the HIV-1 viral protein Vif.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> As a part of the innate immune system, humans encode proteins that inhibit viruses such as HIV-1. These broadly acting antiviral proteins do not protect humans from viral infections because viruses encode proteins that antagonize the host antiviral proteins to evade the innate immune system. One such example of a host antiviral protein is APOBEC3C (A3C), which weakly inhibits HIV-1. Here, we show that we can improve the antiviral activity of A3C by duplicating the DNA sequence to create a synthetic tandem domain and, furthermore, that the proteins thus generated are relatively resistant to the viral antagonist Vif. Together, these data give insights about how nature has evolved a defense against viral pathogens such as HIV.