[PMID: 16093702]
Retrons are distinct DNA sequences that code for a reverse transcriptase (RT) similar to the RTs produced by retroviruses and other types of retroelements. Retron DNAs are commonly associated with prophage DNA and are found in the genomes of a wide variety of different bacteria. The retron RT is used to synthesize a strange satellite DNA known as msDNA. msDNA is actually a complex of DNA, RNA, and probably protein. It is composed of a small, single-stranded DNA, linked to a small, single-stranded RNA molecule. The 5' end of the DNA molecule is joined to an internal guanosine residue of the RNA molecule by a unique 2'-5' phosphodiester bond. msDNA is produced in many hundreds of copies per cell, but its function remains unknown. Although retrons are absent from the genome of most members of a population of related bacteria, retrons may not be entirely benign DNAs. Evidence is beginning to suggest that retron elements may produce small but potentially significant effects on the host cell. This includes the generation of repeated copies of the msDNA sequence in the genome, and increasing the frequency of spontaneous mutations. Because these events involve the retron RT, this may represent a source of reverse transcription in the bacterial cell. Thus, the process of reverse transcription, a force that has profoundly affected the content and structure of most eukaryotic genomes, may likewise be responsible for changes in some prokaryotic genomes.

[PMID: 29087272]
Multi-copy single-stranded DNA (msDNA) is composed of covalently bound single-stranded DNA and RNA, and synthesized by retron-encoded reverse transcriptase. msDNA-synthesizing systems are thought to be a recent acquisition by Escherichia coli because, to date, only seven types of msDNA, which differ markedly in their primary nucleotide sequences, have been found in a small subset of E. coli strains. The wide use of E. coli in molecular research means that it is important to understand more about these stable, covalently bound, single-stranded DNA or RNA compounds. The present review provides insights into the molecular biosynthesis, distribution and function of E. coli msDNA to raise awareness about these special molecules.

[PMID: 11525386]
msDNAs are small, structurally unique satellite DNAs found in a number of Gram-negative bacteria. Composed of hundreds of copies of single-stranded DNA--hence the name multicopy single-stranded DNA--msDNA is actually a complex of DNA, RNA, and probably protein. These peculiar molecules are synthesized by a reverse transcription mechanism catalyzed by a reverse transcriptase (RT) that is evolutionarily related to the polymerase found in the HIV virus. The genes, including the RT gene, responsible for the synthesis of msDNA are encoded in a retron, a genetic element that is carried on the bacterial chromosome. The retron is, in fact, the first such retroelement to be discovered in prokaryotic cells. This report is a comprehensive review of the many interesting questions raised by this unique DNA and the fascinating answers it has revealed. We have learned a great deal about the structure of msDNA: how it is synthesized, the structure and functions of the RT protein required to make it, its effects on the host cell, the retron element that encodes it, its possible origins and evolution, and even its potential usefulness as a practical genetic tool. Despite the impressive gains in our understanding of the msDNAs, however, the simple, fundamental question of its natural function remains an enduring mystery. Thus, we have much more to learn about the msDNAs of bacteria.

[PMID: 22102774]
The multi-copy single-stranded DNA (msDNA) is yielded by the action of reverse transcriptase of retro-element in a wide range of pathogenic bacteria. Upon this phenomenon, it has been shown that msDNA is only produced by Eubacteria because many Eubacteria species contained reverse transcriptase in their special retro-element. We have screened around 111 Archaea at KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database available at genome net server and observed three Methanosarcina species (M.acetivorans, M.barkeri and M.mazei), which also contained reverse transcriptase in their genome sequences. This observation of reverse transcriptase in Archaea raises questions regarding the origin of this enzyme. The evolutionary relationship between these two domains of life (Eubacteria and Archaea) hinges upon the phenomenon of retrons. Interestingly, the evolutionary trees based on the reverse transcriptases (RTs) and 16S ribosomal RNAs point out that all the Eubacteria RTs were descended from Archaea RTs during their evolutionary times. In addition, we also have shown some significant structural features among the newly identified msDNA-Yf79 in Yersinia frederiksenii with other of its related msDNAs (msDNA-St85, msDNA-Vc95, msDNA-Vp96, msDNA-Ec78 and msDNA-Ec83) from pathogenic bacteria. Together the degree of sequence conservation among these msDNAs, the evolutionary trees and the distribution of these ret (reverse transcriptase) genes suggest a possible evolutionary scenario. The single common ancestor of the organisms of Eubacteria and Archaea subgroups probably achieved this ret gene during their evolution through the vertical descent rather than the horizontal transformations followed by integration into this organism genome by a mechanism related to phage recognition and/or transposition.

[PMID: 15459648]
Retron is a prokaryotic genetic element that produces multicopy single-stranded DNA covalently linked to RNA (msDNA) by a reverse transcriptase. It was found that cells producing a large amount of msDNA, rather than those that did not, showed a higher rate of mutation. In order to understand the molecular mechanism connecting msDNA production to the high mutation rate the protein patterns were compared by two dimensional gel electrophoresis. Ten proteins were found to be differentially expressed at levels more than three fold greater in cells with than without msDNA, nine of which were identified by MALDI TOF MS. Eight of the nine identified proteins were repressed in msDNA-producing cells and, surprisingly, most were proteins functioning in the dissimilation of various carbon sources. One protein was induced four fold greater in the msDNA producing cells and was identified as a 30S ribosomal protein S2 involved in the regulation of translation. The molecular mechanism underlying the elevated mutation in msDNA-producing cell still remains elusive.