[PMID: 30401654]
Mitochondrial Carrier Homolog 2 (MTCH2) acts as a receptor for the BH3 interacting-domain death agonist (BID) in the mitochondrial outer membrane. Loss of MTCH2 affects mitochondria energy metabolism and function. MTCH2 forebrain conditional KO (MTCH2 BKO) display a deficit in hippocampus-dependent cognitive functions. Here we study age-related MTCH2 BKO behavioral and electrophysiological aspects of hippocampal functions. MTCH2 BKO exhibit impaired spatial but not motor learning and an impairment in long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal slices. Moreover, MTCH2 BKO express an increase in activated microglia, in addition to a reduction in neuron density in the hippocampus, but do not express amyloid-β plaques or neurofibrillary tangles. These results highlight the role of mitochondria in the normal hippocampus-dependent memory formation.

[PMID: 22326460]
Recent studies report mitochondrial carrier homolog 2 (MTCH2) as a novel and uncharacterized protein that acts as a receptor-like protein for the truncated BH3-interacting domain death agonist (tBID) protein in the outer membrane of mitochondria. These studies, using mouse embryonic stem cells and fibroblasts as well as mice with a conditional knockout of MTCH2 in the liver, showed that deletion of MTCH2 hindered recruitment of tBID to the mitochondria with subsequent reductions in the activation of pro-apoptotic proteins, mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization and apoptosis. Sequence analysis shows that MTCH2 is present in all examined multicellular Metazoa as well as unicellular Choanoflagellata, and is a highly derived member of the mitochondrial carrier family. Mitochondrial carriers are monomeric transport proteins that are usually found in the inner mitochondrial membrane, where they exchange small substrates between the mitochondrial matrix and intermembrane space. There are extensive differences between the protein sequences of MTCH2 and other mitochondrial carriers that may explain the ability of MTCH2 to associate with tBID and thus its role in apoptosis. We review the experimental evidence for the role of MTCH2 in apoptosis and suggest that the original transport function of the ancestral MTCH2 mitochondrial carrier has been co-opted by the apoptotic machinery to provide a receptor and signaling mechanism.

[PMID: 26794447]
During apoptosis, proapoptotic BAX and BAK trigger mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM) permeabilization by a mechanism that is not yet fully understood. BH3-only proteins such as tBID, together with lipids of the MOM, are thought to play a key role in BAX and BAK activation. In particular, cardiolipin (CL) has been shown to stimulate tBID-induced BAX activation in vitro. However, it is still unclear whether this process also relies on CL in the cell, or whether it is more dependent on MTCH2, a proposed receptor for tBID present in the MOM. To address this issue, we deleted both alleles of cardiolipin synthase in human HCT116 cells by homologous recombination, which resulted in a complete absence of CL. The CL-deficient cells were fully viable in glucose but displayed impaired oxidative phosphorylation and an inability to grow in galactose. Using these cells, we found that CL was not required for either tBID-induced BAX activation, or for apoptosis in response to treatment with TRAIL. Downregulation of MTCH2 in HCT116 cells also failed to prevent recruitment of tBID to mitochondria in apoptotic conditions. However, when both CL and MTCH2 were depleted, a significant reduction in tBID recruitment was observed, suggesting that in HCT116 cells, CL and MTCH2 can have redundant functions in this process.

[PMID: 15899861]
BID, a proapoptotic BCL-2 family member, plays an essential role in the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)/Fas death receptor pathway in vivo. Activation of the TNF-R1 receptor results in the cleavage of BID into truncated BID (tBID), which translocates to the mitochondria and induces the activation of BAX or BAK. In TNF-alpha-activated FL5.12 cells, tBID becomes part of a 45-kDa cross-linkable mitochondrial complex. Here we describe the biochemical purification of this complex and the identification of mitochondrial carrier homolog 2 (Mtch2) as part of this complex. Mtch2 is a conserved protein that is similar to members of the mitochondrial carrier protein family. Our studies with mouse liver mitochondria indicate that Mtch2 is an integral membrane protein exposed on the surface of mitochondria. Using blue-native gel electrophoresis we revealed that in viable FL5.12 cells Mtch2 resides in a protein complex of ca. 185 kDa and that the addition of TNF-alpha to these cells leads to the recruitment of tBID and BAX to this complex. Importantly, this recruitment was partially inhibited in FL5.12 cells stably expressing BCL-X(L). These results implicate Mtch2 as a mitochondrial target of tBID and raise the possibility that the Mtch2-resident complex participates in the mitochondrial apoptotic program.

[PMID: 27320914]
Fas apoptotic signaling regulates diverse physiological processes. Acute activation of Fas signaling triggers massive apoptosis in liver. Upon Fas receptor stimulation, the BH3-only protein Bid is cleaved into the active form, tBid. Subsequent tBid recruitment to mitochondria, which is facilitated by its receptor MTCH2 at the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM), is a critical step for commitment to apoptosis via the effector proteins Bax or Bak. MOAP-1 is a Bax-binding protein enriched at the OMM. Here, we show that MOAP-1-deficient mice are resistant to Fas-induced hepatocellular apoptosis and lethality. In the absence of MOAP-1, mitochondrial accumulation of tBid is markedly impaired. MOAP-1 binds to MTCH2, and this interaction appears necessary for MTCH2 to engage tBid. These findings reveal a role for MOAP-1 in Fas signaling in the liver by promoting MTCH2-mediated tBid recruitment to mitochondria.