[PMID: 26713299]
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) results from a deletion of the paternal genes in the region of chromosome 15q11-q13. PWS develops hyperphagia, which when left unmanaged, leads to an excessive ingestion of food. To date there is inadequate pharmacological treatment or supplementation for modification of the PWS hyperphagia and/or the associated behaviors. Therefore, the best practice is familial supervision and restriction of diet and environment. We aimed to determine if the natural supplement of Caralluma fimbriata extract (CFE) could attenuate hyperphagia or the associated appetite behaviors in children and adolescents with PWS over the 4-week pilot trial period. We conducted a placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized crossover trial over a 10-week period to investigate the effects of CFE on hunger control, in a cohort of children and adolescents with confirmed PWS (n =15, mean age 9.27 ± 3.16 years, body weight 43.98 ± 23.99 kg). Participants from Australia and New Zealand ingested CFE or a placebo of maltodextrin/cabbage leaf over a 4-week period, with a 2-week washout before the crossover to the other treatment. Weekly comparisons in appetite behavior, severity, and drive were recorded by parents, as scaled time-point measures on a hyperphagia questionnaire validated for PWS. CFE administration was found to induce a significant accumulative easing of hyperphagia (P = 0.05), with decreases evident in one-third of the participants. Furthermore due to CFE supplementation, a significant decrease (P ≤ 0.05) was recorded in the category of behavior and a decrease in hyperphagia (n = 8, P = 0.009) was observed at the highest dose 1,000 mg/day (recommended adult dose). There were no reported adverse effects at any dose. We demonstrate that an extract of the Indian cactus succulent Caralluma fimbriata eases hyperphagic appetite behavior within a cohort of children and adolescents (n = 15) with PWS without notable adverse effects. The outcomes of this study will have a potential positive impact on PWS management.

[PMID: 1714232]
Deletions of the proximal long arm of chromosome 15 (bands 15q11q13) are found in the majority of patients with two distinct genetic disorders, Angelman syndrome (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). The deleted regions in the two syndromes, defined cytogenetically and by using cloned DNA probes, are similar. However, deletions in AS occur on the maternally inherited chromosome 15, and deletions in PWS occur on the paternally derived chromosome 15. This observation has led to the suggestion that one or more genes in this region show differential expression dependent on parental origin (genetic imprinting). No genes of known function have previously been mapped to this region. We show here that the gene encoding the GABAA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor beta 3 subunit maps to the AS/PWS region. Deletion of this gene (GABRB3) was found in AS and PWS patients with interstitial cytogenetic deletions. Evidence of beta 3 gene deletion was also found in an AS patient with an unbalanced 13;15 translocation but not in a PWS patient with an unbalanced 9;15 translocation. The localization of this receptor gene to the AS/PWS region suggests a possible role of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA in the pathogenesis of one or both of these syndromes.

[PMID: 2564739]
Many Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) patients have a cytogenetic deletion of 15q11q13. While AS and PWS share a similar cytogenetic anomaly, they have very different clinical phenotypes. DNAs from 4 AS patients were examined using 5 chromosome 15q11q13-specific cloned DNA segments. With the present level of resolution, the molecular deletions between AS and those previously reported for PWS did not appear to differ. However, in contrast to the paternal inheritance of the deleted chromosome 15 observed in the majority of PWS patients, maternal inheritance of the deleted chromosome 15 was demonstrated in the AS patients by restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs).

[PMID: 1985457]
Genetic imprinting has been implicated in the etiology of two clinically distinct but cytogenetically indistinguishable disorders--Angelman syndrome (AS) and Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). This hypothesis is derived from two lines of evidence. First, while the molecular extents of de novo cytogenetic deletions of chromosome 15q11q13 in AS and PWS patients are the same, the deletions originate from different parental chromosomes. In AS, the deletion occurs in the maternally inherited chromosome 15, while in PWS the deletion is found in the paternally inherited chromosome 15. The second line of evidence comes from the deletion of an abnormal parental contribution of 15q11q13 in PWS patients without a cytogenetic and molecular deletion. These patients have two maternal copies and no paternal copy of 15q11q13 (maternal uniparental disomy) instead of one copy from each parent. By qualitative hybridization with chromosome 15q11q13 specific DNA markers, we have now examined DNA samples from 10 AS patients (at least seven of which are familial cases) with no cytogenetic or molecular deletion of chromosome 15q11q13. Inheritance of one maternal copy and one paternal copy of 15q11q13 was observed in each family, suggesting that paternal uniparental disomy of 15q11q13 is not responsible for expression of the AS phenotype in these patients.

[PMID: 2309781]
Six persons with the classical Angelman syndrome (AS) phenotype and de novo deletions of chromosome 15q11-q13 were studied to determine the parental origin of the chromosome deletion. Four of the 6 patients had informative cytogenetic studies and all demonstrated maternal inheritance of the deletion. These findings, together with other reported cases of the origin of the chromosome 15 deletion in AS, suggest that deletion of the maternally contributed chromosome leads to the AS phenotype. This contrasts with the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) in which a similar deletion of the paternally contributed chromosome 15 is observed. In deletion cases, a parental gamete effect such as genomic imprinting may be the best model to explain why apparently identical 15q11-q13 deletions may develop the different phenotypes of AS or PWS.