[PMID: 8371105]
Using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), we have demonstrated clonal variation in the size of chromosome XII in a diploid strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae X2180-2D. The sizes of the two chromosome XII homologues were very different: 2600 (L-type) and 1450 kb (S-type). The frequency with which we detected clonal size variation in the diploid, compared to that of the parental clones, was about 15-50% of the progeny clones and the range of the size variation of the homologues was 2580-2680 kb (L-type) and 1340-1500 kb (S-type), respectively. The homologue of the L-type appeared to be more frequently variable than that of the S-type. The size variation was shown to be derived from size changes in the rDNA cluster region, which is present in chromosome XII, by digesting the chromosome with XhoI, whose cutting site is not present in a rDNA repeat unit, and hybridizing to rDNA probes. The clonal size variation was also investigated in haploids from spores after meiosis. The L-type and S-type chromosomes segregated 2:2 in an ascus and the sizes of all the S-type chromosomes were shifted up, compared to the original diploid, though the L-type ones were stable. The S-type sizes of 1340, 1450 and 1780 kb in the original diploids changed into the ranges of 1475-1610 kb, 1520-1680 kb and 1820-2010 kb, respectively, in the segregants. Furthermore, we observed that the size of S-type chromosomes in haploid cells was gradually increasing in mitosis during successive subcultures.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

[PMID: 16738130]
The rDNA cluster in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is located 450 kb from the left end and 610 kb from the right end of chromosome XII and consists of approximately 150 tandemly repeated copies of a 9.1 kb rDNA unit. To explore the biological significance of this specific chromosomal context, chromosome XII was split at both sides of the rDNA cluster and strains harboring deleted variants of chromosome XII consisting of 450 kb, 1500 kb (rDNA cluster only) and 610 kb were created. In the strain harboring the 1500 kb variant of chromosome XII consisting solely of rDNA, the size of the rDNA cluster was found to decrease as a result of a decrease in rDNA copy number. The frequency of silencing of URA3 inserted within the rDNA locus was found to be greater than in a wild-type strain. The localization and morphology of the nucleolus was also affected such that a single and occasionally (6-12% frequency) two foci for Nop1p and a rounded nucleolus were observed, whereas a typical crescent-shaped nucleolar structure was seen in the wild-type strain. Notably, strains harboring the 450 kb chromosome XII variant and/or the 1500 kb variant consisting solely of rDNA had shorter life spans than wild type and also accumulated extrachromosomal rDNA circles. These observations suggest that the context of chromosome XII plays an important role in maintaining a constant rDNA copy number and in physiological processes related to rDNA function in S.cerevisiae.

[PMID: 24333410]
The tools and techniques used in single-cell analysis of DNA damage in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are limited. In this study, we modified the single cell gel electrophoresis assay, namely, the single chromosome comet assay based on DNA break analysis, at the chromosomal level. We studied the largest yeast chromosome XII, which contains the rDNA locus, and we investigated its instability using cell cycle checkpoint-, DNA damage- and antioxidative defence-deficient, and lifespan-deregulated yeast mutant strains. Moreover, we compared chromosome XII instability with the variability of nucleolar rDNA fluorescence signals. Three single-gene-deletion strains, cells lacking single-stranded DNA endonuclease, Rad1p; NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase, Sir2p; and gamma glutamylcysteine synthetase, Gsh1p, were more prone to chromosome XII instability compared to corresponding wildtype strains, indicating that DNA damage repair machinery, chromatin silencing and redox homeostasis may contribute to genome stability. Elevation in the number of DNA breaks was correlated with a high variability in the levels of nucleolar rDNA in the Δrad1 background, while unaffected chromosome XII and low variability in nucleolar rDNA fluorescence signals were observed in the Δtor1 longevity mutant. Taken together, the single chromosome comet assay may be successfully used to study DNA damage at the chromosomal level, which might be overlooked using whole population analysis on DNA breaks with PFGE separation.

[PMID: 8175878]
We have developed a fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) method to examine the structure of both natural chromosomes and small artificial chromosomes during the mitotic cycle of budding yeast. Our results suggest that the pairing of sister chromatids: (a) occurs near the centromere and at multiple places along the chromosome arm as has been observed in other eukaryotic cells; (b) is maintained in the absence of catenation between sister DNA molecules; and (c) is independent of large blocks of repetitive DNA commonly associated with heterochromatin. Condensation of a unique region of chromosome XVI and the highly repetitive ribosomal DNA (rDNA) cluster from chromosome XII were also examined in budding yeast. Interphase chromosomes were condensed 80-fold relative to B form DNA, similar to what has been observed in other eukaryotes, suggesting that the structure of interphase chromosomes may be conserved among eukaryotes. While additional condensation of budding yeast chromosomes were observed during mitosis, the level of condensation was less than that observed for human mitotic chromosomes. At most stages of the cell cycle, both unique and repetitive sequences were either condensed or decondensed. However, in cells arrested in late mitosis (M) by a cdc15 mutation, the unique DNA appeared decondensed while the repetitive rDNA region appeared condensed, suggesting that the condensation state of separate regions of the genome may be regulated differently. The ability to monitor the pairing and condensation of sister chromatids in budding yeast should facilitate the molecular analysis of these processes as well as provide two new landmarks for evaluating the function of important cell cycle regulators like p34 kinases and cyclins. Finally our FISH method provides a new tool to analyze centromeres, telomeres, and gene expression in budding yeast.

[PMID: 9169867]
The complete DNA sequence of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome IV has been determined. Apart from chromosome XII, which contains the 1-2 Mb rDNA cluster, chromosome IV is the longest S. cerevisiae chromosome. It was split into three parts, which were sequenced by a consortium from the European Community, the Sanger Centre, and groups from St Louis and Stanford in the United States. The sequence of 1,531,974 base pairs contains 796 predicted or known genes, 318 (39.9%) of which have been previously identified. Of the 478 new genes, 225 (28.3%) are homologous to previously identified genes and 253 (32%) have unknown functions or correspond to spurious open reading frames (ORFs). On average there is one gene approximately every two kilobases. Superimposed on alternating regional variations in G+C composition, there is a large central domain with a lower G+C content that contains all the yeast transposon (Ty) elements and most of the tRNA genes. Chromosome IV shares with chromosomes II, V, XII, XIII and XV some long clustered duplications which partly explain its origin.