[PMID: 24271646]
Opicapone (OPC) is a novel catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor to be used as adjunctive therapy in levodopa-treated patients with Parkinson's disease. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of moderate liver impairment on the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD; effect on COMT activity) of OPC. An open-label, parallel-group study in patients (n = 8) with moderate liver impairment (Child-Pugh category B, score of 7 to 9) and matched healthy subjects (n = 8, control) with normal liver function. All subjects received a single 50-mg oral dose of OPC, with plasma and urine concentrations of opicapone and its metabolites measured up to 72 h post-dose, including soluble COMT (S-COMT) activity. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the main PK and PD parameters between groups. Point estimates (PE) of geometric mean ratios (GMR) and corresponding 90 % confidence intervals (90%CI) for the ratio hepatic/control subjects of each parameter were calculated and compared with the reference interval (80-125 %). Exposure to opicapone (AUC and Cmax) increased significantly in patients with moderate hepatic impairment (PE [90%CI]: AUC0-∞, 184 % [135-250 %]; Cmax, 189 % [144-249 %]). Although apparent total clearance (CL/F) of opicapone was decreased by ∼35 %, similar elimination half-life and unbound/bound fractions of opicapone were observed between the two groups. Both rate and extent of exposure to BIA 9-1103 were higher in the hepatically impaired group, but not statistically significant compared with the control group. Similar to the parent (opicapone), the observed increase in exposure to BIA 9-1106 was statistically significant in the hepatically impaired group over the control group. BIA 9-1106 was the only metabolite detected in urine and its urine PK parameters were in accordance with plasma data. Maximum S-COMT inhibition (Emax) occurred earlier for the hepatically impaired group with values of 100 % and 91.2 % for the hepatically impaired and control groups respectively. Both Emax and AUEC for the hepatically impaired group reached statistical significance over the control group. OPC was well tolerated in both hepatically impaired and control groups. The bioavailability of an orally administered single dose of 50 mg OPC was significantly higher in patients with moderate chronic hepatic impairment, perhaps by a reduced first-pass effect. As the tolerability profile of OPC was favourable under the conditions of this study and its exposure is completely purged from systemic circulation before the subsequent dose administration, no OPC dose adjustment is needed in patients with mild to moderate chronic hepatic impairment. However, as OPC is under clinical development for use as adjunctive therapy in levodopa-treated patients with Parkinson's disease, an adjustment of levodopa and/or OPC regimens in patients should be carefully considered based on a potentially enhanced levodopa dopaminergic response and the associated tolerability.

[PMID: 23336248]
The aim of this study was to assess the tolerability, pharmacokinetics and inhibitory effect on erythrocyte soluble catechol-O-methyltransferase (S-COMT) activity following repeated doses of opicapone. This randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study enrolled healthy male subjects who received either once daily placebo or opicapone 5, 10, 20 or 30 mg for 8 days. Opicapone was well tolerated. Its systemic exposure increased in an approximately dose-proportional manner with an apparent terminal half-life of 1.0 to 1.4 h. Sulphation was the main metabolic pathway. Opicapone metabolites recovered in urine accounted for less than 3% of the amount of opicapone administered suggesting that bile is likely the main route of excretion. Maximum S-COMT inhibition (Emax ) ranged from 69.9% to 98.0% following the last dose of opicapone. The opicapone-induced S-COMT inhibition showed a half-life in excess of 100 h, which was dose-independent and much longer than plasma drug exposure. Such a half-life translates into a putative underlying rate constant that is comparable with the estimated dissociation rate constant of the COMT-opicapone complex. Despite its short elimination half-life, opicapone markedly and sustainably inhibited erythrocyte S-COMT activity making it suitable for a once daily regimen.

[PMID: 24148813]
The present study aimed at evaluating the effect of opicapone, a third generation nitrocatechol catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor, on the systemic and central bioavailability of 3,4-dihydroxy-l-phenylalanine (levodopa) and related metabolites in the cynomolgus monkey. Four monkeys, implanted with guiding cannulas for microdialysis probes, in the substantia nigra, dorsal striatum and prefrontal cortex, were randomized in two groups that received, in a crossover design, vehicle or 100 mg/kg opicapone for 14 days. Twenty-three hours after last administration of vehicle or opicapone, animals were challenged with levodopa/benserazide (12/3 mg/kg). Extracellular dialysate and blood samples were collected over 360 min (at 30 min intervals) for the assays of catecholamine and COMT activity. Opicapone increased levodopa systemic exposure by 2-fold not changing Cmax values and reduced both 3-O-methyldopa (3-OMD) exposure and Cmax values by 5-fold. These changes were accompanied by ∼76-84% reduction in erythrocyte COMT activity. In dorsal striatum and substantia nigra, opicapone increased levodopa exposure by 1.7- and 1.4-fold, respectively, reducing 3-OMD exposure by 5- and 7-fold respectively. DOPAC exposure was increased by 4-fold in the substantia nigra. In the prefrontal cortex, opicapone increased levodopa exposure and reduced 3-OMD levels by 2.3- and 2.4-fold, respectively. Opicapone behaved as long-acting COMT inhibitor that markedly increased systemic and central levodopa bioavailability. Opicapone is a strong candidate to fill the unmet need for COMT inhibitors that lead to more sustained levodopa levels in Parkinson's disease patients.

[PMID: 23248072]
Opicapone is a novel catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the tolerability, pharmacokinetics (including the effect of food) and pharmacodynamics (effect on COMT activity) following single oral doses of opicapone in young healthy male volunteers. Single rising oral doses of opicapone (10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 400, 800 and 1,200 mg) were administered to eight groups of eight subjects per group (two subjects randomized to placebo and six subjects to opicapone), under a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled design. In an additional group of 12 subjects, a 50 mg single dose of opicapone was administered on two occasions, once having fasted overnight and once with a high-fat high-calorie meal. Opicapone was well tolerated at all doses tested. The extent of systemic exposure (area under the plasma concentration-time curve and maximum plasma concentration) to opicapone and metabolites increased in an approximately dose-proportional manner and showed a decrease following concomitant ingestion of a high-fat high-calorie meal. The apparent terminal elimination half-life of opicapone was 0.8-3.2 h. Sulphation appeared to be the main metabolic pathway for opicapone, and both opicapone and the main sulphated metabolite are likely excreted by the biliary route. Maximum COMT inhibition by opicapone was dose dependent, ranged from 36.1% (10 mg) to 100% (200 mg and above), and reached statistical significance at all doses tested. The long duration of COMT inhibition by opicapone, however, tended to be independent from the dose taken. The observed half-life of opicapone-induced COMT inhibition in human erythrocytes was 61.6 h (standard deviation [SD] = 37.6 h), which reflects an underlying dissociative process with a kinetic rate constant of 3.1 × 10(-6) s(-1) (SD = 1.9 × 10(-6) s(-1)). Such a process compares well to the estimated dissociation rate constant (k(off)) of the COMT-opicapone molecular complex (k(off) = 1.9 × 10(-6) s(-1)). Opicapone was well-tolerated and presented dose-proportional kinetics. Opicapone demonstrated marked and sustained inhibition of erythrocyte soluble COMT activity. Based on the observation that the half-life of COMT inhibition is independent of the dose and that it reflects an underlying kinetic process that is consistent with the k(off) value of the COMT-opicapone complex, we propose that the sustained COMT inhibition, far beyond the observable point of clearance of circulating drug, is due to the long residence time of the reversible complex formed between COMT and opicapone. Globally, these promising results provide a basis for further clinical development of opicapone.

[PMID: 24925090]
Opicapone is a novel third generation catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor. The purpose of this study was to compare the levodopa pharmacokinetic profile throughout a day driven by the COMT inhibition either following repeated doses of opicapone or concomitant administration with entacapone. A randomized, double-blind, gender-balanced, parallel-group study was performed in 4 groups of 20 healthy subjects each. Four subjects in each group received placebo during the entire study. Sixteen subjects in one group received placebo once daily for 11 days and on day 12, 200 mg entacapone concomitantly with each levodopa/carbidopa dose (three times separated by a 5-h interval). Sixteen subjects in each of the remaining three groups received respectively 25, 50, and 75 mg opicapone once daily for 11 days and on day 12, placebo concomitantly with each levodopa/carbidopa dose. Levodopa minimum plasma concentration (Cmin) for each levodopa/carbidopa dose and for the mean of all levodopa/carbidopa doses increased substantially with all active treatments (entacapone and opicapone) when compared to the control group (placebo), with values ranging from 1.7-fold (200 mg entacapone) to 3.3-fold (75 mg opicapone). No statistical difference was found for levodopa peak of systemic exposure (as assessed by maximum observed plasma concentration (Cmax)) between all active treatments and placebo. A significant increase in the levodopa extent of systemic exposure (as assessed by concentration-time curve (AUC)) occurred with all opicapone treatments in relation to placebo. No statistical difference was found for levodopa AUC when entacapone was compared to placebo. When compared to entacapone, both 50 and 75 mg opicapone presented a significant increase for the levodopa AUC. All active treatments significantly inhibited both peak (as assessed by Emax) and extent (as assessed by effect-time curve (AUEC)) of the COMT activity in relation to placebo. When compared to entacapone, all opicapone treatments significantly decreased the extent (AUEC) of the COMT activity due to a long-lasting and sustained effect. The tolerability profile was favorable for all active treatments. Opicapone, a novel third generation COMT inhibitor, when compared to entacapone, provides a superior response upon the bioavailability of levodopa associated to more pronounced, long-lasting, and sustained COMT inhibition. The tolerability profile was favorable. On the basis of the results presented in this study and along with the earlier pharmacology studies, it is anticipated that opicapone adjunct therapy at the dosages of 25 and 50 mg will provide an enhancement in levodopa availability that will translate into clinical benefit for Parkinson's disease patients.