[PMID: 17929738]
Patients who survive an Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Haemorrhage or ASAH describe it as being the worst headache ever, multiplied one hundred-times over. It is a debilitating and life threatening condition, which affects approximately 6.5 people per 100,000 throughout Australia and New Zealand every year (The ACROSS group, 2000). When caring for a patient post Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Haemorrhage or ASAH meticulous monitoring of the patient's neurological, cardiovascular, hepatic, endocrine, renal, and respiratory functions are vital. Due to both the initial ASAH and its complications such as rebleed, cerebral vasospasm, hydrocephalus, cerebral oedema, seizures as well as adverse reactions to counteract these potential problems. All of, which can cause significant long-term morbidity as well as potential mortality if left, undiagnosed and untreated. The following article presets a composite patient highlighting clinical manifestations of ASAH, its associated complications as well as various methods of detecting, preventing and treating them.

[PMID: 28434443]
Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is associated with a mortality of more than 30%. Only about 30% of patients with SAB recover sufficiently to return to independent living. This article is based on a selective review of pertinent literature retrieved by a PubMed search. Acute, severe headache, typically described as the worst headache of the patient's life, and meningismus are the characteristic manifestations of SAH. Computed tomog raphy (CT) reveals blood in the basal cisterns in the first 12 hours after SAH with approximately 95% sensitivity and specificity. If no blood is seen on CT, a lumbar puncture must be performed to confirm or rule out the diagnosis of SAH. All patients need intensive care so that rebleeding can be avoided and the sequelae of the initial bleed can be minimized. The immediate transfer of patients with acute SAH to a specialized center is crucially important for their outcome. In such centers, cerebral aneurysms can be excluded from the circulation either with an interventional endovascular procedure (coiling) or by microneurosurgery (clipping). SAH is a life-threatening condition that requires immediate diagnosis, transfer to a neurovascular center, and treatment without delay.

[PMID: 27741994]
Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a neurological emergency with high risk of neurological decline and death. Although the presentation of a thunderclap headache or the worst headache of a patient's life easily triggers the evaluation for SAH, subtle presentations are still missed. The gold standard for diagnostic evaluation of SAH remains noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) followed by lumbar puncture if the CT is negative for SAH. Management of patients with SAH follows standard resuscitation of critically ill patients with the emphasis on reducing risks of rebleeding and avoiding secondary brain injuries.

[PMID: 9737490]
This study investigated the hypothesis that modern computed tomographic (CT) imaging is sufficient to exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in patients with severe headache. All 38,730 adult patients who presented to Hermann Hospital in Houston, Texas, during a 16-month period were prospectively screened to detect those with "the worst headache of my life." Two neuroradiologists blinded to the study hypothesis interpreted the CT scans. Patients with negative scans underwent comprehensive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis including cell count in first and last tubes, visual and spectrophotometric detection of xanthochromia, and CSF D-dimer assay. A chief complaint of headache was elicited in 455 patients, and 107 of these had "worst headache" and were enrolled in the study. CT-confirmed SAH was found in 18 of the 107 (17%). Only 2 patients (2.5%, 95% confidence interval, .3% to 8.8%) had SAH detected by CSF analysis among those with negative CT imaging result. CSF spectrophotometric detection was the most sensitive test for blood. Three patients with less than 6 red blood cells in tube 1 had positive spectrophotometric results, but in all 3, tube 4 was negative on spectrophotometric analysis, suggesting a high false-positive rate. Modern CT imaging is sufficient to exclude 97.5% of SAH in patients presenting to the ED with "worst headache" symptoms.

[PMID: 22338211]
Headache is the most common presenting symptom of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), ranging from mild headache to the "worst headache of my life". As headache is often non-specific, patients may not seek immediate medical attention, though prompt medical and surgical management is expected to improve clinical outcomes. In this study, we explore the independent association between duration from onset of symptoms to presentation at an emergency department (ED) and clinical outcomes after SAH. Participants with a primary diagnosis of nontraumatic SAH were identified from consecutive patients at 11 regional stroke centres participating in the Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network (RCSN, 2003-2005). Hunt and Hess score (H+H), and modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at discharge were collected on SAH cases by trained nurse-abstractors. For analysis, patients were categorized into patients with mild-moderate dependency (mRS 0-3) and those with severe dependence or death (mRS 4-6) at hospital discharge. Multivariable regression analyses were used to determine the association between 'time to presentation' and clinical outcomes, independent of comorbidities. Of 721 SAH patients included in the RCSN, 642 (89.0%) had the interval between 'time last seen normal' and time of ED presentation recorded. Mean duration from symptom onset to ED arrival was 27.04 hours (+/- 2.02). One hundred and sixty-six patients (25.9%) presented to the ED more than 24 hours after onset of symptoms. On multivariable analysis, there was no association between time to presentation and severe disability or death at hospital discharge (OR 1.0 [95% CI 0.95-1.01]); 30-day mortality (OR 1.0 [95% CI 0.91-1.02]; or six-month mortality (OR 1.0 [95% CI 1.0-1.02]). Increasing H+H score and age were significantly associated with increased odds of death and severe dependence at hospital discharge. In this observational study, duration from symptom onset to hospital presentation was not independently associated with death or severe disability at hospital discharge following SAH. Age and H+H score were independent predictors of clinical outcome after non-traumatic SAH.