[PMID: 28989060]
Outcomes of liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are determined by cancer-related and non-related events. Treatments for hepatitis C virus infection have reduced non-cancer events among patients receiving liver transplants, so reducing HCC-related death might be an actionable end point. We performed a competing-risk analysis to evaluate factors associated with survival of patients with HCC and developed a prognostic model based on features of HCC patients before liver transplantation. We performed multivariable competing-risk regression analysis to identify factors associated with HCC-specific death of patients who underwent liver transplantation. The training set comprised 1018 patients who underwent liver transplantation for HCC from January 2000 through December 2013 at 3 tertiary centers in Italy. The validation set comprised 341 consecutive patients who underwent liver transplantation for HCC during the same period at the Liver Cancer Institute in Shanghai, China. We collected pretransplantation data on etiology of liver disease, number and size of tumors, patient level of α-fetoprotein (AFP), model for end-stage liver disease score, tumor stage, numbers and types of treatment, response to treatments, tumor grade, microvascular invasion, dates, and causes of death. Death was defined as HCC-specific when related to HCC recurrence after transplantation, disseminated extra- and/or intrahepatic tumor relapse and worsened liver function in presence of tumor spread. The cumulative incidence of death was segregated for hepatitis C virus status. In the competing-risk regression, the sum of tumor number and size and of log<sub>10</sub> level of AFP were significantly associated with HCC-specific death (P < .001), returning an average c-statistic of 0.780 (95% confidence interval, 0.763-0.798). Five-year cumulative incidence of non-HCC-related death was 8.6% in HCV-negative patients and 18.1% in HCV-positive patients. For patients with HCC to have a 70% chance of HCC-specific survival 5 years after transplantation, their level of AFP should be <200 ng/mL and the sum of number and size of tumors (in centimeters) should not exceed 7; if the level of AFP was 200-400 ng/mL, the sum of the number and size of tumors should be ≤5; if their level of AFP was 400-1000 ng/mL, the sum of the number and size of tumors should be ≤4. In the validation set, the model identified patients who survived 5 years after liver transplantation with 0.721 accuracy (95% confidence interval, 0.648%-0.793%). Our model, based on patients' level of AFP and HCC number and size, outperformed the Milan; University of California, San Francisco; Shanghai-Fudan; Up-to-7 criteria (P < .001); and AFP French model (P = .044) to predict which patients will survive for 5 years after liver transplantation. We developed a model based on level of AFP, tumor size, and tumor number, to determine risk of death from HCC-related factors after liver transplantation. This model might be used to select end points and refine selection criteria for liver transplantation for patients with HCC. To predict 5-year survival and risk of HCC-related death using an online calculator, please see www.hcc-olt-metroticket.org/. ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT02898415.

[PMID: 28750141]
Cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and surveillance with ultrasound (US) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is recommended. This study aimed to estimate changes in the HCC incidence rate (IR) over time, HCC stage and prognosis, and AFP and US performed in patients with hepatitis C and cirrhosis. Eligible patients were identified in the Danish Database for Hepatitis B and C, and data from national health registries and patient charts were obtained. Tumour stage was based on Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer stage, TNM classification and size and number of lesions combined into stages 0-3. We included 1075 patients with hepatitis C and cirrhosis, free of HCC and liver transplant at baseline. During 4988 person years (PY), 115 HCC cases were diagnosed. The HCC incidence rate increased from 0.8/100 PY [CI95% 0.4-1.5] in 2002-2003 to 2.9/100 PY [2.4-3.4] in 2012-2013. One-year cumulative incidence of at least one AFP or US was 53% among all patients. The positive predictive value of an AFP ≥ 20 ng mL<sup>-1</sup> was 17%. Twenty-three (21%) patients were diagnosed with early-stage HCC (stage 0/1) and 84 (79%) with late stage. Median survival after HCC for early-stage HCC disease was 30.1 months and 7.4 months for advanced HCC (stage 2/3). The incidence rate of HCC increased over time among patients with hepatitis C and cirrhosis in Denmark. Application of AFP and US was suboptimal, and most patients were diagnosed with advanced HCC with a poor prognosis.

[PMID: 29052791]
To evaluate the diagnostic performance of the combination of tumor markers [alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9)] and imaging features in differentiating combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (CHC) from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CC). Forty consecutive patients with pathologically proven CHC were retrospectively evaluated with contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS). Additionally, 40 HCC and 40 CC patients who were randomly selected from the same period served as a control group. Images were classified as HCC-like or CC-like pattern according to CEUS guidelines recommended by World and European Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology (WFUMB-EFSUMB). The diagnostic criteria of CHC were defined as follows: (1) both AFP and CA19-9 are simultaneously elevated (AFP > 20 ng/ml and CA19-9 > 100 units/ml); or (2) elevated AFP with a CC-like pattern on CEUS and without elevated CA19-9 level; or (3) elevated CA19-9 with an HCC-like pattern on CEUS and without elevated AFP level. The diagnostic tests were performed with calculation of the sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). For the 40 CHC patients, the rates of elevated AFP and CA19-9 serology were 55.0 and 30.0%, respectively. Twenty-three (57.5%) patients exhibited an HCC-like pattern, and 15 (37.5%) showed a CC-like pattern. After applying the above diagnostic criteria of CHC in the 120 patients, the sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, accuracy, and AUC were 32.5, 93.8, 72.2, 73.5, 73.3, and 0.631%, respectively. When the actual prevalence rate (0.4-14.3%) was taken into account, the PPV and NPV were modified from 2.1 to 46.7% and 89.3 to 99.7%, respectively. The combination of enhancement patterns on CEUS and serum tumor markers (AFP and CA19-9) may be a potentially specific diagnostic method to differentiate CHC from HCC and CC.

[PMID: 28582340]
Ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (SLCTs) are uncommon neoplasms that are occasionally associated with an elevated level of serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP), a marker of germ cell neoplasms, particularly yolk sac tumor (YST). We report 7 cases of ovarian SLCT (3 moderately differentiated, 2 poorly differentiated, 2 retiform) with heterologous intestinal-type glands, 6 of which were associated with elevated serum AFP. The intestinal-type mucinous glands were immunoreactive for SALL4 (4 cases), AFP (4 cases), glypican 3 (1 case), CDX2 (6 cases), and villin (7 cases), markers that are commonly expressed in YSTs, although the latter 2 markers would be expected to be positive in intestinal-type glands. We show that heterologous intestinal-type glands in ovarian SLCTs often have an endodermal sinus-like (YST-like) immunophenotype and stress that these should not be misinterpreted as microscopic foci of endodermal-type YST. Cases of ovarian SLCT with elevated serum AFP should be sampled extensively to look for foci of intestinal-type glands, the likely source of the AFP elevation in some of these neoplasms.

[PMID: 28482112]
Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has limited treatment options and poor survival, therefore early detection is critical to improving the survival of patients with HCC. Current guidelines for high-risk patients include ultrasound screenings every six months, but ultrasounds are operator dependent and not sensitive for early HCC. Serum α-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a widely used diagnostic biomarker, but it has limited sensitivity and is not elevated in all HCC cases so, we incorporate a second blood-based biomarker, des'γ carboxy-prothrombin (DCP), that has shown potential as a screening marker for HCC. The data from the Hepatitis C Antiviral Long-term Treatment against Cirrhosis (HALT-C) Trial is a valuable source of data to study biomarker screening for HCC. We assume the trajectories of AFP and DCP follow a joint hierarchical mixture model with random changepoints that allows for distinct changepoint times and subsequent trajectories of each biomarker. The changepoint indicators are jointly modeled with a Markov Random Field distribution to help detect borderline changepoints. Markov chain Monte Carlo methods are used to calculate posterior distributions, which are used in risk calculations among future patients and determine whether a patient has a positive screen. The screening algorithm was compared to alternatives in simulations studies under a range of possible scenarios and in the HALT-C Trial using cross-validation.