[PMID: 7607795]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) may involve any number of organ systems and varies greatly in the severity and type of involvement. Cutaneous manifestations of SLE are equally numerous and varied throughout the course of the disease within an individual, as well as varying between patients. Cutaneous manifestations of SLE are frequently the presenting symptoms, typically noted in the classic malar "butterfly" rash; however, other cutaneous patterns are frequently observed. We present here two patients who presented with what was thought to be acne refractory to treatment. These patients actually were found to have a facial eruption associated with SLE as confirmed by skin biopsy. The importance of investigating atypical or treatment-resistant eruptions, especially in patients experiencing other symptoms, is emphasized.

[PMID: 31619142]
Malar rash is one of the three cutaneous diagnostic criteria of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Although its clinical recognition is often straightforward, the differential diagnosis with erythematotelangiectatic rosacea may sometimes be challenging. To describe dermoscopic features of SLE malar rash and investigate the accuracy of dermoscopy for the differential diagnosis with erythematotelangiectatic rosacea. A representative dermoscopic image of target areas was evaluated for the presence of specific features. Fisher's test was used to compare their prevalence between the two cohorts, and accuracy parameters (specificity, sensitivity, and positive and negative predictive values) were evaluated. Twenty-eight patients were included in the analysis, of which 13 had SLE malar rash and 15 erythematotelangiectatic rosacea. The main dermoscopic features of malar rash were reddish/salmon-coloured follicular dots surrounded by white halos ('inverse strawberry' pattern), being present in 53.9% of the cases, while network-like vessels (vascular polygons) turned out to be the main feature of erythematotelangiectatic rosacea, with a prevalence of 93.3%. The comparative analysis showed that the 'inverse strawberry' pattern was significantly more common in SLE malar rash, with a specificity of 86.7%, while vascular polygons were significantly more frequent in rosacea, with a specificity of 92.3%. Dermoscopy may be a useful support to distinguish SLE malar rash and erythematotelangiectatic rosacea by showing peculiar features.

[PMID: 27498665]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease in which the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. It can affect the skin, joints, kidneys, brain and other organs. We report the case of a 7-year-old female patient with facial lesions of SLE since the age of 5. There was no significant family history and patient had been a healthy child from birth. The child presented with a malar rash, also known as a butterfly rash, with distribution over the cheeks but sparing the nasal bridge. This case represents the efficacy of the Dr. Michaels® (Soratinex®) product family in the successful resolution of facial lesions of SLE.

[PMID: 891079]
Between 1945 and 1970, 101 children (86 girls and 15 boys) with systemic lupus erythematosus were evaluated at the Mayo Clinic. Only 9 children were less than 9 years old at the time of diagnosis. The most frequent presenting complaint was arthralgia; fever, fatigue, and a "butterfly" malar rash also were common. Renal involvement, found in more than 76 per cent of patients, was a prognostically poor sign. The overall survival of children with renal involvement is improved by the use of adequate steroid therapy.

[PMID: 1824645]
The butterfly rash and malar flush are common facial manifestations of several disorders. Systemic lupus erythematosus may produce a transient rash before any other signs. In pellagra, symmetric keratotic areas on the face are always accompanied by lesions elsewhere on the body. Erysipelas produces brawny, fiery red facial lesions, and scarlet fever causes facial eruptions as part of a generalized eruption. Lupus vulgaris and lupus pernio produce nodules that may spread in a butterfly pattern, and seborrheic dermatitis has a predilection for the malar prominences and other areas of the face. Carcinoid syndrome often causes flushing attacks that vary in duration, and facial flushing that lasts throughout treatment may accompany chemotherapy if the patient has a hypersensitivity reaction. Deep-red rashes and/or lichenoid lesions may be caused by graft-versus-host disease in a patient undergoing bone marrow transplantation.