[PMID: 34108012]
Transposable elements (TEs) are repetitive sequences of viral origin that compose almost half of the human genome. These elements are tightly controlled within cells, and if activated, they can cause changes in both gene regulation and immune viral responses that have been associated with several chronic inflammatory diseases in humans. As oxidants are potent activators of TEs, and because oxidative injury is a major risk factor in relation to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), we hypothesized that TEs might be involved in the regulation of gene expression and so contribute to inflammation in cases of IPF. IPF is a fatal lung disease that involves the gradual replacement of the alveolar tissue with fibrotic scars as well as the accumulation of inflammatory cells in the lower respiratory tract. Although IPF is known to occur as a result of the complex interaction between age, environmental risk factors (i.e., oxidative stress) and genetics, the relative contributions of these factors to the disease remain unclear. To determine whether TEs are associated with IPF, we compared the transcriptional profiles of the genes and TEs of lung cells obtained from both healthy donors and IPF patients. We quantified TE and gene expression levels using a published bulk RNA-seq dataset containing 24 subjects (16 donors and eight IPF patients), including three lung-cell types per subject, as well as an scRNA-seq dataset concerning 16 subjects (eight donors and eight IPF patients). We found evidence of TE dysregulation in the alveolar type II lung cells and alveolar macrophages of the IPF patients. In addition, the activation of the LINE1 family of elements in IPF is associated with the increased expression of TE cellular regulators (MOV10, IFI16, SAMHD1, and APOBECG3), interferon-stimulating genes (ISG15, IFI6, IFI27, IFI44, and OAS1), chemokines (CX3CL1 and CXCL9), and interleukins (IL15RA). We also propose that TE derepression might be involved in the regulation of previously reported IPF candidate genes (MUC5B, CHL1, SPP1, and MMP7). Based on our findings, we propose that TE derepression plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression and can also prompt both the recruitment of inflammatory processes and the disruption of the immunological balance, which can lead to chronic inflammation in IPF.

[PMID: 34082434]
The female reproductive tract (FRT) is a major site of HIV sexual transmission. As the outermost layer of cells in the FRT, the human cervical epithelial cells (HCEs) have direct contact with HIV or infected cells. Our early work showed that supernatant (SN) from TLR3-activated HCEs contain the antiviral factors that could potently inhibit HIV replication in macrophages. However, it remains to be determined how HCEs transport the anti-HIV factors to macrophages. This follow-up study examined the role of exosomes in HCE-mediated anti-HIV activity. We found that TLR3 activation of HCEs resulted in the release of exosomes that contained multiple IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs: ISG56, OAS1, MxA, and Mx2) and the HIV restriction microRNAs (miR-28, miR-29 family members, miR-125b, miR-150, miR-382, miR-223, miR-20a, and miR-198). The depletion of exosomes from SN of TLR3-activated HCEs diminished HCE-mediated anti-HIV activity in macrophages, indicating that HCE-derived exosomes are responsible for transporting the antiviral molecules to macrophages. These in vitro findings suggest a novel antiviral mechanism by which HCEs participate in the FRT innate immunity against HIV infection. Further in vivo studies are necessary in order to develop an exosome-based delivery system for prevention and treatment of HIV infection through sexual transmission.

[PMID: 33307546]
Host-mediated lung inflammation is present<sup>1</sup>, and drives mortality<sup>2</sup>, in the critical illness caused by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Host genetic variants associated with critical illness may identify mechanistic targets for therapeutic development<sup>3</sup>. Here we report the results of the GenOMICC (Genetics Of Mortality In Critical Care) genome-wide association study in 2,244 critically ill patients with COVID-19 from 208 UK intensive care units. We have identified and replicated the following new genome-wide significant associations: on chromosome 12q24.13 (rs10735079, P = 1.65 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) in a gene cluster that encodes antiviral restriction enzyme activators (OAS1, OAS2 and OAS3); on chromosome 19p13.2 (rs74956615, P = 2.3 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) near the gene that encodes tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2); on chromosome 19p13.3 (rs2109069, P = 3.98 ×  10<sup>-12</sup>) within the gene that encodes dipeptidyl peptidase 9 (DPP9); and on chromosome 21q22.1 (rs2236757, P = 4.99 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) in the interferon receptor gene IFNAR2. We identified potential targets for repurposing of licensed medications: using Mendelian randomization, we found evidence that low expression of IFNAR2, or high expression of TYK2, are associated with life-threatening disease; and transcriptome-wide association in lung tissue revealed that high expression of the monocyte-macrophage chemotactic receptor CCR2 is associated with severe COVID-19. Our results identify robust genetic signals relating to key host antiviral defence mechanisms and mediators of inflammatory organ damage in COVID-19. Both mechanisms may be amenable to targeted treatment with existing drugs. However, large-scale randomized clinical trials will be essential before any change to clinical practice.

[PMID: 34826092]
OASs play critical roles in immune response against virus infection by polymerizing ATP into 2-5As, which initiate the classical OAS/RNase L pathway and induce degradation of viral RNA. OAS members are functionally diverged in four known innate immune pathways (OAS/RNase L, OASL/IRF7, OASL/RIG-I, and OASL/cGAS), but how they functionally diverged is unclear. Here, we focus on evolutionary patterns and explore the link between evolutionary processes and functional divergence of Tetrapod OAS1. We show that Palaeognathae and Primate OAS1 genes are conserved in genomic and protein structures but differ in function. The former (i.e., ostrich) efficiently synthesized long 2-5A and activated RNase L, while the latter (i.e., human) synthesized short 2-5A and did not activate RNase L. We predicted and verified that two in-frame indels and one positively selected site in the active site pocket contributed to the functional divergence of Palaeognathae and Primate OAS1. Moreover, we discovered and validated that an in-frame indel in the C-terminus of Palaeognathae OAS1 affected the binding affinity of dsRNA and enzymatic activity, and contributed to the functional divergence of Palaeognathae OAS1 proteins. Our findings unravel the molecular mechanism for functional divergence and give insights into the emergence of novel functions in Tetrapod OAS1.

[PMID: 34873989]
The innate immune system has an important role in developing the initial resistance to virus infection, and the ability of oligoadenylate synthetase to overcome viral evasion and enhance innate immunity is already established in humans. In the present study, we have tried to explore the molecular and structural variations present in Sahiwal (indigenous) and crossbred (Frieswal) cattle to identify the molecular mechanism of action of OAS1 gene in activation of innate immune response. The significant changes in structural alignment in terms of orientation of loops, shortening of β-sheets and formation of 3-10 α-helix was noticed in Sahiwal and Frieswal cattle. Further, it has been observed that OAS1 from Sahiwal had better binding with APC and DTP ligand than Frieswal OAS1. A remarkable change was seen in orientation at the nucleoside base region of both the ligands, which are bound with OAS1 protein from Frieswal and Sahiwal cattle. The Molecular Dynamic study of apo and ligand complex structures was provided more insight towards the stability of OAS1 from both cattle. This analysis displayed that the Sahiwal cattle protein has more steady nature throughout the simulation and has better binding towards Frieswal in terms of APC and DTP binding. Thus, OAS1 protein is the potential target for explaining the innate immune response in Sahiwal than Frieswal.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.