[PMID: 33847964]
The mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein (mtSSB) regulates the function of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replisome. In vitro, mtSSB stimulates the activity of enzymatic components of the replisome, namely mtDNA helicase and DNA polymerase gamma (Pol γ). We have demonstrated that the stimulatory properties of mtSSB result from its ability to organize the single-stranded DNA template in a specific manner. Here we present methods employing electron microscopy and enzymatic assays to characterize and classify the mtSSB-DNA complexes and their effects on the activity of Pol γ.

[PMID: 33847967]
RNA interference (RNAi) is a posttranscriptional gene silencing method that is triggered by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). RNAi is used to inactivate genes of interest and provides a genetic tool for loss-of-function studies in a variety of organisms.I have used this method to reveal the physiological roles of a number of endogenous proteins involved in mitochondrial DNA metabolism in Schneider cells, including the mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein. Here, I present experimental schemes of selective suppression of endogenous gene expression using RNAi in Drosophila Schneider S2 cells. With this method, the function of exogenous wild-type or mutant genes can be evaluated.

[PMID: 34215584]
We report a role for the mitochondrial single-stranded DNA binding protein (mtSSB) in regulating mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication initiation in mammalian mitochondria. Transcription from the light-strand promoter (LSP) is required both for gene expression and for generating the RNA primers needed for initiation of mtDNA synthesis. In the absence of mtSSB, transcription from LSP is strongly up-regulated, but no replication primers are formed. Using deep sequencing in a mouse knockout model and biochemical reconstitution experiments with pure proteins, we find that mtSSB is necessary to restrict transcription initiation to optimize RNA primer formation at both origins of mtDNA replication. Last, we show that human pathological versions of mtSSB causing severe mitochondrial disease cannot efficiently support primer formation and initiation of mtDNA replication.

[PMID: 34185867]
A mitochondrion is a semiautonomous organelle that provides energy for life activities and balances plant growth and stress responses. Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates multiple physiological processes, including seed maturation, seed dormancy, stomatal closure and various abiotic stress responses. However, the relationship between mitochondrial activity and the ABA response is unclear. In this study, an Arabidopsis mutant, ssb1-1, was isolated because of its hypersensitivity toward ABA. Assessment results showed that ABA negatively regulates the expression of Arabidopsis SSB1. Mutations in ABA-insensitive 4 (ABI4) and ABI5, genes of key transcription factors involved in ABA-dependent seed dormancy, attenuated the ABA sensitivity of ssb1-1 during germination, suggesting that Arabidopsis SSB1 may act as a regulator in ABA response. Inhibition of endogenous ABA biosynthesis reversed the NaCl-sensitive phenotype of the ssb1-1 mutant, indicating that enhanced ABA biosynthesis is critical for the salinity stress response of ssb1-1. Moreover, compared to that of the wild type, ssb1-1 accumulated more reactive oxygen species (ROS) and exhibited increased sensitivity to the application of exogenous H2O2 during seed germination. SSB1 is also required for mitochondrial RNA splicing, as indicated by the result showing that SSB1 loss of function led to a decreased splicing efficiency of nad1 intron1 and nad2 intron1. Taken together, our data reported here provide insights into a novel role of Arabidopsis SSB1 in ABA signaling and mitochondrial RNA splicing.

[PMID: 34539752]
The maintenance of the mitochondrial genome depends on a suite of nucleus-encoded proteins, among which the catalytic subunit of the mitochondrial replicative DNA polymerase, Pol γα, plays a pivotal role. Mutations in the Pol γα-encoding gene, <i>POLG</i>, are a major cause of human mitochondrial disorders. Here we present a study of direct and functional interactions of Pol γα with the mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein (mtSSB). mtSSB coordinates the activity of the enzymes at the DNA replication fork. However, the mechanism of this functional relationship is elusive, and no direct interactions between the replicative factors have been identified to date. This contrasts strikingly with the extensive interactomes of SSB proteins identified in other homologous replication systems. Here we show for the first time that mtSSB binds Pol γα directly, in a DNA-independent manner. This interaction is strengthened in the absence of the loop 2.3 structure in mtSSB, and is abolished upon preincubation with Pol γβ. Together, our findings suggest that the interaction between mtSSB and polymerase gamma holoenzyme (Pol γ) involves a balance between attractive and repulsive affinities, which have distinct effects on DNA synthesis and exonucleolysis.