[PMID: 23658160]
Ribbon synapses of tonically releasing sensory neurons must provide a large pool of releasable vesicles for sustained release, while minimizing spontaneous release in the absence of stimulation. Complexins are presynaptic proteins that may accomplish this dual task at conventional synapses by interacting with the molecular machinery of synaptic vesicle fusion at the active zone to retard spontaneous vesicle exocytosis yet facilitate release evoked by depolarization. However, ribbon synapses of photoreceptor cells and bipolar neurons in the retina express distinct complexin subtypes, perhaps reflecting the special requirements of these synapses for tonic release. To investigate the role of ribbon-specific complexins in transmitter release, we combined presynaptic voltage clamp, fluorescence imaging, electron microscopy, and behavioral assays of photoreceptive function in zebrafish. Acute interference with complexin function using a peptide derived from the SNARE-binding domain increased spontaneous synaptic vesicle fusion at ribbon synapses of retinal bipolar neurons without affecting release triggered by depolarization. Knockdown of complexin by injection of an antisense morpholino into zebrafish embryos prevented photoreceptor-driven migration of pigment in skin melanophores and caused the pigment distribution to remain in the dark-adapted state even when embryos were exposed to light. This suggests that loss of complexin function elevated spontaneous release in illuminated photoreceptors sufficiently to mimic the higher release rate normally associated with darkness, thus interfering with visual signaling. We conclude that visual system-specific complexins are required for proper illumination-dependent modulation of the rate of neurotransmitter release at visual system ribbon synapses.

[PMID: 30471689]
Complexins play a critical role in the regulation of neurotransmission by regulating SNARE-mediated exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. Complexins can exert either a facilitatory or an inhibitory effect on neurotransmitter release, depending on the context, and different complexin domains contribute differently to these opposing roles. Structural characterization of the central helix domain of complexin bound to the assembled SNARE bundle provided key insights into the functional mechanism of this domain of complexin, which is critical for both complexin activities, but many questions remain, particularly regarding the roles and mechanisms of other complexin domains. Recent progress has clarified the structural properties of these additional domains, and has led to various proposals regarding how they contribute to complexin function. This chapter describes spectroscopic approaches used in our laboratory and others, primarily involving circular dichroism and solution-state NMR spectroscopy, to characterize structure within complexins when isolated or when bound to interaction partners. The ability to characterize complexin structure enables structure/function studies employing in vitro or in vivo assays of complexin function. More generally, these types of approaches can be used to study the binding of other intrinsically disordered proteins or protein regions to membrane surfaces or for that matter to other large physiological binding partners.

[PMID: 31691534]
Complexins (CPLXs), initially identified in neuronal presynaptic terminals, are cytoplasmic proteins that interact with the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNARE) complex to regulate the fusion of vesicles to the plasma membrane. Although much is known about CPLX function in neuronal synaptic vesicle exocytosis, their distribution and role in immune cells are still unclear. In this study, we investigated CPLX2 knockout (KO) mice to reveal the role of CPLXs in exocytosis of lymphocytes. We examined the expression of CPLXs and SNAREs in lymphocytes. To study the effect of CPLXs on the immune system in vivo, we analyzed the immune phenotype of CPLX2 KO mice. Furthermore, antibodies secretion from the peritoneal cavity, spleen, and bone marrow cells of wild-type (WT) and CPLX2 KO mice were determined. CPLX2 was detected in B cells but not in T cells, while other CPLXs and SNAREs were expressed at a similar level in both B and T cells. To clarify the function of CPLX2 in B lymphocytes, serum concentrations of immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, IgM, and IgE were measured in WT and CPLX2 KO mice using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The level of IgM, which mainly consists of natural antibodies, was higher in KO mice than that in WT mice, while the levels of other antibodies were similar in both types of mice. Additionally, we found that spontaneous secretion of IgM and IgG1 was enhanced from the splenic antibody-secreting cells (ASCs) of CPLX2 KO mice. Our data suggest that CPLX2 inhibits spontaneous secretion of IgM and IgG1 from splenic ASCs. This study provides new insight into the mechanism of antibody secretion of ASCs.

[PMID: 23159779]
Complexins are small α-helical proteins that modulate neurotransmitter release by binding to SNARE complexes during synaptic vesicle exocytosis. They have been found to function as fusion clamps to inhibit spontaneous synaptic vesicle fusion in the absence of Ca(2+), while also promoting evoked neurotransmitter release following an action potential. Complexins consist of an N-terminal domain and an accessory α-helix that regulates the activating and inhibitory properties of the protein, respectively, and a central α-helix that binds the SNARE complex and is essential for both functions. In addition, complexins contain a largely unstructured C-terminal domain whose role in synaptic vesicle cycling is poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate that the C-terminus of Drosophila complexin (DmCpx) regulates localization to synapses and that alternative splicing of the C-terminus can differentially regulate spontaneous and evoked neurotransmitter release. Characterization of the single DmCpx gene by mRNA analysis revealed expression of two alternatively expressed isoforms, DmCpx7A and DmCpx7B, which encode proteins with different C-termini that contain or lack a membrane tethering prenylation domain. The predominant isoform, DmCpx7A, is further modified by RNA editing within this C-terminal region. Functional analysis of the splice isoforms showed that both are similarly localized to synaptic boutons at larval neuromuscular junctions, but have differential effects on the regulation of evoked and spontaneous fusion. These data indicate that the C-terminus of Drosophila complexin regulates both spontaneous and evoked release through separate mechanisms and that alternative splicing generates isoforms with distinct effects on the two major modes of synaptic vesicle fusion at synapses.

[PMID: 26019341]
Complexins (Cplxs) are small synaptic proteins that cooperate with SNARE-complexes in the control of synaptic vesicle (SV) fusion. Studies involving genetic mutation, knock-down, or knock-out indicated two key functions of Cplx that are not mutually exclusive but cannot easily be reconciled, one in facilitating SV fusion, and one in "clamping" SVs to prevent premature fusion. Most studies on the role of Cplxs in mammalian synapse function have relied on cultured neurons, heterologous expression systems, or membrane fusion assays in vitro, whereas little is known about the function of Cplxs in native synapses. We therefore studied consequences of genetic ablation of Cplx1 in the mouse calyx of Held synapse, and discovered a developmentally exacerbating phenotype of reduced spontaneous and evoked transmission but excessive asynchronous release after stimulation, compatible with combined facilitating and clamping functions of Cplx1. Because action potential waveforms, Ca(2+) influx, readily releasable SV pool size, and quantal size were unaltered, the reduced synaptic strength in the absence of Cplx1 is most likely a consequence of a decreased release probability, which is caused, in part, by less tight coupling between Ca(2+) channels and docked SV. We found further that the excessive asynchronous release in Cplx1-deficient calyces triggered aberrant action potentials in their target neurons, and slowed-down the recovery of EPSCs after depleting stimuli. The augmented asynchronous release had a delayed onset and lasted hundreds of milliseconds, indicating that it predominantly represents fusion of newly recruited SVs, which remain unstable and prone to premature fusion in the absence of Cplx1.