[PMID: 32048961]
Lactose is a reducing sugar consisting of galactose and glucose, linked by a β (1→4) glycosidic bond, considered as an antioxidant due to its α-hydroxycarbonyl group. Lactose is widely ingested through the milk and other unfermented dairy products and is considered to be one of the primary foods. On the other hand, lactose is also considered as one of the most widely used excipients for the development of pharmaceutical formulations. In this sense, lactose has been related to numerous drug-excipient or drug-food pharmacokinetic interactions. Intolerance, maldigestion and malabsorption of carbohydrates are common disorders in clinical practice, with lactose-intolerance being the most frequently diagnosed, afflicting 10% of the world's population. Four clinical subtypes of lactose intolerance may be distinguished, namely lactase deficiency in premature infants, congenital lactase deficiency, adult-type hypolactasia and secondary lactase intolerance. An overview of the main uses of lactose in human nutrition and in the pharmaceutical industry and the problems derived from this circumstance are described in this review.

[PMID: 31802224]
Adult lactose intolerance (ALI) significantly alters calcium intake and absorption, and thus may promote osteoporosis. ALI is a recessive condition with a geographical north-south gradient characterised by decreased levels of intestinal lactase. PCR-based genotyping of lactase (LCT) gene polymorphisms is a safe and easy way to diagnose ALI and may complement diagnostic procedures to identify individuals at risk for reduced calcium intake and subsequently osteoporosis due to lactose malabsorption. Therefore, we investigated the frequency of ALI and its influence on calcium intake, markers of bone metabolism and bone mineral density (BMD) in a cohort of Turkish immigrants living in Germany. We investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms of the LCT gene, calcium intake, markers of bone metabolism and BMD in 183 Turkish immigrants. ALI was diagnosed in 154 out of 183 (81%) probands. ALI was significantly associated with self-reported lactose intolerance (p < 0.001) and dislike for dairy products (p < 0.01). Osteopenia was diagnosed in 59 out of 183 (32%) and osteoporosis in 15 out of 183 (8%) probands. Probands with reduced BMD had ALI in 86%. All probands had a decreased calcium intake [mg/week]. There was no significant association between ALI, calcium intake, markers of bone metabolism or BMD. Turkish immigrants mostly have ALI and overall show a reduced calcium intake per week. However, ALI did not significantly influence calcium intake, markers of bone metabolism or BMD in this cohort. Therefore, ALI in Turkish immigrants does not seem to be a risk factor for osteoporosis.

[PMID: 32443748]
Lactose intolerance (LI) is characterized by the presence of primarily gastrointestinal clinical signs resulting from colonic fermentation of lactose, the absorption of which is impaired due to a deficiency in the lactase enzyme. These clinical signs can be modified by several factors, including lactose dose, residual lactase expression, concurrent ingestion of other dietary components, gut-transit time, and enteric microbiome composition. In many of individuals with lactose malabsorption, clinical signs may be absent after consumption of normal amounts of milk or, in particular, dairy products (yogurt and cheese), which contain lactose partially digested by live bacteria. The intestinal microbiota can be modulated by biotic supplementation, which may alleviate the signs and symptoms of LI. This systematic review summarizes the available evidence on the influence of prebiotics and probiotics on lactase deficiency and LI. The literature search was conducted using the MEDLINE (via PUBMED) and SCOPUS databases following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, and included randomized controlled trials. For each study selected, the risk of bias was assessed following the Cochrane Collaboration methodology. Our findings showed varying degrees of efficacy but an overall positive relationship between probiotics and LI in relation to specific strains and concentrations. Limitations regarding the wide heterogeneity between the studies included in this review should be taken into account. Only one study examined the benefits of prebiotic supplementation and LI. So further clinical trials are needed in order to gather more evidence.

[PMID: 30617948]
Lactose intolerance is a common condition caused by lactase deficiency and may result in symptoms of lactose malabsorption (bloating, flatulence, abdominal discomfort, and change in bowel habits). As current data is limited, the aim of our study was to assess the efficacy of probiotics with a β-galactosidase activity on symptoms of lactose malabsorption and on the lactose hydrogen breath test (LHBT). The study group comprised eight symptomatic female patients with a positive LHBT. Patients were treated for 6 months with a probiotic formula with β-galactosidase activity (Bio-25, Ambrosia-SupHerb, Israel). All patients completed a demographic questionnaire as well as a diary for the assessment of symptom severity and frequency at entry, every 8 weeks, and at the end of the treatment period. Measurements of hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>) levels (parts per million, ppm) at each of these time points were also performed. End points were a decrease of 50% in symptom severity or frequency, and the normalization (decrease below cutoff point of 20 ppm) of the breath test. Mean age and mean body mass index (BMI) were 36.4 ± 18.6 years and 23.2 kg/m<sup>2</sup>, respectively. Compared to baseline scores, the frequency of most symptoms, and the severity of bloating and flatulence, improved after treatment. Normalization of LHBT was obtained in only two patients (25%). In this pilot study, Bio-25, a unique formulation of probiotics with β-galactosidase activity, demonstrated symptom resolution in most patients with lactose malabsorption. A larger randomized trial is warranted to confirm these preliminary findings.

[PMID: 31904838]
Dairy products have been a key component of dietary guidance in the United States for more than 100 years. In light of major advances in the understanding of dietary intake and metabolism, the aim of this review was to examine whether dairy should remain a single commodity in federal guidance. Considerations include recognizing that a substantial proportion of the world's adult population (65%-70%) exhibits lactase nonpersistence, a reduced ability to metabolize lactose to glucose and galactose. Shifts in the US population, including a greater proportion of African Americans and Asians, are of key importance because several studies have shown a markedly higher prevalence of lactase nonpersistence and, consequently, a lower dairy intake among these groups. While cow's milk alternatives are available, families who use them will pay up to an additional $1400 per year compared with those who are able to consume dairy products. Dietary guidance also contains downstream effects for government assistance, such as the US Department of Agriculture's National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program. For reasons like these, Canada has recently removed dairy as a separate food group in national dietary guidance. The results of the present review suggest that consideration of this modification when developing population-level guidelines in the United States is warranted.