[PMID: 26957392]
A survey of reptile-associated ticks and their infection status with severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) virus was conducted to determine the relative abundance and distribution among lizards, skinks, and snakes in the Republic of Korea (ROK). In total, 132 reptiles, including 49 lizards (two species), 15 skinks (one species), and 68 snakes (eight species) were collected. In total, 84 ixodid ticks belonging to two genera (Ixodes and Amblyomma) were collected from 28/132 (21.2%) lizards, skinks, and snakes. Ixodes nipponensis Kitaoka & Saito was only collected from lizards and skinks, while Amblyomma testudinarium Koch was only collected from snakes. Takydromus wolteri had the highest tick index (0.7; total number ticks/total number collected hosts) among lizards and skinks, while Rhabdophis tigrinus had the highest tick index (2.2) among the snakes. Ixodes nipponensis larvae and nymphs accounted for 11.1% and 88.9%, respectively, of all ticks collected from lizards and skinks, while only A. testudinarium nymphs were collected from snakes. Nymphs of both species of ticks were collected from lizards and skinks from April to October, while I. nipponensis larvae were collected only from September to October. Ixodes nipponensis larvae and nymphs were preferentially attached to the lateral trunk (83.3%) and the foreleg axillae (16.7%) of lizards and skinks. SFTS virus was detected in both I. nipponensis and A. testudinarium collected from lizards and snakes. Phylogenetic analysis of SFTS viruses of ticks collected from two lizards and one snake demonstrated close relationships with SFTS virus strains observed from humans and ticks in the ROK, China, and Japan. These results implicate lizards and snakes as potential hosts of SFTS virus.

[PMID: 24793967]
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a newly identified viral zoonosis caused by a phlebovirus. Most reported SFTS cases are farmers living in rural areas. The seroprevalence of SFTS virus in farmers has not been investigated. The current knowledge of SFTS virus seroprevalence in animals, especially in wild animals, is still poor. To investigate SFTS virus seroprevalence among farmers and a variety of animal species. SFTS virus antibodies in sera were determined using a double-antigen sandwich ELISA. Serum samples were collected from 2547 farmers and 2741 animals in 6 SFTS-endemic counties from March 2012 to February 2013 in Jiangsu province. The farmer participants aged from 15 to 90 years. All of them were interviewed using a structured questionnaire. The animals sampled included 6 domesticated animal species and 2 wild animal species. SFTSV antibodies were found in a total of 33 farmers (1.30%) and was more prevalent in males than in females (respectively 1.87% and 0.71%, P<0.01). The mean age of seropositive farmers was 56.5 years and seroprevalence increased gradually with age. Seroprevalence in animal species were: goats (66.8%), cattle (28.2%), dogs (7.4%), pigs (4.7%), chickens (1.2%), geese (1.7%), rodents (4.4%) and hedgehogs (2.7%). Multiple variable logistic regression analysis showed that grazing, grass mowing, raising cattle, age, farm work time and tick bites were risk factors for SFTS virus infection among farmers. SFTSV readily infects humans with farming-related exposures as well as numerous domestic and wild animals. Serological results further suggest that the virus circulates widely in Jiangsu province.

[PMID: 29665796]
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an emerging tick-borne disease. Haemophysalis longicornis ticks have been considered the vector of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV). However, clear data on the transmission of SFTS from ticks to humans are limited. We report an 84-year-old woman who presented with fever and altered mentality, which was confirmed as SFTS with encephalopathy by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. The SFTSV was also identified in the tick that bit her, H. longicornis. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that the SFTSV from the patient and the tick was identical. The patient gradually recovered with treatments of corticosteroids and immunoglobulin. These findings provide further evidence of SFTS viral transmission from H. longicornis to human.

[PMID: 25711611]
In total, 3,145 ticks of the species Haemaphysalis longicornis (3,048; 96.9%), R. microplus (82; 2.6%), H. campanulata (9; 0.3%), and Dermacentor sinicus (5; 0.2%) were collected from animals and vegetation at Yantai in Shandong Province. Both adult and immature ticks were obtained, and all ticks collected from vegetation were unfed. Eggs were obtained from 22 blood-fed female ticks through maintenance at room temperature after collection. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) viral RNA was identified in H. longicornis and R. microplus, with a prevalence of 4.75 per 100 ticks (95% confidence interval [95% CI] = 3.87-5.63) for ticks collected from animals and 2.24 per 100 ticks (95% CI = 1.27-3.21) for ticks collected from vegetation. The possibility that SFTSV transmission may occur by both the transstadial and transovarial routes was suggested by the fact that viral RNA was detected in H. longicornis at all developmental stages. Tick-derived sequences shared over 95.6% identity with human- and animal-derived isolates. This study provides evidence that implicates ticks as not only vectors but also, reservoirs of SFTSV.

[PMID: 27495089]
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a new emerging zoonosis. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a life-threatening syndrome caused by hyperinflammation. Here, we report the case of SFTS-associated HLH. A 62-year-old man was admitted to local hospital with 8 days of fever and chill. He had leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and developed seizure. An attending physician examined bone marrow to rule out hematologic malignancy. He was transferred to tertiary referral hospital for suspicious HLH. We decided to confirm its histologic feature for sure. Bone marrow and liver biopsy showed hemophagocyotic histiocytes. Serological tests for other infections were all negative except SFTS virus polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) as positive from serum, bone marrow, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and liver biopsy specimen. A definitive diagnosis was SFTS-associated HLH. During 2 weeks of conservative treatment, he succeeded in recovery from multiple organ failure. SFTS should be considered one of differential diagnosis of HLH. In certain endemic areas, SFTS infection deserves clinicians' attention because it can be presented hematologic diseases as HLH.