[PMID: 25373504]
Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome (ATS) is a very rare autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder (CTD) characterized by tortuosity and elongation of the large- and medium-sized arteries and a propensity for aneurysm formation and vascular dissection. During infancy, children frequently present the involvement of the pulmonary arteries (elongation, tortuosity, stenosis) with dyspnea and cyanosis. Other CTD signs of ATS are dysmorphisms, abdominal hernias, joint hypermobility, skeletal abnormalities, and keratoconus. ATS is typically described as a severe disease with high rate of mortality due to major cardiovascular malformations. ATS is caused by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene, which encodes the facilitative glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10). Approximately 100 ATS patients have been described, and 21 causal mutations have been identified in the SLC2A10 gene. We describe the clinical findings and molecular characterization of three new ATS families, which provide insight into the clinical phenotype of the disorder; furthermore, we expand the allelic repertoire of SLC2A10 by identifying two novel mutations. We also review the ATS patients characterized by our group and compare their clinical findings with previous data. Our data confirm that the cardiovascular prognosis in ATS is less severe than previously reported and that the first years of life are the most critical for possible life-threatening events. Molecular diagnosis is mandatory to distinguish ATS from other CTDs and to define targeted clinical follow-up and timely cardiovascular surgical or interventional treatment, when needed.

[PMID: 28726533]
Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease hallmarked by tortuosity, stenosis, and aneurysm development of large- and medium-sized arteries. Mutations in SLC2A10, a gene that encodes the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10, cause ATS. Several case reports have noted associated ophthalmic findings such as keratoconus, keratoglobus, and myopia without detailed descriptions or standardized examinations. We report the ophthalmic findings in a cohort of compound heterozygous ATS patients and heterozygous carriers of SLC2A10 mutations. Five ATS patients and three carriers were identified through an ATS specialty clinic at the Arkansas Children's Hospital in Little Rock, Arkansas. Patients underwent complete eye examinations, including corneal pachymetry, topography, and optical coherence tomography when indicated. All five patients with ATS had myopia and thin corneas with an average central corneal thickness of 426 µm, and three had corneal ectasia, two with early keratoconus and one with keratoglobus and deep stromal corneal opacities. One patient had bilateral high irregular astigmatism, and one had unilateral high regular astigmatism. All carriers had myopia, one had corneal thinning, and one developed keratectasia in one eye many years after laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) surgery. We document a spectrum of ophthalmic manifestations of ATS with universal findings of myopia, corneal thinning, and a propensity for corneal ectasia leading to keratoconus or keratoglobus. Heterozygous carriers may develop keratectasia after corneal refractive surgery. Our data support regular eye examinations for all patients carrying SLC2A10 mutations with follow-up tailored to clinical findings.

[PMID: 22116938]
Growth factor signaling results in dramatic phenotypic changes in cells, which require commensurate alterations in cellular metabolism. Mutations in SLC2A10/GLUT10, a member of the facilitative glucose transporter family, are associated with altered transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) signaling in patients with arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS). The objective of this work was to test whether SLC2A10/GLUT10 can serve as a link between TGFβ-related transcriptional regulation and metabolism during development. In zebrafish embryos, knockdown of slc2a10 using antisense morpholino oligonucleotide injection caused a wavy notochord and cardiovascular abnormalities with a reduced heart rate and blood flow, which was coupled with an incomplete and irregular vascular patterning. This was phenocopied by treatment with a small-molecule inhibitor of TGFβ receptor (tgfbr1/alk5). Array hybridization showed that the changes at the transcriptome level caused by the two treatments were highly correlated, revealing that a reduced tgfbr1 signaling is a key feature of ATS in early zebrafish development. Interestingly, a large proportion of the genes, which were specifically dysregulated after glut10 depletion gene and not by tgfbr1 inhibition, play a major role in mitochondrial function. Consistent with these results, slc2a10 morphants showed decreased respiration and reduced TGFβ reporter gene activity. Finally, co-injection of antisense morpholinos targeting slc2a10 and smad7 (a TGFβ inhibitor) resulted in a partial rescue of smad7 morphant phenotypes, suggesting scl2a10/glut10 functions downstream of smads. Taken together, glut10 is essential for cardiovascular development by facilitating both mitochondrial respiration and TGFβ signaling.

[PMID: 26376865]
Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in SLC2A10, which encodes facilitative glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10). The role of GLUT10 in ATS pathogenesis remains an enigma, and the transported metabolite(s), i.e. glucose and/or dehydroascorbic acid, have not been clearly elucidated. To discern the molecular mechanisms underlying the ATS aetiology, we performed gene expression profiling and biochemical studies on skin fibroblasts. Transcriptome analyses revealed the dysregulation of several genes involved in TGFβ signalling and extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis as well as the perturbation of specific pathways that control both the cell energy balance and the oxidative stress response. Biochemical and functional studies showed a marked increase in ROS-induced lipid peroxidation sustained by altered PPARγ function, which contributes to the redox imbalance and the compensatory antioxidant activity of ALDH1A1. ATS fibroblasts also showed activation of a non-canonical TGFβ signalling due to TGFBRI disorganization, the upregulation of TGFBRII and connective tissue growth factor, and the activation of the αvβ3 integrin transduction pathway, which involves p125FAK, p60Src and p38 MAPK. Stable GLUT10 expression in patients' fibroblasts normalized redox homeostasis and PPARγ activity, rescued canonical TGFβ signalling and induced partial ECM re-organization. These data add new insights into the ATS dysregulated biological pathways and definition of the pathomechanisms involved in this disorder.

[PMID: 26398550]
Arterial tortuosity is emerging as a common feature in genetically mediated thoracic aortic disease that may be prognostic. This review will summarize recent literature on arterial tortuosity in the setting of genetic arteriopathies. Although arterial tortuosity has been primarily described in Loeys-Dietz syndrome due to TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 mutations and in arterial tortuosity syndrome due to SLC210A mutations, recent studies that use quantitative measures of tortuosity suggest that tortuosity is present in many other genetic conditions associated with aortic dilation and dissection. The mechanisms of the development of tortuosity in these disorders are not fully understood, but are founded in the concept that there is abnormal, pathologic arterial lengthening in a fixed space, resulting in more tortuous vessels. Further studies suggest that patients with increased arterial tortuosity are at increased risk of adverse cardiovascular events, including aortic surgery, aortic dissection, and death. Arterial tortuosity is commonly present in genetically mediated aortic disease. Given the suboptimal performance of aortic dimension alone in predicting aortic dissection, quantification of tortuosity may augment the current algorithms for determining risk in patients with aortic disease.