[PMID: 21914464]
Intronless genes (IGs) fraction varies between 2.7 and 97.7% in eukaryotic genomes. Although many databases on exons and introns exist, there was no curated database for such genes which allowed their study in a concerted manner. Such a database would be useful to identify the functional features and the distribution of these genes across the genome. Here, a new database of IGs in eukaryotes based on GenBank data was described. This database, called IGD (Intronless Gene Database), is a collection of gene sequences that were annotated and curated. The current version of IGD contains 687 human intronless genes with their protein and CDS sequences. Some features of the entries are given in this paper. Data was extracted from GenBank release 183 using a Perl script. Data extraction was followed by a manual curation step. Intronless genes were then analyzed based on their RefSeq annotation and Gene Ontology functional class. IGD represents a useful resource for retrieval and in silico study of intronless genes. IGD is available at http://www.bioinfo-cbs.org/igd with comprehensive help and FAQ pages that illustrate the main uses of this resource.

[PMID: 22732409]
Intronless genes (IGs) constitute approximately 3% of the human genome. Human IGs are essentially different in evolution and functionality from the IGs of unicellular eukaryotes, which represent the majority in their genomes. Functional analysis of IGs has revealed a massive over-representation of signal transduction genes and genes encoding regulatory proteins important for growth, proliferation, and development. IGs also often display tissue-specific expression, usually in the nervous system and testis. These characteristics translate into IG-associated diseases, mainly neuropathies, developmental disorders, and cancer. IGs represent recent additions to the genome, created mostly by retroposition of processed mRNAs with retained functionality. Processing, nuclear export, and translation of these mRNAs should be hampered dramatically by the lack of splice factors, which normally tightly cover mature transcripts and govern their fate. However, natural IGs manage to maintain satisfactory expression levels. Different mechanisms by which IGs solve the problem of mRNA processing and nuclear export are discussed here, along with their possible impact on reporter studies.

[PMID: 11333024]
Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), also called mRNA surveillance, is an evolutionarily conserved pathway that degrades mRNAs that prematurely terminate translation. To date, the pathway in mammalian cells has been shown to depend on the presence of a cis-acting destabilizing element that usually consists of an exon-exon junction generated by the process of pre-mRNA splicing. Whether or not mRNAs that derive from naturally intronless genes, that is, mRNAs not formed by the process of splicing, are also subject to NMD has yet to be investigated. The possibility of NMD is certainly reasonable considering that mRNAs of Saccharomyces cerevisiae are subject to NMD even though most derive from naturally intronless genes. In fact, mRNAs of S. cerevisiae generally harbor a loosely defined splicing-independent destabilizing element that has been proposed to function in NMD analogously to the spliced exon-exon junction of mammalian mRNAs. Here, we demonstrate that nonsense codons introduced into naturally intronless genes encoding mouse heat shock protein 70 or human histone H4 fail to elicit NMD. Failure is most likely because each mRNA lacks a cis-acting destabilizing element, because insertion of a spliceable intron a sufficient distance downstream of a nonsense codon within either gene is sufficient to elicit NMD.

[PMID: 26415210]
Nucleosomes, the basic units of chromatin, are involved in transcription regulation and DNA replication. Intronless genes, which constitute 3 percent of the human genome, differ from intron-containing genes in evolution and function. Our analysis reveals that nucleosome positioning shows a distinct pattern in intronless and intron-containing genes. The nucleosome occupancy upstream of transcription start sites of intronless genes is lower than that of intron-containing genes. In contrast, high occupancy and well positioned nucleosomes are observed along the gene body of intronless genes, which is perfectly consistent with the barrier nucleosome model. Intronless genes have a significantly lower expression level than intron-containing genes and most of them are not expressed in CD4+ T cell lines and GM12878 cell lines, which results from their tissue specificity. However, the highly expressed genes are at the same expression level between the two types of genes. The highly expressed intronless genes require a higher density of RNA Pol II in an elongating state to compensate for the lack of introns. Additionally, 5' and 3' nucleosome depleted regions of highly expressed intronless genes are deeper than those of highly expressed intron-containing genes.

[PMID: 16469316]
Using computational approaches we have identified 2017 expressed intronless genes in the mouse genome. Evolutionary analysis reveals that 56 intronless genes are conserved among the three domains of life--bacteria, archea and eukaryotes. These highly conserved intronless genes were found to be involved in essential housekeeping functions. About 80% of expressed mouse intronless genes have orthologs in eukaryotic genomes only, and thus are specific to eukaryotic organisms. 608 of these genes have intronless human orthologs and 302 of these orthologs have a match in OMIM database. Investigation into these mouse genes will be important in generating mouse models for understanding human diseases.