[PMID: 27632666]
Telomestatin, a natural product isolated from Streptomyces anulatus, stabilizes telomeric DNA G-quadruplexes. Treatment with this ligand induces apoptosis of various cancer cells with a relatively low effect on somatic cells because of its high selectivity toward G-quadruplex over duplex DNA. A high-resolution structure of a G-quadruplex in complex with telomestatin does not yet exist because of its low solubility, and the binding nature of this ligand remains elusive. In this study, we utilized molecular binding simulations and MMGBSA binding energy analysis to decipher the nature of the binding of telomestatin to a telomeric G-quadruplex. We identified three major binding poses: bottom intercalation, top stacking, and groove binding. The top stacking mode resembles the pose observed in an NMR complex of the same G-quadruplex with the telomestatin analogue L2H. The bottom intercalation and groove binding poses were not observed in the previous studies of L2H. The bottom intercalation mode exhibited the most favorable binding energy among the three modes, while also partially intercalating into the telomeric quadruplex. The dynamic and energetic properties of these three binding modes are thoroughly examined. "Flip insertion" and "slide insertion" were observed in the bottom intercalation mode. Our findings also provide insight into the design of more selective DNA quadruplex ligands as anticancer agents in the future.

[PMID: 11878947]
Telomestatin is a natural product isolated from Streptomyces anulatus 3533-SV4 and has been shown to be a very potent telomerase inhibitor. The structural similarity between telomestatin and a G-tetrad suggested to us that the telomerase inhibition might be due to its ability either to facilitate the formation of or trap out preformed G-quadruplex structures, and thereby sequester single-stranded d[T(2)AG(3)](n) primer molecules required for telomerase activity. Significantly, telomestatin appears to be a more potent inhibitor of telomerase (5 nM) than any of the previously described G-quadruplex-interactive molecules. In this communication we provide the first experimental evidence that telomestatin selectively facilitates the formation of or stabilizes intramolecular G-quadruplexes, in particular, that produced from the human telomeric sequence d[T(2)AG(3)](4). A simulated annealing (SA) docking approach was used to study the binding interactions of telomestatin with the intramolecular antiparallel G-quadruplex structure. Each intramolecular G-quadruplex molecule was found to bind two telomestatin molecules (unpublished results). A 2:1 model for the telomestatin bound in the external stacking mode in an energy minimized complex with the human telomeric basket-type G-quadruplex was constructed. Our observation that a G-quadruplex-interactive molecule without significant groove interactions is able to reorient in a G-quadruplex structure proints to the importance of core interaction with an asymmetric G-quadruplex structure in producing selective binding. Furthermore, the G-quadruplex interactions of telomestatin are more selective for the intramolecular structure in contrast to other G-quadruplex-interactive agents, such as TMPyP4.

[PMID: 34285374]
G-quadruplexes (G4s) are higher-order structures formed by guanine-rich sequences of nucleic acids, such as the telomeric 5'-TTAGGG-3'/5'-UUAGGG-3' repeats and those in gene regulatory regions. G4s regulate various biological events, including replication, transcription, and translation. Imbalanced G4 dynamics is associated with diseases, such as cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. Telomestatin is a natural macrocyclic compound derived from Streptomyces anulatus 3533-SV4. It interacts with the guanine quartet via π-π stacking and potently stabilizes G4. Because G4 stabilization at the telomeric repeat inhibits the telomere-synthesizing enzyme telomerase, telomestatin was originally identified as a telomerase inhibitor. Whereas non-toxic doses of telomestatin induce gradual shortening of telomeres and eventual crisis in human cancer cells, higher doses trigger prompt replication stress and DNA damage responses, resulting in acute cell death. Suppression of the transcription and translation of G4-containing genes is also implicated in the anticancer effects of telomestatin. Because telomestatin is rare, labile, and insoluble, synthetic oxazole telomestatin derivatives have been developed and verified for their therapeutic efficacies in preclinical cancer models. Furthermore, a variety of G4-stabilizing compounds have been reported as promising seeds for molecular cancer therapeutics. To improve the design of future clinical studies, it will be important to identify predictive biomarkers of drug efficacy.

[PMID: 15283144]
A novel telomerase inhibitor, telomestatin, isolated from Streptomyces anulatus is the most potent telomerase inhibitor so far. Telomestatin specifically inhibited telomerase without affecting reverse transcriptases and polymerases. In addition, telomestatin induced telomere shortening, but its ratio was extremely faster than that observed in physiological telomere shortening. These results suggested the existence of other mechanisms to inhibit telomerase. Telomeres consist of guanine rich sequences which compose a characteristic three-dimensional structure designated as G-quadruplex. Stabilization of G-quadruplex structure inhibited the catalysis of not only telomerase but also other DNA interacting molecules. Telomestatin potently stabilized G-quadruplex structure in a specific manner. G-quadruplex structure is also involved in a lot of oncogene promoters. Thus, telomestatin provide the novel therapeutic molecular target for cancer chemotherapy.

[PMID: 12810655]
Demonstration of the existence of G-quadruplex structures in telomeres of Stylonychia macronuclei and in the promoter of c-myc in human cells has validated these secondary DNA structures as potential targets for drug design. The next important issue is the selectivity of G-quadruplex-interactive agents for the different types of G-quadruplex structures. In this study, we have taken an important step in associating specific biological effects of these drugs with selective interaction with either intermolecular or intramolecular G-quadruplex structures formed in telomeres. Telomestatin is a natural product isolated from Streptomyces anulatus 3533-SV4 and has been shown to be a very potent telomerase inhibitor through its G-quadruplex interaction. We have demonstrated that telomestatin interacts preferentially with intramolecular versus intermolecular G-quadruplex structures and also has a 70-fold selectivity for intramolecular G-quadruplex structures over duplex DNA. Telomestatin is able to stabilize G-quadruplex structures that are formed from duplex human telomeric DNA as well as from single-stranded DNA. Importantly, telomestatin stabilizes these G-quadruplex structures in the absence of monovalent cations, which is a unique characteristic among G-quadruplex-interactive compounds. At noncytotoxic concentrations, telomestatin suppresses the proliferation of telomerase-positive cells within several weeks. In contrast, TMPyP4, a compound that preferentially facilitates the formation of intermolecular G-quadruplex structures, suppresses the proliferation of alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT)-positive cells as well as telomerase-positive cells. We have also demonstrated that TMPyP4 induces anaphase bridges in sea urchin embryos, whereas telomestatin did not have this effect, leading us to conclude that the selectivity of telomestatin for intramolecular G-quadruplex structures and TMPyP4 for intermolecular G-quadruplex structures is important in mediating different biological effects: stabilization of intramolecular G-quadruplex structures produces telomerase inhibition and accelerated telomere shortening, whereas facilitation of the formation of intermolecular G-quadruplex structures induces the formation of anaphase bridges.