[PMID: 28974143]
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) in higher organisms repair massive DNA abrasions caused by ultraviolet rays, and various mutagens, where Xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) protein is known to be involved in damage recognition step. Any mutations in XPA cause classical Xeroderma pigmentosum disease. The extent to which XPA is required in the NER is still unclear. Here, we present the comparative study on the structural and conformational changes in globular DNA binding domain of XPA<sub>98-210</sub> in DNA bound and DNA free state. Atomistic molecular dynamics simulation was carried out for both XPA<sub>98-210</sub> systems using AMBER force fields. We observed that XPA<sub>98-210</sub> in presence of damaged DNA exhibited more structural changes compared to XPA<sub>98-210</sub> in its free form. When XPA is in contact with DNA, we found marked stability of the complex due to the formation of characteristic longer antiparallel β-sheets consisting mainly lysine residues.

[PMID: 29403087]
Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias (ARCAs) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous neurological disorders. Through whole-exome sequencing of Japanese ARCA patients, we identified three index patients from unrelated families who had biallelic mutations in ERCC4. ERCC4 mutations have been known to cause xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group F (XP-F), Cockayne syndrome, and Fanconi anemia phenotypes. All of the patients described here showed very slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia and cognitive decline with choreiform involuntary movement, with young adolescent or midlife onset. Brain MRI demonstrated atrophy that included the cerebellum and brainstem. Of note, cutaneous symptoms were very mild: there was normal to very mild pigmentation of exposed skin areas and/or an equivocal history of pathological sunburn. However, an unscheduled DNA synthesis assay of fibroblasts from the patient revealed impairment of nucleotide excision repair. A similar phenotype was very recently recognized through genetic analysis of Caucasian cerebellar ataxia patients. Our results confirm that biallelic ERCC4 mutations cause a cerebellar ataxia-dominant phenotype with mild cutaneous symptoms, possibly accounting for a high proportion of the genetic causes of ARCA in Japan, where XP-F is prevalent.

[PMID: 26074087]
The ERCC1 and ERCC4 genes encode the two subunits of the ERCC1-XPF nuclease. This enzyme plays an important role in repair of DNA damage and in maintaining genomic stability. ERCC1-XPF nuclease nicks DNA specifically at junctions between double-stranded and single-stranded DNA, when the single-strand is oriented 5' to 3' away from a junction. ERCC1-XPF is a core component of nucleotide excision repair and also plays a role in interstrand crosslink repair, some pathways of double-strand break repair by homologous recombination and end-joining, as a backup enzyme in base excision repair, and in telomere length regulation. In many of these activities, ERCC1-XPF complex cleaves the 3' tails of DNA intermediates in preparation for further processing. ERCC1-XPF interacts with other proteins including XPA, RPA, SLX4 and TRF2 to perform its functions. Disruption of these interactions or direct targeting of ERCC1-XPF to decrease its DNA repair function might be a useful strategy to increase the sensitivity of cancer cells to some DNA damaging agents. Complete deletion of either ERCC1 or ERCC4 is not compatible with viability in mice or humans. However, mutations in the ERCC1 or ERCC4 genes cause a remarkable array of rare inherited human disorders. These include specific forms of xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome, Fanconi anemia, XFE progeria and cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome.

[PMID: 29105242]
Pathogenic variants in genes, which encode DNA repair and damage response proteins, result in a number of genomic instability syndromes with features of accelerated aging. ERCC4 (XPF) encodes a protein that forms a complex with ERCC1 and is required for the 5' incision during nucleotide excision repair. ERCC4 is also FANCQ, illustrating a critical role in interstrand crosslink repair. Pathogenic variants in this gene cause xeroderma pigmentosum, XFE progeroid syndrome, Cockayne syndrome (CS), and Fanconi anemia. We performed massive parallel sequencing for 42 unsolved cases submitted to the International Registry of Werner Syndrome. Two cases, each carrying two novel heterozygous ERCC4 variants, were identified. The first case was a compound heterozygote for: c.2395C > T (p.Arg799Trp) and c.388+1164_792+795del (p.Gly130Aspfs*18). Further molecular and cellular studies indicated that the ERCC4 variants in this patient are responsible for a phenotype consistent with a variant of CS. The second case was heterozygous for two variants in cis: c.[1488A > T; c.2579C > A] (p.[Gln496His; Ala860Asp]). While the second case also had several phenotypic features of accelerated aging, we were unable to provide biological evidence supporting the pathogenic roles of the associated ERCC4 variants. Precise genetic causes and disease mechanism of the second case remains to be determined.

[PMID: 28676261]
Biochemical risk assessment studies of chemicals that induce DNA lesions are important, because lesions in genomic DNA frequently result in cancer, neurodegeneration, and aging in humans. Many classes of DNA lesions induced by chemical agents are eliminated via DNA repair mechanisms, such as nucleotide excision repair (NER) and base excision repair (BER), for the maintenance of genomic integrity. Individuals with NER-defective xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), in which bulky DNA lesions are not efficiently removed, are cancer-prone and suffer neurodegeneration. For research into cancer and neurological diseases, therefore, it might be important to identify DNA damage from agents that induce NER-repairable bulky DNA lesions. However, simple and quick assays to detect such damaging agents have not been developed using human cells. Here, we report a simple, non-isotopic assay for determining DNA damaging agents that induce NER-repairable DNA lesions by visualizing gene expression from treated fluorescent protein vectors in a mammalian cell system. This assay is based on a comparison of fluorescent protein expression in NER-proficient and NER-deficient cells. When we tested UV-irradiated fluorescent protein vectors, the fluorescent protein was observed in NER-proficient cells, but not in NER-deficient cells. Similar results were obtained for vectors treated with the anticancer drug, cisplatin. In contrast, when treated with the DNA alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate, believed to cause BER-repairable damage, no difference in gene expression between NER-proficient and NER-deficient cells was observed. These results suggest that our assay can specifically detect DNA-damaging agents that induce NER-repairable DNA lesions, and could be used to analyze chemicals with the potential to cause cancer and neurological diseases. With further validation, the assay might be also applicable to XP diagnosis.