[PMID: 12970845]
Myotonic dystrophy (DM), the most common form of muscular dystrophy in adults, is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous neuromuscular disorder. DM is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, muscular dystrophy, myotonia, and multisystem involvement. Type 1 DM (DM1) is caused by a (CTG)(n) expansion in the 3' untranslated region of DMPK in 19q13.3. Multiple families, predominantly of German descent and with clinically variable presentation that included proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM) and type 2 DM (DM2) but without the DM1 mutation, showed linkage to the 3q21 region and were recently shown to segregate a (CCTG)(n) expansion mutation in intron 1 of ZNF9. Here, we present linkage to 3q21 and mutational confirmation in 17 kindreds of European origin with PROMM and proximal myotonic dystrophy, from geographically distinct populations. All patients have the DM2 (CCTG)(n) expansion. To study the evolution of this mutation, we constructed a comprehensive physical map of the DM2 region around ZNF9. High-resolution haplotype analysis of disease chromosomes with five microsatellite and 22 single-nucleotide polymorphism markers around the DM2 mutation identified extensive linkage disequilibrium and a single shared haplotype of at least 132 kb among patients from the different populations. With the exception of the (CCTG)(n) expansion, the available markers indicate that the DM2 haplotype is identical to the most common haplotype in normal individuals. This situation is reminiscent of that seen in DM1. Taken together, these data suggest a single founding mutation in DM2 patients of European origin. We estimate the age of the founding haplotype and of the DM2 (CCTG) expansion mutation to be approximately 200-540 generations.

[PMID: 18228241]
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant disorder, caused by an expansion of a CTG triplet repeat in the DMPK gene. The aims of the present study were to classify a cohort of children with DM1, to describe their neuropsychiatric problems and cognitive level, to estimate the size of the CTG expansion, and to correlate the molecular findings with the neuropsychiatric problems. Fifty-seven children and adolescents (26 females; 31 males) with DM1 (CTG repeats > 40) were included in the study. The following instruments were used: Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R), 5-15, Griffiths Mental Development Scales, and the Wechsler Scales. Based on age at onset and presenting symptoms, the children were divided into four DM1 groups; severe congenital (n = 19), mild congenital (n = 18), childhood (n = 18), and classical DM1 (n = 2). Forty-nine percent had an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and autistic disorder was the most common diagnosis present in 35% of the subjects. Eighty-six percent of the individuals with DM1 had mental retardation (MR), most of them moderate or severe MR. ASD was significantly correlated with the DM1 form; the more severe the form of DM1, the higher the frequency of ASD. The frequency of ASD increased with increasing CTG repeat expansions. ASD and/or other neuropsychiatric disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and Tourette's disorder were found in 54% of the total DM1 group. In conclusion, awareness of ASD comorbidity in DM1 is essential. Further studies are warranted to elucidate the molecular etiology causing neurodevelopmental symptoms such as ASD and MR in DM1.

[PMID: 8154209]
Dystrophic myotonia is a sufficiently rare disease inherited mainly by the autosomal dominant type. Clinical picture is characterized by the myotonic, myopathic, and endocrine-autonomic syndrome. A clinical, genetic, and electromyographic study was carried out to elucidate the problem of this condition inheritance, its intra- and interfamilial clinical polymorphism, and effects of environmental factors on its course and outcomes.

[PMID: 22332444]
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is an autosomal dominant, multisystem disorder caused by a CCTG tetranucleotide repeat expansion located in intron 1 of the zinc finger protein 9 gene (ZNF9 gene) on chromosome 3q 21.3. To describe the clinical, electrophysiologic and pathologic findings in patients with myotonic dystrophy 2. We evaluated 10 patients genetically, clinically and electrophysiologically during the years 2007 to 2008. All patients were of Jewish European ancestry. Among affected individuals, eight patients had symptoms of proximal muscle weakness, two had muscle pain, and two exhibited myotonia. On physical examination six patients had severe weakness of hip flexor muscles. Seven individuals underwent cataract surgery, and cardiac involvement was seen in one case. On the initial electromyographic (EMG) examination five patients demonstrated myotonic discharges; repeated studies showed these discharges in nine cases. Six muscle biopsies showed non-specific pathological changes. Seven patients had an affected first-degree relative with either a diagnosed or an undiagnosed muscular disorder consistent with an autosomal dominant trait. DM2 may often present with proximal muscle weakness without myotonia. EMG may initially fail to show myotonic discharges, but these discharges may eventually show in most cases on repeated EMG. Thus, DM2 may be underdiagnosed and should be included in the differential diagnosis of adult patients of Jewish European ancestry presenting with proximal lower limb weakness.

[PMID: 12577208]
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is a neuromuscular, degenerative and progressive disease, with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. The genetic defect is an unstable mutation due to the expansion of the triplet CTG in the 3 unstranslated region at the DMPK gene on chromosome 19q13.3. The main objective was to study the intergenerational behavior of the DM1 mutation in order to evaluate the importance of this disease as a neurological problem that could be manageable by genetic counseling. The study involved 84 patients with clinical diagnosis of DM1 and their relatives, which were confirmed through molecular diagnosis using Southern blot and PCR. Data analysis reveals the size of the mutation presents a positive correlation with the severity of the symptoms and a negative correlation with the age of onset. Transmission of the DM1 mutation is sex and size dependent among the Costa Rican patients. There is an important increment in the size of the mutation between generations and there are no differences in mutation size respect to the transmitting sex. The worldwide intergenerational behavior of the DM1 mutation is similar in Costa Rica