[PMID: 28796412]
The prognostic significance of the half-lives (HLs) of α-fetoprotein (AFP) and des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) in patients undergoing hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is unclear. We evaluated the HLs of AFP and DCP in a cohort of such patients. This study included data on 202 patients with HCC who underwent curative hepatectomy and had preoperative AFP concentrations ≥100 ng/mL or DCP ≥200 mAU/mL. We calculated the HLs of AFP and DCP from their values just before and 1 month after hepatectomy. We identified three groups: a normalization group, tumor marker concentrations within normal range 1 month post-hepatectomy; a long group, HL of AFP ≥7 days or DCP ≥4 days; and a short group, remaining patients. We evaluated associations between HL and prognosis. Three-year recurrence-free survival (RFS) in the normalization (n = 70), short (n = 71), and long groups (n = 61) was 41.3%, 46.0%, and 16.8%, respectively (P = 0.002). Five-year overall survival (OS) of normalization, short, and long groups was 72.6, 70.6 and 43.8%, respectively (P = 0.002). Multivariate analysis revealed that long HL is an independent risk factor for poor RFS (hazard ratio [HR] 2.21, P = 0.0006) and poor OS (HR 2.70, P = 0.004). The extrahepatic recurrence rate was 21.3% (13/61) in the long group, which is higher than in the normalization group (8.6%, 6/70) (P = 0.04) and short group (9.9%, 7/71) (P = 0.07). Post-hepatectomy HLs of AFP and DCP are predictors of long-term outcome in patients with HCC.

[PMID: 29154784]
We tested whether transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) signaling plays an important role in hepatic stellate cell differentiation fate and investigated the role of Jagged1/Notch in this process. TGF-β1 was overexpressed and transforming growth factor receptor 1 (TGF-β-R1) was knocked down by a lentiviral vector in mouse hepatic stellate cells (mHSCs). Transfection efficiency was assessed with immunofluorescence, quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and western blotting. The downstream genes alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), Jagged1 and the differentiation markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), albumin (ALB), cytokeratin19 (CK19), SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 9 (SOX9), and hairy and enhancer of split-1 (Hes1) were measured with qRT-PCR and western blotting. SpHBLV-CMVIE-TGF-β1, pHBLV-CMVIE-GFP, pHBLV-U6-TGF-β-R1 shRNA, and pHBLV-U6-RFP were successfully transfected. Over-expression of the TGF-β1 gene caused mHSCs to transform into myofibroblasts (MFs) and expression of Jagged1 and cholangiocyte markers (CK19, SOX9, Hes1) were significantly upregulated (P<0.01). Importantly, after blocking TGF-β1 signaling via gene silencing, expression of Jagged1 was much reduced, but the mature hepatocyte marker (ALB) was obviously increased. In addition, AFP, a hepatic stem cell marker, was expressed at the highest level in the control groups. Our findings emphasize that the TGF-β1 signaling pathway regulates expression of Jagged1 in mHSCs which is associated with transformation of mHSCs into MFs, thus demonstrating a novel mechanism via which TGF-β1 signaling controls the differentiation fate of mHSCs through regulation of the Jagged1/Notch pathway.

[PMID: 28361205]
Extremely poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with progressing disease was denoted by vascular invasion. Cytokeratin 18 (CK18) has been shown to be overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma so it is a valuable tumor marker; however, its role in vascular invasion is still unclear. This study aimed to predict CK18 as a predictive marker for macrovascular malignant invasion. The present study was conducted on three groups of patients: group I included 91 HCC patients without macrovascular invasion, group II included 34 HCC patients with radiological evidence of vascular invasion, and group III included 110 control individuals subdivided into IIIA as healthy blood donors and IIIB as post-HCV cirrhotic patients without HCC. ROC curve of M30 fragments of CK18 was constructed for discrimination between HCC with and without macrovascular invasion. Optimum cutoff value was 304.5 ng/mL (AUC = 0.997, P < 0.001), sensitivity (100%) and specificity (98.8%). Regression analysis was conducted for prediction of macrovascular invasion within HCC patients. The following variables: higher levels of AST, M30, bilirubin, and AFP, lower levels of serum albumin, larger tumor size, child B score, and multiple lesions were associated with vascular invasion in univariate analysis. While in multivariate analysis, higher levels of AST and bilirubin and elevated levels of M30 and AFP serum were considered independent predictors for macrovascular invasion in HCC patients. The present study suggests that increased M30 fragments of CK18 levels may be useful as a possible marker of early tumor invasiveness.

[PMID: 28582340]
Ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (SLCTs) are uncommon neoplasms that are occasionally associated with an elevated level of serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP), a marker of germ cell neoplasms, particularly yolk sac tumor (YST). We report 7 cases of ovarian SLCT (3 moderately differentiated, 2 poorly differentiated, 2 retiform) with heterologous intestinal-type glands, 6 of which were associated with elevated serum AFP. The intestinal-type mucinous glands were immunoreactive for SALL4 (4 cases), AFP (4 cases), glypican 3 (1 case), CDX2 (6 cases), and villin (7 cases), markers that are commonly expressed in YSTs, although the latter 2 markers would be expected to be positive in intestinal-type glands. We show that heterologous intestinal-type glands in ovarian SLCTs often have an endodermal sinus-like (YST-like) immunophenotype and stress that these should not be misinterpreted as microscopic foci of endodermal-type YST. Cases of ovarian SLCT with elevated serum AFP should be sampled extensively to look for foci of intestinal-type glands, the likely source of the AFP elevation in some of these neoplasms.

[PMID: 28482112]
Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has limited treatment options and poor survival, therefore early detection is critical to improving the survival of patients with HCC. Current guidelines for high-risk patients include ultrasound screenings every six months, but ultrasounds are operator dependent and not sensitive for early HCC. Serum α-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a widely used diagnostic biomarker, but it has limited sensitivity and is not elevated in all HCC cases so, we incorporate a second blood-based biomarker, des'γ carboxy-prothrombin (DCP), that has shown potential as a screening marker for HCC. The data from the Hepatitis C Antiviral Long-term Treatment against Cirrhosis (HALT-C) Trial is a valuable source of data to study biomarker screening for HCC. We assume the trajectories of AFP and DCP follow a joint hierarchical mixture model with random changepoints that allows for distinct changepoint times and subsequent trajectories of each biomarker. The changepoint indicators are jointly modeled with a Markov Random Field distribution to help detect borderline changepoints. Markov chain Monte Carlo methods are used to calculate posterior distributions, which are used in risk calculations among future patients and determine whether a patient has a positive screen. The screening algorithm was compared to alternatives in simulations studies under a range of possible scenarios and in the HALT-C Trial using cross-validation.