[PMID: 31928996]
During DNA virus infections, detection of cytosolic DNA by the cGAS-STING pathway leads to activation of IFN-β. Kaposi's Sarcoma Herpesvirus (KSHV), an oncogenic DNA virus, is the etiological agent of Kaposi's Sarcoma, an endothelial cell (EC)-based tumor. To investigate the role of STING during KSHV infection of primary ECs we identified a primary lymphatic EC sample that is defective for STING activation and we also knocked out STING in blood ECs. Ablation of STING in EC does not increase susceptibility to KSHV latent infection nor does it increase KSHV spread after lytic reactivation indicating STING signaling does not restrict KSHV. In contrast, STING ablation increases Adenovirus spread at low MOI, but STING is dispensable for blocking replication. These experiments reveal that the importance of STING depends on the DNA virus and that STING appears more important for restricting spread to bystander cells than for inhibition of viral replication.

[PMID: 31820985]
Stimulator of interferon genes (STING) is an endoplasmic reticulum-localized adaptor protein (STING receptor) that has been shown to be activated by binding to natural cyclic dinucleotide (CDN) ligands and plays a vital role in innate immune sensing of exogenous or endogenous DNA, which then induces type I interferons and other cytokines. In this paper, we described a series of amidobenzimidazole STING agonists with high potency for the STING receptor and presented the relevant structure-activity relationships (SARs). The relative potencies of compounds <b>16g</b>, <b>24b</b>, and <b>24e</b> were measured by a STING competition binding assay. A more thorough study of the effect on the STING signaling pathway demonstrated that three compounds, <b>16g</b>, <b>24b</b>, and <b>24e</b>, significantly increased the protein levels and mRNA levels of IFN-β, CXCL10, and IL-6, and <b>24b</b> as a representative compound effectively triggered the phosphorylation of STING, TBK1, and IRF3 in both human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (hPBMCs) and WT THP-1 cells. In addition, compound <b>24b</b> demonstrated impressive antitumor efficacy in mice with established syngeneic colon tumors by intravenous administration. Furthermore, the pharmacokinetic profile of compound <b>24b</b> was fully evaluated.

[PMID: 31896590]
The innate immune response is crucial for defense against viral infections. Cells recognize virus infection through pattern recognition receptors and induce type I interferons as well as proinflammatory cytokines to orchestrate an innate immune response. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) triggers both the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) pathways. It is well known that TLR3 uses the adaptor protein Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R) domain-containing adaptor-inducing beta interferon (TRIF) for signaling, but we recently reported that STING signaling also requires TRIF. Because STING directly binds to TRIF, we identified the STING-interacting domain of TRIF and generated STING-noninteracting mutants of human and mouse TRIFs. The mutant TRIFs were unable to support STING signaling, although they were fully functional in the TLR3 pathway. These mutants were used to assess the relative contributions of the TLR3 and STING pathways to the attenuation of HSV-1 replication in mouse and human cell lines. For this purpose, the mouse L929 and NB41A3 cell lines and the human HT1080 and HeLa-M cell lines, in which both the TLR3 and the STING pathways are operational, were used. The TRIF gene was disrupted in these lines by CRISPR/Cas9, before reconstituting them with mutant and wild-type TRIF expression vectors. Infection of the reconstituted cells with HSV-1 revealed that both the cGAS-STING and the TLR3 signaling pathways are required for the attenuation of virus replication, but their relative contributions in attenuating HSV-1 replication were found to be different in mouse versus human cell lines. Thus, our study suggests that the relative contributions of the cGAS-STING and the TLR3 pathways in the attenuation of viral infection may be species specific.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The magnitude of fatal infections caused by all different viruses in human and animal populations justifies a better understanding of the host innate immune response process that attenuates virus replication. In particular, the relative contributions of different signaling pathways which are responsible for the generation of the innate immune response are still largely unknown. In this study, we used STING-noninteracting TRIF mutants to decipher the relative contributions of the TLR3 and cGAS-STING signaling pathways to the attenuation of HSV-1 infection. We show that the relative contributions of the two pathways to the attenuation of viral infection are different in mouse versus human cell lines. Together, our results provide new insights into the relative contributions of two different signaling pathways in the attenuation of viral infection and may lead to the development of new antiviral strategies aimed at blocking viral infection at very early stages.

[PMID: 31980485]
Detection of intracellular DNA by the cGAS-STING pathway activates a type I interferon-mediated innate immune response that protects from virus infection. Whether there are additional DNA sensing pathways, and how such pathways might function, remains controversial. We show here that humans-but not laboratory mice-have a second, potent, STING-independent DNA sensing pathway (SIDSP). We identify human DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) as the sensor of this pathway and demonstrate that DNA-PK activity drives a robust and broad antiviral response. We show that the E1A oncoprotein of human adenovirus 5 and the ICP0 protein of herpes simplex virus 1 block this response. We found heat shock protein HSPA8/HSC70 as a target for inducible phosphorylation in the DNA-PK antiviral pathway. Last, we demonstrate that DNA damage and detection of foreign DNA trigger distinct modalities of DNA-PK activity. These findings reveal the existence, sensor, a specific downstream target, and viral antagonists of a SIDSP in human cells.

[PMID: 31991682]
Several DNA viruses have evolved antagonists to inhibit the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) DNA-sensing immune pathway. This includes DNA viral oncogenes that antagonize the cGAS-STING pathway by binding STING through the LxCxE motif. The 293T human cells are widely used in biology studies as they are highly transfectable. While parental 293 cells express high levels of STING, 293T cells lack STING and are unable to induce interferon antiviral responses to cytosolic DNA. Additionally, 293T cells express the SV40 polyomavirus large T antigen (LT) which enhances the replication of transfected DNA plasmids carrying the SV40 origin of replication. Since SV40 LT also encodes the LxCxE motif, the lack of STING expression in 293T cells is commonly assumed to be due to SV40 large T antigen. We find that SV40 LT does not alter exogenously expressed and endogenous levels of STING protein. We show that STING transcription is suppressed in 293T cells but is not driven by SV40. This study also revealed that SV40 LT does indeed inhibit cGAS-STING interferon induction, but through a mechanism distinct from other DNA virus oncogenes. Collectively, these results indicate that while SV40 LT can inhibit cGAS-STING interferon induction, it does so in an unanticipated manner.