[PMID: 25024351]
Over the past decade genome-wide expression analyses have been often used to study how expression of genes changes in response to various environmental stresses. Many of these studies (such as effects of oxygen concentration, temperature stress, low pH stress, osmotic stress, depletion or limitation of nutrients, addition of different chemical compounds, etc.) have been conducted in the unicellular Eukaryal model, yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. However, the lack of a unifying or integrated, bioinformatics platform that would permit efficient and rapid use of all these existing data remain an important issue. To facilitate research by exploiting existing transcription data in the field of yeast physiology, we have developed the yStreX database. It is an online repository of analyzed gene expression data from curated data sets from different studies that capture genome-wide transcriptional changes in response to diverse environmental transitions. The first aim of this online database is to facilitate comparison of cross-platform and cross-laboratory gene expression data. Additionally, we performed different expression analyses, meta-analyses and gene set enrichment analyses; and the results are also deposited in this database. Lastly, we constructed a user-friendly Web interface with interactive visualization to provide intuitive access and to display the queried data for users with no background in bioinformatics. Database URL: http://www.ystrexdb.com.

[PMID: 10779484]
We report steps toward the systematic management, standardization, and analysis of functional genomics data. We developed the ExpressDB database for yeast RNA expression data and loaded it with approximately 17.5 million pieces of data reported by 11 studies with three different kinds of high-throughput RNA assays. A web-based tool supports queries across the data from these studies. We examined comparability of data by converting data from 9 studies (217 conditions) into mRNA relative abundance estimates (ERAs) and by clustering of conditions by ERAs. We report on generation of ERAs and condition clustering for non-microarray data (5 studies, 63 conditions) and describe initial attempts to generate microarray-based ERAs (4 studies, 154 conditions), which exhibit increased error, on our web site http://arep.med.harvard. edu/ExpressDB. We recommend standards for data reporting, suggest research into improving comparability of microarray data through quantifying and standardizing control condition RNA populations, and also suggest research into the calibration of different RNA assays. We introduce a model for a database that integrates different kinds of functional genomics data, Biomolecule Interaction, Growth and Expression Database (BIGED).

[PMID: 20025988]
Filamentous fungal gene expression assays provide essential information for understanding systemic cellular regulation. To aid research on fungal gene expression, we constructed a novel, comprehensive, free database, the filamentous fungal gene expression database (FFGED), available at http://bioinfo.townsend.yale.edu. FFGED features user-friendly management of gene expression data, which are assorted into experimental metadata, experimental design, raw data, normalized details, and analysis results. Data may be submitted in the process of an experiment, and any user can submit multiple experiments, thus classifying the FFGED as an "active experiment" database. Most importantly, FFGED functions as a collective and collaborative platform, by connecting each experiment with similar related experiments made public by other users, maximizing data sharing among different users, and correlating diverse gene expression levels under multiple experimental designs within different experiments. A clear and efficient web interface is provided with enhancement by AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) and through a collection of tools to effectively facilitate data submission, sharing, retrieval and visualization.

[PMID: 25404128]
MOPED (Multi-Omics Profiling Expression Database; http://moped.proteinspire.org) has transitioned from solely a protein expression database to a multi-omics resource for human and model organisms. Through a web-based interface, MOPED presents consistently processed data for gene, protein and pathway expression. To improve data quality, consistency and use, MOPED includes metadata detailing experimental design and analysis methods. The multi-omics data are integrated through direct links between genes and proteins and further connected to pathways and experiments. MOPED now contains over 5 million records, information for approximately 75,000 genes and 50,000 proteins from four organisms (human, mouse, worm, yeast). These records correspond to 670 unique combinations of experiment, condition, localization and tissue. MOPED includes the following new features: pathway expression, Pathway Details pages, experimental metadata checklists, experiment summary statistics and more advanced searching tools. Advanced searching enables querying for genes, proteins, experiments, pathways and keywords of interest. The system is enhanced with visualizations for comparing across different data types. In the future MOPED will expand the number of organisms, increase integration with pathways and provide connections to disease.

[PMID: 24350770]
The Model Organism Protein Expression Database (MOPED, http://moped.proteinspire.org) is an expanding proteomics resource to enable biological and biomedical discoveries. MOPED aggregates simple, standardized and consistently processed summaries of protein expression and metadata from proteomics (mass spectrometry) experiments from human and model organisms (mouse, worm, and yeast). The latest version of MOPED adds new estimates of protein abundance and concentration as well as relative (differential) expression data. MOPED provides a new updated query interface that allows users to explore information by organism, tissue, localization, condition, experiment, or keyword. MOPED supports the Human Proteome Project's efforts to generate chromosome- and diseases-specific proteomes by providing links from proteins to chromosome and disease information as well as many complementary resources. MOPED supports a new omics metadata checklist to harmonize data integration, analysis, and use. MOPED's development is driven by the user community, which spans 90 countries and guides future development that will transform MOPED into a multiomics resource. MOPED encourages users to submit data in a simple format. They can use the metadata checklist to generate a data publication for this submission. As a result, MOPED will provide even greater insights into complex biological processes and systems and enable deeper and more comprehensive biological and biomedical discoveries.