[PMID: 11035915]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited cancer-susceptibility disorder, characterized by genomic instability, hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents, and a prolonged G2 phase of the cell cycle. We observed a marked dose-dependent accumulation of FA cells in the G2 compartment after treatment with 4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (Me(3)Pso) in combination with 365 nm irradiation. Using bivariate DNA distribution methodology, we determined the proportion of replicating and arresting S-phase cells and observed that, whereas normal cells arrested DNA replication in the presence of Me(3)Pso cross-links and monoadducts, FA lymphoblasts failed to arrest DNA synthesis. Taken together, the above data suggest that, in response to damage induced by DNA cross-linking agents, the S-phase checkpoint is inefficient in FA cells. This would lead to accumulation of secondary lesions, such as single- and double-strand breaks and gaps. The prolonged time in G2 phase seen in FA cells therefore exists in order to allow the cells to remove lesions which accumulated during the preceding abnormal S phase.

[PMID: 9414295]
Cells from individuals with Fanconi anemia (FA) arrest excessively in the G2/M cell cycle compartment after exposure to low doses of DNA cross-linking agents. The relationship of this abnormality to the fundamental genetic defect in such cells is unknown, but many investigators have speculated that the various FA genes directly regulate cell cycle checkpoints. We tested the hypothesis that the protein encoded by the FA group C complementing gene (FAC) functions to control a cell cycle checkpoint and that cells from group C patients (FA[C]) have abnormalities of cell cycle regulation directly related to the genetic mutation. We found that retroviral transduction of FA(C) lymphoblasts with wild-type FAC cDNA resulted in normalization of the cell cycle response to low-dose mitomycin C (MMC). However, when DNA damage was quantified in terms of cytogenetic damage or cellular cytotoxicity, we found similar degrees of G2/M arrest in response to equitoxic amounts of MMC in FA(C) cells as well as in normal lymphoblasts. Similar results were obtained using isogenic pairs of uncorrected, FAC- or mock-corrected (neo only) FA(C) cell lines. To test the function of other checkpoints we examined the effects of hydroxyurea (HU) and ionizing radiation on cell cycle kinetics of FA(C) and normal lymphoblasts as well as with isogenic pairs of uncorrected, FAC-corrected, or mock-corrected FA(C) cell lines. In all cases the cell cycle response of FA(C) and normal lymphoblasts to these two agents were identical. Based on these studies we conclude that the aberrant G2/M arrest that typifies the response of FA(C) cells to low doses of cross-linking agents does not represent an abnormal cell cycle response but instead represents a normal cellular response to the excessive DNA damage that results in FA(C) cells following exposure to low doses of cross-linking agents.

[PMID: 14988723]
The genetic syndrome Fanconi anemia (FA) is characterized by aplastic anemia, cancer predisposition and hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). FA proteins (FANCs) are thought to work in pathway(s) essential for dealing with crosslinked DNA. FANCs interact with other proteins involved in both DNA repair and S-phase checkpoint such as BRCA1, ATM and the RAD50/MRE11/NBS1 (RMN) complex. We deciphered the previously undefined pathway(s) leading to the ICLs-induced S-phase checkpoint and the role of FANCs in this process. We found that ICLs activate a branched pathway downstream of the ATR kinase: one branch depending on CHK1 activity and the other on the FANCs-RMN complex. The transient slow-down of DNA synthesis was abolished in cells lacking ATR, whereas CHK1-siRNA-treated cells, NBS1 or FA cells showed partial S-phase arrest. CHK1 RNAi in NBS1 or FA cells abolished the S-phase checkpoint, suggesting that CHK1 and FANCs/NBS1 proteins work on parallel pathways. Furthermore, we found that ICLs trigger ATR-dependent FANCD2 phosphorylation and FANCD2/ATR colocalization. This study demonstrates a novel relationship between the FA pathway(s) and the ATR kinase.

[PMID: 9650445]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder defined by cellular hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents, such as mitomycin C (MMC). MMC causes increased FA cell death, chromosome breakage, and accumulation in the G2 phase of the cell cycle. Recently, Fanconi anemia complementation group C (fac) gene knock-out mice have been developed, and SV40-transformed fibroblasts were established from fac homozygous knock-out (-/-), heterozygous (+/-), and wild-type mice (+/+). MMC sensitivity of these cell lines was assessed by three methods: colony-formation assay in the presence of MMC, chromosome breakage, and cell cycle analysis to detect G2 phase arrest. The fac knock-out fibroblasts (-/-) showed a significantly higher sensitivity to MMC than did fibroblasts from wild-type (+/+) or heterozygous (+/-) mice (three experiments). In addition, we analyzed hematopoietic progenitor colony assays of bone marrow cells from fac knock-out (-/-) and heterozygous (+/-) mice. CFU-E, BFU-E, and CFU-GM colony formation from fac nullizygous mouse progenitors was markedly diminished by MMC when compared to growth of progenitors from heterozygous mice. These results show that fac knock-out mouse cells mimic the behavior of human FA-C patient cells in terms of MMC hypersensitivity. The fac knock-out mouse may be used to model some aspects of human FA and should be useful for understanding the function of the FAC protein.

[PMID: 11749045]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a human genetic disorder characterized by hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents. Its cellular phenotypes include increased chromosome breakage and a marked cell-cycle delay with 4N DNA content after introduction of interstrand DNA crosslinks (ICL). To further understand the nature of this delay previously described as a G2/M arrest, we introduced ICL specifically during G2 and monitored the cells for passage into mitosis. Our results showed that, even at the highest doses, postreplication ICL produced neither G2/M arrest nor chromosome breakage in FA-A or FA-C cells. This suggests that, similar to wild-type cells, DNA replication is required to trigger both responses. Therefore, the 4N cell DNA content observed in FA cells after ICL treatment also represents incomplete DNA replication and arrest in late S phase. FA fibroblasts from complementation groups A and C were able to recover from the ICL-induced cell-cycle arrest, but took approximately 3 times longer than controls. These results indicate that the FA pathway is required for the efficient resolution of ICL-induced S-phase arrest.