[PMID: 29576526]
Upon stress, cytoplasmic mRNA is sequestered to insoluble ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules, such as the stress granule (SG). Partially due to the belief that translationally suppressed mRNAs are recruited to SGs in bulk, stress-induced dynamic redistribution of mRNA has not been thoroughly characterized. Here, we report that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress targets only a small subset of translationally suppressed mRNAs into the insoluble RNP granule fraction (RG). This subset, characterized by extended length and adenylate-uridylate (AU)-rich motifs, is highly enriched with genes critical for cell survival and proliferation. This pattern of RG targeting was conserved for two other stress types, heat shock and arsenite toxicity, which induce distinct responses in the total cytoplasmic transcriptome. Nevertheless, stress-specific RG-targeting motifs, such as guanylate-cytidylate (GC)-rich motifs in heat shock, were also identified. Previously underappreciated, transcriptome profiling in the RG may contribute to understanding human diseases associated with RNP dysfunction, such as cancer and neurodegeneration.

[PMID: 24013423]
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) belongs to the group of RNA-binding proteins implicated as underlying factors in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and certain other neurodegenerative diseases. Multiple FUS gene mutations have been linked to hereditary forms, and aggregation of FUS protein is believed to play an important role in pathogenesis of these diseases. In cultured cells, FUS variants with disease-associated amino acid substitutions or short deletions affecting nuclear localization signal (NLS) and causing cytoplasmic mislocalization can be sequestered into stress granules (SGs). We demonstrated that disruption of motifs responsible for RNA recognition and binding not only prevents SG recruitment, but also dramatically increases the protein propensity to aggregate in the cell cytoplasm with formation of juxtanuclear structures displaying typical features of aggresomes. Functional RNA-binding domains from TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) fused to highly aggregation-prone C-terminally truncated FUS protein restored the ability to enter SGs and prevented aggregation of the chimeric protein. Truncated FUS was also able to trap endogenous FUS molecules in the cytoplasmic aggregates. Our data indicate that RNA binding and recruitment to SGs protect cytoplasmic FUS from aggregation, and loss of this protection may trigger its pathological aggregation in vivo.

[PMID: 29483269]
Stress granules are higher order assemblies of nontranslating mRNAs and proteins that form when translation initiation is inhibited. Stress granules are thought to form by protein-protein interactions of RNA-binding proteins. We demonstrate RNA homopolymers or purified cellular RNA forms assemblies in vitro analogous to stress granules. Remarkably, under conditions representative of an intracellular stress response, the mRNAs enriched in assemblies from total yeast RNA largely recapitulate the stress granule transcriptome. We suggest stress granules are formed by a summation of protein-protein and RNA-RNA interactions, with RNA self-assembly likely to contribute to other RNP assemblies wherever there is a high local concentration of RNA. RNA assembly in vitro is also increased by GR and PR dipeptide repeats, which are known to increase stress granule formation in cells. Since GR and PR dipeptides are involved in neurodegenerative diseases, this suggests that perturbations increasing RNA-RNA assembly in cells could lead to disease.

[PMID: 21118122]
Overexpression of P-glycoprotein, encoded by the MDR1 (multidrug resistance 1) gene, is often responsible for multidrug resistance and chemotherapy failure in cancer. We have demonstrated that, in leukaemic cells, P-glycoprotein expression is regulated at the translational level. More recently, we have shown that in cells overexpressing P-glycoprotein, MDR1 mRNA does not aggregate into translationally silent stress granules. Importantly, this is not unique for MDR1, since other transcripts encoding transmembrane proteins, and which are thus translated at the endoplasmic reticulum, follow the same pattern. By using a series of chimaeric transcripts, we have demonstrated that transcript localization at the endoplasmic reticulum bypasses the signals dictating stress granule sequestration. Polysome profile analyses and protein synthesis experiments indicate that, upon stress withdrawal, endoplasmic-reticulum-bound transcripts resume translation faster than those at the cytosol, which have been sequestered into stress granules. This may represent a novel mechanism by which drug-resistant cells respond quickly to stress, helping them to survive the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapeutic drugs.

[PMID: 29129640]
Stress granules are mRNA-protein assemblies formed from nontranslating mRNAs. Stress granules are important in the stress response and may contribute to some degenerative diseases. Here, we describe the stress granule transcriptome of yeast and mammalian cells through RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of purified stress granule cores and single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) validation. While essentially every mRNA, and some noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), can be targeted to stress granules, the targeting efficiency varies from <1% to >95%. mRNA accumulation in stress granules correlates with longer coding and UTR regions and poor translatability. Quantifying the RNA-seq analysis by smFISH reveals that only 10% of bulk mRNA molecules accumulate in mammalian stress granules and that only 185 genes have more than 50% of their mRNA molecules in stress granules. These results suggest that stress granules may not represent a specific biological program of messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) assembly, but instead form by condensation of nontranslating mRNPs in proportion to their length and lack of association with ribosomes.