[PMID: 28666211]
Carnitine/organic cation transporter 2 (OCTN2) is localized at the basolateral membrane of epididymal epithelial cells, and mainly serves to reabsorb carnitine as an essential factor for sperm maturation; however, its functional features in epididymal epithelial cells have remained unclear. We isolated primary epididymal epithelial cells from rat epididymides and verified their phenotype by detecting the presence of cytokeratin-19 (CK-19, an epithelial cell marker) and the absence vimentin (an interstitial cell marker). We found that cultured epididymal epithelial cells isolated from rat epididymides expressed high levels of CK-19 but barely expressed vimentin. Gain-of-function assays, which included the CCK-8 assay and EdU flow cytometry assay, indicated that overexpression of OCTN2 significantly promoted epididymal epithelial cell growth and proliferation. Moreover, forced expression of OCTN2 inhibited the cell apoptosis process, and at the same time increased expression of the pro-apoptosis factor BAX, and decreased expression of the anti-apoptosis factors BCL-2 and Survivin. Furthermore, we also found that OCTN2 overexpression dramatically increased the levels of biomarkers associated with spermatogenesis, including azoospermia-like (DAZL), phosphoglycerate kinase 2 (PGK2), and protamine 2 (PRM2). These results demonstrate that OCTN2 plays a positive role in epididymal epithelial cells, and might be useful in the clinical treatment of male infertility by serving as a key regulatory factor.

[PMID: 24869677]
Human sperm express two types of protamine: protamine 1 (P1) and the family of protamine 2 (P2) proteins, with P1 and P2 normally existing in a ratio of approximately 1:1. Both the elevation and reduction of this ratio have been linked with male infertility suggesting that abnormalities in protamine expression, processing and replacement may be responsible for effects on semen parameters observed in infertile males affected by deficient protamination, along with abnormalities in associated regulatory processes. Abnormal protamination may result in insufficient condensation in the sperm nucleus, thus rendering paternal DNA susceptible to damage, which could have detrimental consequences upon embryogenesis. Consequently, it is imperative that Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ARTs) endeavour to utilise sperm devoid of protamine abnormalities, especially because retained histones are present in imprinted gene clusters. Emerging evidence indicates that abnormalities in protamine content may influence epigenetic signals transmitted via paternal DNA. Indeed, an increase in rare imprinting disorders has been observed in children conceived via in vitro fertilisation (IVF). This review examines the links between male infertility, abnormal protamine expression and replacement, the implications of abnormal sperm DNA packaging on fertility treatments and the potential iatrogenic effects of ART procedures on sperm function.

[PMID: 28748416]
This work aimed at investigating the effect of resveratrol on (1) DNA integrity and (2) fertilizing capacity of sperm by quantifying the presence of key paternal transcripts considered as markers for male fertility (protamine 1 [PRM1] and protamine 2 [PRM2]) and pregnancy success (adducin 1 alpha [ADD1]) in cryopreserved human spermatozoa through modulation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). The study populations was drawn from 22 normozoospermic healthy volunteers which were incubated with or without AMPK activator (resveratrol [RSV], 15 µM) or inhibitor (Compound C [CC], 30 µM) for 1 h and were then cryopreserved. Untreated frozen-thawed spermatozoa served as controls. The RSV-induced AMPK activation decreased the level of DNA fragmentation in comparison with the control (21.18 ± 0.92 vs. 22.50 ± 0.40; p < 0.01). The relative mRNA expression levels of protamines (1 and 2) and ADD1 in RSV pretreated frozen-thawed human spermatozoa were also improved significantly compared to the control (p < 0.05). Conversely, the inhibitory effect of CC on AMPK activity deteriorated the deleterious effects of cryopreservation on these parameters (p < 0.01). In conclusion, these results demonstrated the cryoprotective effect of the RSV-induced increase in AMPK activity on DNA integrity and key paternal transcripts of cryopreserved human spermatozoa. These findings are of great importance for improving the available cryopreservation protocols in terms of the number of lesions that produced over key genes and the dramatic effects on sperm DNA fragmentation.

[PMID: 25516990]
Ectopic autografting of testis tissue is a promising approach for studying testicular development, male germline preservation and restoration of male fertility. In this study, we examined the fate of various testicular cells in adult mouse testes following ectopic autografting at 1, 2, 4 and 8 weeks post grafting. Histological examination showed no evidence of re-establishment of spermatogenesis in autografts, and progressive degeneration of seminiferous tubules was detected. Expression of germ cell-specific proteins such as POU5F1, DAZL, TNP1, TNP2, PRM1 and PRM2 revealed that, although proliferating and differentiating spermatogenic germ cells such as spermatogonia, spermatocytes and spermatids could survive in autografts until 4 weeks, only terminally differentiated germ cells such as sperm persisted in autografts until 8 weeks. The presence of Sertoli and peritubular myoid cells, as indicated by expression of WT1 and ACTA2 proteins, respectively, was evident in the autografts until 8 weeks. Interestingly, seminal vesicle weight and serum testosterone level were restored in autografted mice by 8 weeks post grafting. The expression of Leydig cell-specific proteins such as CYP11A1, HSD3B2 and LHCGR showed revival of Leydig cell (LC) populations in autografts over time since grafting. Elevated expression of PDGFRA, LIF, DHH and NEFH in autografts indicated de novo regeneration of LC populations. Autografted adult testis can be used as a model for investigating Leydig cell regeneration, steroidogenesis and regulation of the intrinsic factors involved in Leydig cell development. The success of this rodent model can have therapeutic applications for adult human males undergoing sterilizing cancer therapy.

[PMID: 26801756]
Protamines are sperm nuclear proteins with a crucial role in chromatin condensation. Their function is strongly linked to sperm head morphology and male fertility. Protamines appear to be affected by a complex pattern of selective constraints. Previous studies showed that sexual selection affects protamine coding sequence and expression in rodents. Here we analyze selective constraints and post-copulatory sexual selection acting on protamine 2 (Prm2) gene sequences of 53 species of primates and rodents. We focused on possible differences in selective constraints between these two clades and on the two functional domains of PRM2 (cleaved- and mature-PRM2). We also assessed if and how changes in Prm2 coding sequence may affect sperm head dimensions. The domain of Prm2 that is cleaved off during binding to DNA (cleaved-Prm2) was found to be under purifying selection in both clades, whereas the domain that remains bound to DNA (mature-Prm2) was found to be positively selected in primates and under relaxed constraint in rodents. Changes in cleaved-Prm2 coding sequence are significantly correlated to sperm head width and elongation in rodents. Contrary to expectations, a significant effect of sexual selection was not found on either domain or clade. Mature-PRM2 may be free to evolve under less constraint due to the existence of PRM1 as a more conserved and functionally redundant copy. The cleaved-PRM2 domain seems to play an important role in sperm head shaping. However, sexual selection on its sequence may be difficult to detect until it is identified which sperm head phenotype (shape and size) confers advantages for sperm performance in different mammalian clades.