[PMID: 31537107]
Ubrogepant is a novel, oral calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonist in development for the acute treatment of migraine. This trial evaluated the safety and tolerability of ubrogepant, focusing on hepatic safety, when administered intermittently with high-frequency dosing to healthy participants. In this phase 1, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group trial, healthy adults (age 18-50 years) were randomized 1:1 to placebo or ubrogepant. Ubrogepant was dosed at 100 mg (2 × 50 mg tablets) on 2 consecutive days followed by 2 consecutive days of placebo, alternating for 8 weeks. Primary outcome measures were safety and tolerability. Of participants randomized (n = 518), 516 were included in the safety population (n = 260 placebo; n = 256 ubrogepant). Treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in 45% of placebo and 44% of ubrogepant participants. The most common was headache (10% placebo; 11% ubrogepant). Overall, seven cases of alanine aminotransferase and/or aspartate aminotransferase levels ≥ 3 × the upper limit of normal (five placebo, two ubrogepant) were reported and adjudicated by a panel of independent liver experts blinded to treatment. Four cases were judged unlikely related to treatment. Two cases (one placebo, one ubrogepant) were judged possibly related, and one (ubrogepant) probably related. Alanine aminotransferase increases to ≥ 3 × the upper limit of normal in the two ubrogepant cases (possibly or probably related) were transient and resolved with continued dosing; both cases were asymptomatic, with no concurrent bilirubin elevation. Ubrogepant was well tolerated following intermittent, high-frequency dosing in healthy participants, with no clinically relevant signal of hepatotoxicity. NA.

[PMID: 31899602]
Ubrogepant is a novel, oral calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonist intended for the acute treatment of migraine attacks. Ubrogepant has a chemical structure distinct from previous small-molecule CGRP receptor antagonists that were associated with elevated serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in clinical trials. Here, we report overall and hepatic safety data from two placebo-controlled phase I trials of ubrogepant, spray-dried oral compressed tablet (SD-OCT) in healthy male volunteers. Trial A was a pharmacokinetic (PK) trial of single (100-400 mg) and multiple (40-400 mg) ascending doses. Trial B was a dedicated hepatic safety trial assessing daily use of ubrogepant 150 mg for 28 days. Serum ALT (as hepatotoxicity biomarker) and PK data are reported. Ubrogepant was well-tolerated in both trials, with a low incidence of adverse events that did not differ greatly from placebo. Changes in mean ALT levels were minimal and similar to placebo. Over 28 days of treatment, the mean percentage change in ALT from baseline was < 5% at all time points. No participant in either trial demonstrated ALT ≥ 3× upper limit of normal at any time. Ubrogepant SD-OCT demonstrated linear PK appropriate for acute treatment of migraine, with rapid uptake (time of maximum plasma concentration (t<sub>max</sub> ): 2-3 hours) and no accumulation with daily use. Overall, there was no evidence of ubrogepant-associated hepatotoxicity with daily doses up to 400 mg for 10 days or with daily ubrogepant 150 mg for 28 days. Supratherapeutic dosing is a useful strategy for characterizing hepatic safety in early drug development.

[PMID: 31758661]
Ubrogepant (MK-1602) is a novel, oral, calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist in clinical development with positive phase III outcomes for acute treatment of migraine. This paper describes the population exposure-response (E-R) modeling and simulations, which were used to inform the phase III dose-selection rationale, based on ~ 800 participants pooled across two phase IIb randomized dose-finding clinical trials. The E-R model describes the placebo and ubrogepant treatment effects based on migraine pain end points (2-hour pain relief and 2-hour pain freedom) at various dose levels. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to evaluate various assumptions of placebo response in light of the high placebo response observed in one phase II trial. A population pharmacokinetic model describing the effect of formulations was included in the E-R simulation framework to assess potential dose implications of a formulation switch from phase II to phase III. Model-based simulations predict that a dose of 25 mg or higher is likely to achieve significantly better efficacy than placebo with desirable efficacy levels. The understanding of E-R helped support the dose selection for the phase III clinical trials.

[PMID: 29136283]
Merck & Co., Inc. (Kenilworth, New Jersey) has recently published an integrated strategy for implementation of dried blood spots (DBS) in late-stage trials for population pharmacokinetic (PK) modeling. We applied this strategy for another late-stage clinical program: ubrogepant (MK-1602), a novel oral calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist for acute treatment of migraine. At the time of implementation, ubrogepant was entering phase 2 development. DBS was implemented to acquire PK information proximal to an acute migraine event to enable exposure-response modeling. The clinical endpoint was a spontaneous event, which generally occurs outside a clinic visit. Thus, an innovative feature of this trial was facilitating DBS in an outpatient setting. In vitro and bioanalytical tests established initial method feasibility and suitability for further evaluations in the clinic. A quantitative relationship was developed between blood and plasma concentrations from concurrently collected samples in a phase 1 (healthy subjects) and phase 2 (target patient population) study using graphical and population PK approaches. This integrated information was presented to the Food and Drug Administration for regulatory input. Following regulatory concurrence, DBS was poised for use in further clinical studies. Population PK modeling was used to dissect sources of variability contributing to DBS collection in the outpatient setting. What has been learned from this program has informed the broader integrated strategy of Merck & Co., Inc. (Kenilworth, NJ) for DBS implementation in clinical trials and research to improve the precision of PK data collected in an outpatient setting.

[PMID: 32020557]
Ubrogepant (Ubrelvy™) is an orally administered, small molecule, highly-selective, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonist that was developed by Allergan under license to Merck & Co. as an acute treatment for migraine. In December 2019, ubrogepant received its first global approval in the USA for the acute treatment of migraine (± aura) in adults. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of ubrogepant leading to its first global approval for the acute treatment of migraine (± aura) in adults.