[PMID: 27405674]
The development of inhibitors to factor VIII (FVIII) or factor IX (FIX) remains a major treatment complication encountered in the treatment of haemophilia. Not all patients with even the same severity and genotype develop inhibitors suggesting an underlying mechanism of tolerance against FVIII- or FIX-related immunity. One mechanism may be central tolerance observed in patients in whom the FVIII mutation enables some production of the protein. The other is a peripheral tolerance mechanism which may be evident in patients with null mutation. Recently, recombinant porcine FVIII (rpFVIII, Obixur, OBI-1, BAX801) has been developed for the haemostatic treatment of both congenital haemophilia with inhibitor (CHAWI) and acquired haemophilia A (AHA). In 28 subjects with AHA with life-/limb-threatening bleeding, rpFVIII reduced or stopped bleeding in all patients within 24 h. The cross-reactivity of anti-human FVIII antibodies to rpFVIII remains around 30-50%. Recently, new therapeutics based on the quite novel concepts have been developed and clinical studies are ongoing. These are humanized asymmetric antibody mimicking FVIIIa function by maintaining a suitable interaction between FIXa and FX (Emicizumab, ACE910), and small interfering RNAs (siRNA, ALN-AT3) suppress liver production of AT through post-transcriptional gene silencing and a humanized anti-TFPI monoclonal antibody (Concizumab). Their main advantages are longer half-life, subcutaneous applicability and efficacy irrespective of the presence of inhibitors which will make it easier to initiate more effective treatment especially early childhood.

[PMID: 27795538]
The principle of hemophilia treatment is replacement therapy with factor VIII and factor IX concentrates. Recently, extended half-life factor VIII and factor IX concentrates have been developed. With these concentrates, improvements in patient QOL can be expected. More recently, a novel hemophilia therapy based on a very new concept was developed. ACE910 (emicizumab) is a humanized bispecific antibody recognizing factor IXa and X mimicking factor VIII function. The half-life is reportedly 4-5 weeks and remarkably decreased annual bleeding rates have been achieved with subcutaneous weekly injections in the phase 1 clinical trial. Clinical trials of anti-antithrombin therapeutics based on siRNA (ALN-AT3) and anti-TFPI antibody are currently ongoing and the results are eagerly anticipated.

[PMID: 27885373]
Treatment and prevention of bleeding episodes in patients with severe haemophilia A require frequent intravenous injection of factor VIII. Inhibitory antibodies against factor VIII occur in approximately 30 % of these patients during the first exposure days and immune tolerance induction to eradicate the inhibitor is challenging. Prevention of bleeds in patients with haemophilia A and inhibitors is less effective and there is ongoing research for alternative treatment options. A promising approach in 2016 is the development of emicizumab (ACE910), a bi-specific IgG antibody to factor IXa and factor X, that mimics the cofactor function of factor VIII. Due to the different structure of this antibody it cannot be neutralized by factor VIII inhibitors and has the possibility to achieve haemostasis in patients with severe haemophilia A with and without inhibitors. First studies in healthy volunteers and in patients showed a shortened activated partial thromboplastin time and increased peak height of thrombin generation in a dose-dependent manner. The half-life of the drug was 4 to 5 weeks. There were no clinical signs of thrombosis and no laboratory abnormalities indicating hypercoagulability. In a first study with 18 patients with severe haemophilia A with and without inhibitors a remarkable reduction in the annualised bleeding rate occurred. Safety of the drug has to be proven in ongoing research. Mimicking the cofactor activity of factor VIII by a bispecific antibody for the treatment of severe haemophilia A is so far safe and seems to be effective and is one highlight in haemostasis 2016.

[PMID: 28691557]
Emicizumab (ACE910) bridges activated factor IX and factor X to restore the function of activated factor VIII, which is deficient in persons with hemophilia A. This phase 3, multicenter trial assessed once-weekly subcutaneous emicizumab prophylaxis in persons with hemophilia A with factor VIII inhibitors. We enrolled participants who were 12 years of age or older. Those who had previously received episodic treatment with bypassing agents were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to emicizumab prophylaxis (group A) or no prophylaxis (group B). The primary end point was the difference in bleeding rates between group A and group B. Participants who had previously received prophylactic treatment with bypassing agents received emicizumab prophylaxis in group C. A total of 109 male participants with hemophilia A with inhibitors were enrolled. The annualized bleeding rate was 2.9 events (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.7 to 5.0) among participants who were randomly assigned to emicizumab prophylaxis (group A, 35 participants) versus 23.3 events (95% CI, 12.3 to 43.9) among those assigned to no prophylaxis (group B, 18 participants), representing a significant difference of 87% in favor of emicizumab prophylaxis (P<0.001). A total of 22 participants in group A (63%) had zero bleeding events, as compared with 1 participant (6%) in group B. Among 24 participants in group C who had participated in a noninterventional study, emicizumab prophylaxis resulted in a bleeding rate that was significantly lower by 79% than the rate with previous bypassing-agent prophylaxis (P<0.001). Overall, 198 adverse events were reported in 103 participants receiving emicizumab prophylaxis; the most frequent events were injection-site reactions (in 15% of participants). Thrombotic microangiopathy and thrombosis were reported in 2 participants each (in the primary analysis) who had received multiple infusions of activated prothrombin complex concentrate for breakthrough bleeding. No antidrug antibodies were detected. Emicizumab prophylaxis was associated with a significantly lower rate of bleeding events than no prophylaxis among participants with hemophilia A with inhibitors. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche and Chugai Pharmaceutical; HAVEN 1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02622321 .).

[PMID: 29042366]
During the last decade, the development of improved and novel approaches for the treatment of hemophilia A has expanded tremendously. These approaches include factor VIII (FVIII) with extended half-life (eg, FVIII-Fc and PEGylated FVIII), monoclonal antibodies targeting tissue factor pathway inhibitor, small interfering RNA to reduce antithrombin expression and the bispecific antibody ACE910/emicizumab. Emicizumab is a bispecific antibody recognizing both the enzyme factor IXa and the substrate factor X. By simultaneously binding enzyme and substrate, emicizumab mimics some part of the function exerted by the original cofactor, FVIII, in that it promotes colocalization of the enzyme-substrate complex. However, FVIII and the bispecific antibody are fundamentally different proteins and subject to different modes of regulation. Here, we will provide an overview of the similarities and dissimilarities between FVIII and emicizumab from a biochemical and mechanistical perspective. Such insight might be useful in the clinical decision making for those who apply emicizumab in their practice now or in the future, particularly in view of the thrombotic complications that have been reported when emicizumab is used in combination with FVIII-bypassing agents.