[PMID: 11709084]
EDG-1, encoded by the endothelial differentiation gene-1, is a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for sphingosine-1-phosphate (SPP) that has been shown to stimulate angiogenesis and cell migration in cultured endothelial cells. Unexpectedly, EDG-1 knockout embryos had a normal blood vessel network, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, but died in utero owing to massive haemorrhaging as a result of failure of smooth muscle cells and pericytes to migrate around the circumference and reinforce endothelial tubes [Liu, Wada, Yamashita, Mi, Deng, Hobson, Rosenfeldt, Nava, Chae, Lee, et al. (2000) J. Clin. Invest. 106, 951-961]. This vascular maturation defect is similar to the phenotype of mice homozygous for disrupted alleles of platelet-derived growth factor B-subunit homodimer (PDGF-BB) or its receptor PDGFR-beta. We found that fibroblasts from EDG-1 null embryos did not migrate toward PDGF or SPP, and inhibition of motility correlated with defective activation of the small guanosine triphosphatase Rac, which is required for lamellipodia formation and directional locomotion [Hobson, Rosenfeldt, Barak, Olivera, Poulton, Caron, Milstien, and Spiegel (2001) Science 291, 1800-1803]. Moreover, we showed that PDGF-directed cell migration requires both sphingosine kinase activation and expression of EDG-1, suggesting a functional link between PDGF signalling and EDG-1. Indeed, treatment of wild-type cells with PDGF transactivated EDG-1 as determined by translocation of beta-arrestin and phosphorylation of EDG-1. These findings reveal a new paradigm for receptor cross-communication in which activation of a GPCR by a receptor tyrosine kinase is critical for cell motility. Our observations might also clarify the role of EDG-1 in vascular maturation and angiogenesis.

[PMID: 19801976]
Protein-protein interactions are essential for many cellular processes. We have developed a technology called light-activated dimerization (LAD) to artificially induce protein hetero- and homodimerization in live cells using light. Using the FKF1 and GIGANTEA (GI) proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana, we have generated protein tags whose interaction is controlled by blue light. We demonstrated the utility of this system with LAD constructs that can recruit the small G-protein Rac1 to the plasma membrane and induce the local formation of lamellipodia in response to focal illumination. We also generated a light-activated transcription factor by fusing domains of GI and FKF1 to the DNA binding domain of Gal4 and the transactivation domain of VP16, respectively, showing that this technology is easily adapted to other systems. These studies set the stage for the development of light-regulated signaling molecules for controlling receptor activation, synapse formation and other signaling events in organisms.

[PMID: 24265417]
Recent evidence suggests G-protein-coupled receptor-2-interacting protein-1 (GIT1) overexpression in several human metastatic tumors, including breast, lung, and prostate. Tumor metastasis is associated with an increase in angiogenesis. We have showed previously that GIT1 is required for postnatal angiogenesis during lung development. However, the functional role of GIT1 in pathological angiogenesis during tumor growth is unknown. In the present study, we show inhibition of angiogenesis in matrigel implants as well as reduced tumor angiogenesis and melanoma tumor growth in GIT1-knockout mice. We demonstrate that this is a result of impaired directional migration of GIT1-depleted endothelial cells toward a vascular endothelial growth factor gradient. Cortactin-mediated lamellipodia formation in the leading edge is critical for directional migration. We observed a significant reduction in cortactin localization and lamellipodia formation in the leading edge of GIT1-depleted endothelial cells. We specifically identified that the Spa homology domain (aa 250-420) of GIT1 is required for GIT1-cortactin complex localization to the leading edge. The mechanisms involved extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2-mediated Cortactin-S405 phosphorylation and activation of Rac1/Cdc42. Finally, using gain of function studies, we show that a constitutively active mutant of cortactin restored directional migration of GIT1-depleted cells. Our data demonstrated that a GIT1-cortactin association through GIT1-Spa homology domain is required for cortactin localization to the leading edge and is essential for endothelial cell directional migration and tumor angiogenesis.

[PMID: 9301423]
1. The efficient repair of gastrointestinal mucosal injuries is essential in the preservation of the epithelial barrier to luminal antigens. Accumulated evidence suggests that epithelial migration plays a major part in this repair by rapidly resealing defects induced by both physiological and pathological insults, a process termed restitution. 2. This migration has been modelled in various ways, most commonly in mechanically wounded monolayers of cell lines or cells in primary culture, and in wounded human or animal tissue. Evidence from these models indicates that migration is a highly complex process, which is likely to involve the tightly controlled spatial and temporal interaction of multiple factors: (i) extracellular molecules such as soluble factors (e.g. growth factors, trefoil peptides, cytokines) and matrix components (e.g. collagen, laminin, fibronectin); (ii) signalling molecules activated by the interaction of these factors with cell surface receptors (e.g. protein kinases, phospholipases, low-molecular-weight GTPases); (iii) factors which regulate adhesion to other cells (e.g. E-cadherin) and to matrix components (e.g. integrins, hyaluronic acid receptors); (iv) factors which regulate detachment from the extracellular matrix (e.g. urokinase-type plasminogen activator, matrix metalloproteinases); and (v) molecules which regulate cytoskeletal function (e.g. Rac), which allows the formation of specialized cellular processes termed lamellipodia. 3. The identification of physiologically relevant factors that stimulate epithelial cell migration, and a better understanding of their mechanism of action, may be beneficial in the development of novel therapeutic approaches in diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease through the pharmacological or dietary enhancement of this migration.

[PMID: 11230698]
EDG-1 is a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for sphingosine-1-phosphate (SPP). Cell migration toward platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which stimulates sphingosine kinase and increases intracellular SPP, was dependent on expression of EDG-1. Deletion of edg-1 or inhibition of sphingosine kinase suppressed chemotaxis toward PDGF and also activation of the small guanosine triphosphatase Rac, which is essential for protrusion of lamellipodia and forward movement. Moreover, PDGF activated EDG-1, as measured by translocation of beta-arrestin and phosphorylation of EDG-1. Our results reveal a role for receptor cross-communication in which activation of a GPCR by a receptor tyrosine kinase is critical for cell motility.