[PMID: 22086232]
We previously conducted a proof of principle; dose escalation study in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients using the morpholino splice-switching oligonucleotide AVI-4658 (eteplirsen) that induces skipping of dystrophin exon 51 in patients with relevant deletions, restores the open reading frame and induces dystrophin protein expression after intramuscular (i.m.) injection. We now show that this dystrophin expression was accompanied by an elevated expression of α-sarcoglycan, β-dystroglycan (BDG) and--in relevant cases--neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) at the sarcolemma, each of which is a component of a different subcomplex of the dystrophin-associated glycoprotein complex (DAPC). As expected, nNOS expression was relocalized to the sarcolemma in Duchenne patients in whom the dystrophin deletion left the nNOS-binding domain (exons 42-45) intact, whereas this did not occur in patients with deletions that involved this domain. Our results indicate that the novel internally deleted and shorter dystrophin induced by skipping exon 51 in patients with amenable deletions, can also restore the dystrophin-associated complex, further suggesting preserved functionality of the newly translated dystrophin.

[PMID: 23995279]
The most encouraging recent advances regarding pharmacological agents for treating Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) are summarized. Emphasis is given to compounds acting downstream of dystrophin, the protein lacking in DMD, on cellular pathways leading to pathological consequences. The author highlights the progress that may have the greatest potential for clinical use in DMD. Modifying the transcripts of the mutated gene by exon skipping has led to expression of shortened dystrophins in DMD patients. Currently, the most promising potential drugs are the exon-skipping agents eteplirsen and drisapersen. Biglycan and SMTC1100 upregulate utrophin. The steroid receptor modulating compounds VBP15 and tamoxifen, and specific antioxidants appear promising agents for symptomatic therapy. The past 18 months have seen a strong increase in the number of exciting reports on novel therapeutic agents for DMD. Exon-skipping agents have been fine-tuned to improve tissue delivery and stability. Impressive discoveries regarding pathogenic events in cellular signalling have revealed targets that were unknown in the context of DMD, thus enabling approaches that limit inflammation, fibrosis and necrosis. The targets are nuclear hormone receptors, NADPH-oxidases and Ca channels. Inhibition of NF-KB, transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-α) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β)/myostatin production or action are also promising routes in counteracting the complex pathogenesis of DMD.

[PMID: 23907995]
In prior open-label studies, eteplirsen, a phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer, enabled dystrophin production in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) with genetic mutations amenable to skipping exon 51. The present study used a double-blind placebo-controlled protocol to test eteplirsen's ability to induce dystrophin production and improve distance walked on the 6-minute walk test (6MWT). DMD boys aged 7 to 13 years, with confirmed deletions correctable by skipping exon 51 and ability to walk 200 to 400 m on 6 MWT, were randomized to weekly intravenous infusions of 30 or 50 mg/kg/wk eteplirsen or placebo for 24 weeks (n = 4/group). Placebo patients switched to 30 or 50 mg/kg eteplirsen (n=2/group) at week 25; treatment was open label thereafter. All patients had muscle biopsies at baseline and week 48. Efficacy included dystrophin-positive fibers and distance walked on the 6MWT. At week 24, the 30 mg/kg eteplirsen patients were biopsied, and percentage of dystrophin-positive fibers was increased to 23% of normal; no increases were detected in placebo-treated patients (p≤0.002). Even greater increases occurred at week 48 (52% and 43% in the 30 and 50 mg/kg cohorts, respectively), suggesting that dystrophin increases with longer treatment. Restoration of functional dystrophin was confirmed by detection of sarcoglycans and neuronal nitric oxide synthase at the sarcolemma. Ambulation-evaluable eteplirsen-treated patients experienced a 67.3 m benefit compared to placebo/delayed patients (p≤0.001). Eteplirsen restored dystrophin in the 30 and 50 mg/kg/wk cohorts, and in subsequently treated, placebo-controlled subjects. Duration, more than dose, accounted for dystrophin production, also resulting in ambulation stability. No severe adverse events were encountered.

[PMID: 23075107]
Restoration of the open reading frame of the DMD gene and dystrophin protein production in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) can be achieved by exon skipping using antisense oligomers (AOs) targeted to splicing elements. Several such RNA-based gene therapy approaches are in clinical development in which all studies to date have assessed AO efficacy by semiquantitative nested reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Precise evaluation of dystrophin protein levels is complex and hindered by the large size and low abundance of dystrophin; thus an accurate and standardized measurement of DMD exon skipping at the RNA level remains important to assess and compare patient responses in DMD exon skipping clinical trials. Here we describe the development of a Taqman quantitative (q)RT-PCR assay to quantify exon skipping and highlight its use to determine the levels of exon skipping in DMD patients treated intramuscularly with a morpholino AO to skip exon 51, eteplirsen (AVI-4658). The muscle biopsies of these patients were previously thoroughly characterized, providing a valuable benchmark for the evaluation of novel methodology. We demonstrate that levels of dystrophin protein restoration, and thus patient response, correlate accurately with the RNA level. Furthermore, this sensitive assay detects revertant exon 51 skipped fibers in untreated biopsies, providing an important baseline to precisely quantify treatment success. This study represents the first quantitative assessment of exon skipping in a clinical trial setting. We present a standardized and reproducible method to assess patient response that will complement protein studies in future preclinical and clinical exon skipping-based gene therapy studies for DMD.

[PMID: 24282529]
Duchenne muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is an inherited disease caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene that disrupt the open reading frame, while in frame mutations result in Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD) is due to mutations affecting collagen VI genes. Specific muscle miRNAs (dystromirs) are potential non-invasive biomarkers for monitoring the outcome of therapeutic interventions and disease progression. We quantified miR-1, miR-133a,b, miR-206 and miR-31 in serum from patients with DMD, BMD, UCMD and healthy controls. MiR-1, miR-133a,b and miR-206 were upregulated in DMD, but unchanged in UCMD compared to controls. Milder DMD patients had higher levels of dystromirs than more severely affected patients. Patients with low forced vital capacity (FVC) values, indicating respiratory muscle weakness, had low levels of serum miR-1 and miR-133b. There was no significant difference in the level of the dystromirs in BMD compared to controls. We also assessed the effect of dystrophin restoration on the expression of the five dystromirs in serum of DMD patients treated systemically for 12 weeks with antisense oligomer eteplirsen that induces skipping of exon 51 in the dystrophin gene. The dystromirs were also analysed in muscle biopsies of DMD patients included in a single dose intramuscular eteplirsen clinical trial. Our analysis detected a trend towards normalization of these miRNA between the pre- and post-treatment samples of the systemic trial, which however failed to reach statistical significance. This could possibly be due to the small number of patients and the short duration of these clinical trials. Although longer term studies are needed to clarify the relationship between dystrophin restoration following therapeutic intervention and the level of circulating miRNAs, our results indicate that miR-1 and miR-133 can be considered as exploratory biomarkers for monitoring the progression of muscle weakness and indirectly the remaining muscle mass in DMD.