[PMID: 21268065]
In mammals Dnmt1 is the DNA methyltransferase chiefly responsible for maintaining genomic methylation patterns through DNA replication cycles, but how its maintenance activity is controlled is still not well understood. Interestingly, Uhrf1, a crucial cofactor for maintenance of DNA methylation by Dnmt1, is endowed with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. Here, we show that both Dnmt1 and Uhrf1 coprecipitate with ubiquitin specific peptidase 7 (Usp7), a de-ubiquitinating enzyme. Overexpression of Uhrf1 and Usp7 resulted in opposite changes in the ubiquitination status and stability of Dnmt1. Our findings suggest that, by balancing Dnmt1 ubiquitination, Usp7 and Uhrf1 fine tune Dnmt1 stability.

[PMID: 19468253]
Salivary gland neoplasms pathogenesis has not been well established. DNA methylation occurs when methyl groups are added to cytosine nucleotides in specific areas of the gene by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase (DNMT). This chemical modification can alter gene expression without altering DNA sequence. While DNMT3a is mostly involved in de novo methylation, DNMT1 acts as a maintenance methyltransferase. We aimed to investigate the immunoexpression of DNMT3a and DNMT1 in minor salivary gland neoplasms, comparing it with normal tissue. Forty-four formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded samples of pleomorphic adenoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma and polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma were included in the study. The DNMT1 and DNMT3a proteins were identified by using a highly sensitive polymer-based system. Positive nuclear and cytoplasmic labeling for DNMT1 was observed in all samples, including the controls. Positive nuclear labeling for DNMT3a was found only in few neoplasms: 1 pleomorphic adenoma (9.0%), 2 adenoid cystic carcinoma (16.6%) and 1 mucoepidermoid (9.0%) cases. Our results were not able to demonstrate a clear correlation between DNMT1 and DNMT3a immunoexpression and salivary gland neoplasms development.

[PMID: 7638194]
Methylation of cytosine residues in DNA plays an important role in regulating gene expression during vertebrate embryonic development. Conversely, disruption of normal patterns of methylation is common in tumors and occurs early in progression of some human cancers. In vertebrates, it appears that the same DNA methyltransferase maintains preexisting patterns of methylation during DNA replication and carries out de novo methylation to create new methylation patterns. There are several indications that inherent signals in DNA structure can act in vivo to initiate or block de novo methylation in adjacent DNA regions. To identify sequences capable of enhancing de novo methylation of DNA in vitro, we designed a series of oligodeoxyribonucleotide substrates with substrate cytosine residues in different sequence contexts. We obtained evidence that some 5-methylcytosine residues in these single-stranded DNAs can stimulate de novo methylation of adjacent sites by murine DNA 5-cytosine methyltransferase as effectively as 5-methylcytosine residues in double-stranded DNA stimulate maintenance methylation. This suggests that double-stranded DNA may not be the primary natural substrate for de novo methylation and that looped single-stranded structures formed during the normal course of DNA replication or repair serve as "nucleation" sites for de novo methylation of adjacent DNA regions.

[PMID: 20506537]
DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are essential for maintenance of aberrant methylation in cancer cells and play important roles in the development of cancers. Unregulated activation of PI3K/Akt pathway is a prominent feature of many human cancers including human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In present study, we found that DNMT3B mRNA and protein levels were decreased in a dose- and time-dependent manner in HCC cell lines with LY294002 treatment. However, we detected that LY294002 treatment did not induce increase of the degradation of DNMT3B protein using protein decay assay. Moreover we found that Akt induced alteration of the expression of DNMT3B in cells transfected with myristylated variants of Akt2 or cells transfected with small interfering RNA respectively. Based on DNMT3B promoter dual-luciferase reporter assay, we found PI3K pathway regulates DNMT3B expression at transcriptional level. And DNMT3B mRNA decay analysis suggested that down-regulation of DNMT3B by LY294002 is also post-transcriptional control. Furthermore, we demonstrated that LY294002 down-regulated HuR expression in a time-dependent manner in BEL-7404. In summary, we have, for the first time, demonstrate that PI3K/Akt pathway regulates the expression of DNMT3B at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels, which is particularly important to understand the effects of PI3K/Akt and DNMT3B on hepatocarcinogenesis.

[PMID: 18536530]
DNA methylation in post-mitotic neurons is reported to serve a variety of functions from survival during development to the consolidation of memory. Of particular interest with regards neuronal functioning is the change in site-specific methylation of a variety of gene promoters in the context of neuronal depolarization and the coding of new information. We examined the expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3a, representative of a maintenance and de novo methyltransferase respectively, in response to in-vitro depolarization of cortical neurons, using standard techniques such as high potassium (KCl) or the sodium channel agonist veratridine. KCl and veratridine mediated depolarization caused a modest but significant and replicable reduction in the mRNA and protein expression of both DNMTs that was time and dose dependent. These effects were supported by parallel increases in the mRNA expression of BDNF exon-1 and exon-4 as a typical response of neurons to depolarization and to rule out the possibility of impaired transcriptional activity as a trivial explanation. In addition to effects on mRNA and protein expression, functional DNA methyltransferase activity was reduced in nuclear protein extracts from cells exposed to a depolarization condition. Also, these changes could not be explained by differential neuronal loss as measured by cell viability cytochemistry. Our results support the idea that a reduction in DNA methyltransferase activity in the activated and depolarized neuron could contribute to the enhanced intensity and multiplicity of gene expression frequently reported.

[PMID: 17312023]
DNA methylation plays a central role in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression in vertebrates. Genetic and biochemical data indicated that DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) is indispensable for the maintenance of DNA methylation patterns in mice, but targeting of the DNMT1 locus in human HCT116 tumor cells had only minor effects on genomic methylation and cell viability. In this study, we identified an alternative splicing in these cells that bypasses the disrupting selective marker and results in a catalytically active DNMT1 protein lacking the proliferating cell nuclear antigen-binding domain required for association with the replication machinery. Using a mechanism-based trapping assay, we show that this truncated DNMT1 protein displays only twofold reduced postreplicative DNA methylation maintenance activity in vivo. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of this truncated DNMT1 results in global genomic hypomethylation and cell death. These results indicate that DNMT1 is essential in mouse and human cells, but direct coupling of the replication of genetic and epigenetic information is not strictly required.

[PMID: 19789556]
DNA methylation patterns are set up early in mammalian development and are then copied during the division of somatic cells. A long-established model for the maintenance of these patterns explains some, but not all, of the data that are now available. We propose a new model that suggests that the maintenance of DNA methylation relies not only on the recognition of hemimethylated DNA by DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) but also on the localization of the DNMT3A and DNMT3B enzymes to specific chromatin regions that contain methylated DNA.

[PMID: 22704242]
Aberrant promoter DNA hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes is a hallmark of cancer. This alteration is largely dependent on the action of de novo DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) early during tumor progression, which supports the oncogenic role for these enzymes. However, recent research has identified several inactivating mutations of de novo DNMTs in various types of tumor. In addition, it has been shown that loss of de novo DNA methylation activity at advanced tumor stages leads to the promoter DNA demethylation-dependent expression of specific oncogenes. These new data support the notion that de novo DNMTs also have an important role in the maintenance of DNA methylation and suggest that, in addition to acting as oncogenes, they also behave as tumor suppressors. This potential dual role might have clinical implications, as DNMTs are currently considered bona fide targets in cancer therapy.

[PMID: 23393137]
Methylation at the 5-position of DNA cytosine on the vertebrate genomes is accomplished by the combined catalytic actions of three DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), the de novo enzymes DNMT3A and DNMT3B and the maintenance enzyme DNMT1. Although several metabolic routes have been suggested for demethylation of the vertebrate DNA, whether active DNA demethylase(s) exist has remained elusive. Surprisingly, we have found that the mammalian DNMTs, and likely the vertebrates DNMTs in general, can also act as Ca(2+) ion- and redox state-dependent active DNA demethylases. This finding suggests new directions for reinvestigation of the structures and functions of these DNMTs, in particular their roles in Ca(2+) ion-dependent biological processes, including the genome-wide/local DNA demethylation during early embryogenesis, cell differentiation, neuronal activity-regulated gene expression, and carcinogenesis.

[PMID: 19778587]
5-Lipoxygenase (5-Lox), an enzyme involved in the metabolism of arachidonic acid participates in the modulation of the proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells and cerebellar granule cell (CGC) precursors. Since epigenetic mechanisms including DNA methylation regulate 5-LOX expression and have been suggested as possible modulators of stem cell differentiation and aging, using primary cultures of mouse CGC (1, 5, 10, 14, 30 days in vitro; DIV), we studied DNA methylation patterns of the 5-LOX promoter and 5-LOX mRNA levels. We also measured the mRNA and protein content of the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1 and DNMT3a. 5-LOX, DNMT1, and DNMT3a mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR. We observed that 5-LOX expression and the expression of maintenance DNMT1 is maximal at 1 DIV (proliferating neuronal precursors), whereas the expression of the de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3a mRNA increased in aging cultures. We analyzed the methylation status of the 5-LOX promoter using the methylation-sensitive restriction endonucleases AciI, BstUI, HpaII, and HinP1I, which digest unmethylated CpGs while leaving methylated CpGs intact. The 5-LOX DNA methylation increased with the age of the cells. Taken together, our data show that as cultured CGC mature and age in vitro, a decrease in 5-LOX mRNA content is accompanied by an increase in the methylation of the gene DNA. In addition, an increase in DNMT3a but not DNMT1 expression accompanies an increase of 5-LOX methylation during in vitro maturation.

[PMID: 19923434]
Reprogramming of DNA methylation patterns during mammalian preimplantation development involves the concurrent maintenance of methylation on differentially methylated domains (DMDs) of imprinted genes and a marked reduction of global (non-DMD) genomic methylation. In the developing mammalian embryo, one allele of a DMD is unmethylated, and the opposite parental allele is methylated, having inherited this methylation from the parental gamete. The maintenance of DMDs is important for monoallelic imprinted gene expression and normal development of the embryo. Because the DNMT1 cytosine methyltransferase governs maintenance methylation in mammals, rearrangements of non-DMD, but not DMD methylation in preimplantation embryos suggest that the preimplantation DNMT1-dependent maintenance mechanism specifically targets DMD sequences. We explored this possibility using an engineered mouse ES cell line to screen for mutant DNMT1 proteins that protect against the loss of DMD and/or global (non-DMD) methylation in the absence of the wild-type endogenous DNMT1 methyltransferase. We identified DNMT1 mutants that were defective in maintenance of either DMD and/or non-DMD methylation. Among these, one mutant maintained non-DMD methylation but not imprinted DMD methylation and another mutant maintained just DMD methylation. The mutated amino acids of these mutants reside in a mammal-specific, disordered region near the amino terminus of DNMT1. These findings suggest that DNMT1 participates in epigenetic reprogramming through its ability to distinguish different categories of methylated sequences.

[PMID: 19282482]
Inheritance of epigenetic information encoded by cytosine DNA methylation patterns is crucial for mammalian cell survival, in large part through the activity of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1). Here, we show that SET7, a known histone methyltransferase, is involved in the regulation of protein stability of DNMT1. SET7 colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and specifically monomethylates Lys-142 of DNMT1. Methylated DNMT1 peaks during the S and G(2) phases of the cell cycle and is prone to proteasome-mediated degradation. Overexpression of SET7 leads to decreased DNMT1 levels, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of SET7 stabilizes DNMT1. These results demonstrate that signaling through SET7 represents a means of DNMT1 enzyme turnover.

[PMID: 22072770]
Establishment of persistent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection requires transition from a program of full viral latency gene expression (latency III) to one that is highly restricted (latency I and 0) within memory B lymphocytes. It is well established that DNA methylation plays a critical role in EBV gene silencing, and recently the chromatin boundary protein CTCF has been implicated as a pivotal regulator of latency via its binding to several loci within the EBV genome. One notable site is upstream of the common EBNA gene promoter Cp, at which CTCF may act as an enhancer-blocking factor to initiate and maintain silencing of EBNA gene transcription. It was previously suggested that increased expression of CTCF may underlie its potential to promote restricted latency, and here we also noted elevated levels of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and DNMT3B associated with latency I. Within B-cell lines that maintain latency I, however, stable knockdown of CTCF, DNMT1, or DNMT3B or of DNMT1 and DNMT3B in combination did not result in activation of latency III protein expression or EBNA gene transcription, nor did knockdown of DNMTs significantly alter CpG methylation within Cp. Thus, differential expression of CTCF and DNMT1 and -3B is not critical for maintenance of restricted latency. Finally, mutant EBV lacking the Cp CTCF binding site exhibited sustained Cp activity relative to wild-type EBV in a recently developed B-cell superinfection model but ultimately was able to transition to latency I, suggesting that CTCF contributes to but is not necessarily essential for the establishment of restricted latency.

[PMID: 18665914]
Maintenance of cytosine methylation in plants is controlled by three DNA methyltransferases. MET1 maintains CG methylation, and DRM1/2 and CMT3 act redundantly to enforce non-CG methylation. RPS, a repetitive hypermethylated DNA fragment from Petunia hybrida, attracts DNA methylation when transferred into Petunia or other species. In Arabidopsis thaliana, which does not contain any RPS homologues, RPS transgenes are efficiently methylated in all sequence contexts. To test which DNA methylation pathways regulate RPS methylation, we examined maintenance of RPS methylation in various mutant backgrounds. Surprisingly, CG methylation was lost in a drm1/2/cmt3 mutant, and non-CG methylation was almost completely eliminated in a met1 mutant. An unusual cooperative activity of all three DNA methyltransferases is therefore required for maintenance of both CG and non-CG methylation in RPS. Other unusual features of RPS methylation are the independence of its non-CG methylation from the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway and the exceptional maintenance of methylation at a CC(m)TGG site in some epigenetic mutants. This is indicative of activity of a methylation system in plants that may have evolved from the DCM methylation system that controls CC(m)WGG methylation in bacteria. Our data suggest that strict separation of CG and non-CG methylation pathways does not apply to all target regions, and that caution is required in generalizing methylation data obtained for individual genomic regions.

[PMID: 22967183]
DNA methylation and DNA methyltransferases are essential for spermatogenesis. Mutations in the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 gene exert a paternal effect on epigenetic states and phenotypes of offspring, suggesting that DNMT1 is important for the epigenetic remodeling of the genome that takes place during spermatogenesis. However, the specific role of DNMT1 in spermatogenesis and the establishment of genomic imprints in the male germ line remains elusive. To further characterize the effect of DNMT1 deficiency on the resetting of methylation imprints during spermatogenesis, we analyzed the methylation profiles of imprinted regions in the spermatozoa of mice that were heterozygous for a Dnmt1 loss-of-function mutation. The mutation did not affect the H19 or IG differentially methylated regions (DMRs) that are usually highly methylated but led to a partial hypermethylation of the Snrpn DMR, a region that should normally be unmethylated in mature spermatozoa. This defect does not appear in mouse models with mutations in Dnmt3a and Mthfr genes and, therefore, it is specific for the Dnmt1 gene and is suggestive of a role of DNMT1 in imprint resetting or maintenance in the male germ line.

[PMID: 15799776]
Though Dnmt1 is considered the primary maintenance methyltransferase and Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are considered de novo methyltransferases in mammals, these three enzymes may work together in maintaining as well as establishing DNA methylation patterns. It has been proposed that Dnmt1 may carry out de novo methylation at sites in the genome with transient single-stranded regions, such as replication origins, and then spread methylation from these nucleation sites in vivo, even though such activity has not been reported. In this study, we show that Dnmt3a does not act on single-stranded substrates in vitro, indicating that Dnmt3a is not likely to initiate DNA methylation at such proposed nucleation sites. Dnmt3a shows similar methylation activity on unmethylated and hemimethylated duplex DNA, though with some substrate preference. Unlike Dnmt1, pre-existing cytosine methylation at CpG sites or non-CpG sites does not stimulate Dnmt3a activity in vitro and in vivo. The fact that Dnmt3a does not act on single stranded DNA and is not stimulated by pre-existing cytosine methylation indicates that the de novo methylation activity of Dnmt3a is quite different from that of Dnmt1. These findings are consistent with a model in which Dnmt3a initiates methylation on one of the DNA strands of duplex DNA, and these hemimethylated sites then stimulate Dnmt1 activity for further methylation.

[PMID: 22761581]
The enzymatic control of the setting and maintenance of symmetric and non-symmetric DNA methylation patterns in a particular genome context is not well understood. Here, we describe a comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation patterns generated by high resolution sequencing of hairpin-bisulfite amplicons of selected single copy genes and repetitive elements (LINE1, B1, IAP-LTR-retrotransposons, and major satellites). The analysis unambiguously identifies a substantial amount of regional incomplete methylation maintenance, i.e. hemimethylated CpG positions, with variant degrees among cell types. Moreover, non-CpG cytosine methylation is confined to ESCs and exclusively catalysed by Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. This sequence position-, cell type-, and region-dependent non-CpG methylation is strongly linked to neighboring CpG methylation and requires the presence of Dnmt3L. The generation of a comprehensive data set of 146,000 CpG dyads was used to apply and develop parameter estimated hidden Markov models (HMM) to calculate the relative contribution of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) for de novo and maintenance DNA methylation. The comparative modelling included wild-type ESCs and mutant ESCs deficient for Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, or Dnmt3a/3b, respectively. The HMM analysis identifies a considerable de novo methylation activity for Dnmt1 at certain repetitive elements and single copy sequences. Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b contribute de novo function. However, both enzymes are also essential to maintain symmetrical CpG methylation at distinct repetitive and single copy sequences in ESCs.

[PMID: 22064703]
Recent studies demonstrate that UHRF1 is required for DNA methylation maintenance by targeting DNMT1 to DNA replication foci, presumably through its unique hemi-methylated DNA-binding activity and interaction with DNMT1. UHRF2, another member of the UHRF family proteins, is highly similar to UHRF1 in both sequence and structure, raising questions about its role in DNA methylation. In this study, we demonstrate that, like UHRF1, UHRF2 also binds preferentially to methylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) through its conserved tudor domain and hemi-methylated DNA through the SET and Ring associated domain. Like UHRF1, UHRF2 is enriched in pericentric heterochromatin. The heterochromatin localization depends to large extent on its methylated H3K9-binding activity and to less extent on its methylated DNA-binding activity. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that both UHRF1 and UHRF2 interact with DNMT1, DNMT3a, DNMT3b and G9a. Despite all these conserved functions, we find that UHRF2 is not able to rescue the DNA methylation defect in Uhrf1 null mouse embryonic stem cells. This can be attributed to the inability for UHRF2 to recruit DNMT1 to replication foci during S phase of the cell cycle. Indeed, we find that while UHRF1 interacts with DNMT1 in an S phase-dependent manner in cells, UHRF2 does not. Thus, our study demonstrates that UHRF2 and UHRF1 are not functionally redundant in DNA methylation maintenance and reveals the cell-cycle-dependent interaction between UHRF1 and DNMT1 as a key regulatory mechanism targeting DNMT1 for DNA methylation.

[PMID: 22278882]
While DNA methyltransferase1 (DNMT1) is classically known for its functions as a maintenance methyltransferase enzyme, additional roles for DNMT1 in gene expression are not as clearly understood. Several groups have shown that deletion of the catalytic domain from DNMT1 does not abolish repressive activity of the protein against a reporter gene. In our studies, we examine the repressor function of catalytically inactive DNMT1 at endogenous genes. First, potential DNMT1 target genes were identified by searching for genes up-regulated in HCT116 colon cancer cells genetically disrupted for DNMT1 (DNMT1(-/-) hypomorph cells). Next, the requirement for DNMT1 activity for repression of these genes was assessed by stably restoring expression of wild-type or catalytically inactive DNMT1. Both wild-type and mutant proteins are able to occupy the promoters and repress the expression of a set of target genes, and induce, at these promoters, both the depletion of active histone marks and the recruitment of a H3K4 demethylase, KDM1A/LSD1. Together, our findings show that there are genes for which DNMT1 acts as a transcriptional repressor independent from its methyltransferase function and that this repressive function may invoke a role for a scaffolding function of the protein at target genes.

[PMID: 20940144]
DNA methylation is an epigenetic mark critical for regulating transcription, chromatin structure and genome stability. Although many studies have shed light on how methylation impacts transcription and interfaces with the histone code, far less is known about how it regulates genome stability. We and others have shown that DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), the maintenance methyltransferase, contributes to the cellular response to DNA damage, yet DNMT1's exact role in this process remains unclear. DNA damage, particularly in the form of double-strand breaks (DSBs), poses a major threat to genome integrity. Cells therefore possess a potent system to respond to and repair DSBs, or to initiate cell death. In the current study, we used a near-infrared laser microirradiation system to directly study the link between DNMT1 and DSBs. Our results demonstrate that DNMT1 is rapidly but transiently recruited to DSBs. DNMT1 recruitment is dependent on its ability to interact with both PCNA and the ATR effector kinase CHK1, but is independent of its catalytic activity. In addition, we show for the first time that DNMT1 interacts with the 9-1-1 PCNA-like sliding clamp and that this interaction also contributes to DNMT1 localization to DNA DSBs. Finally, we demonstrate that DNMT1 modulates the rate of DSB repair and is essential for suppressing abnormal activation of the DNA damage response in the absence of exogenous damage. Taken together, our studies provide compelling additional evidence for DNMT1 acting as a regulator of genome integrity and as an early responder to DNA DSBs.

[PMID: 21559294]
DNA methylation is widespread in most species, from bacteria to mammals, and is crucial for genomic imprinting, gene expression, and embryogenesis. DNA methylation occurs via two major classes of enzymatic reactions: maintenance-type methylation catalyzed by DNA (cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase (DNMT) 1, and de novo methylation catalyzed by DNMT 3 alpha (DNMT3A) and -beta (DNMT3B). The expression pattern and regulation of DNMT genes in primordial germ cells (PGCs) and germ line cells has not been sufficiently established in birds. Therefore, we employed bioinformatics, RT-PCR, real-time PCR, and in situ hybridization analyses to examine the structural conservation and conserved expression patterns of chicken DNMT family genes. We further examined the regulation of a candidate de novo DNA methyltransferase gene, cDNMT3B by cotransfection of cDNMT3B 3'UTR- and cDNMT3B 3'UTR-specific miRNAs through a dual fluorescence reporter assay. All cDNMT family members were differentially detected during early embryonic development. Of interest, cDNMT3B expression was highly detected in early embryos and in PGCs. During germ line development and sexual maturation, cDNMT3B expression was reestablished in a female germ cell-specific manner. In the dual fluorescence reporter assay, cDNMT3B expression was significantly downregulated by four miRNAs: gga-miR-15c (25.82%), gga-miR-29b (30.01%), gga-miR-383 (30.0%), and gga-miR-222 (31.28%). Our data highlight the structural conservation and conserved expression patterns of chicken DNMTs. The miRNAs investigated in this study may induce downregulation of gene expression in chicken PGCs and germ cells.

[PMID: 18922972]
DNA methylation at promoter CpG islands (CGI) is an epigenetic modification associated with inappropriate gene silencing in multiple tumor types. In the absence of a human pituitary tumor cell line, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of the maintenance methyltransferase DNA methyltransferase (cytosine 5)-1 (Dnmt1) was used in the murine pituitary adenoma cell line AtT-20. Sustained knockdown induced reexpression of the fully methylated and normally imprinted gene neuronatin (Nnat) in a time-dependent manner. Combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA) revealed that reexpression of Nnat was associated with partial CGI demethylation, which was also observed at the H19 differentially methylated region. Subsequent genome-wide microarray analysis identified 91 genes that were significantly differentially expressed in Dnmt1 knockdown cells (10% false discovery rate). The analysis showed that genes associated with the induction of apoptosis, signal transduction, and developmental processes were significantly overrepresented in this list (P < 0.05). Following validation by reverse transcription-PCR and detection of inappropriate CGI methylation by COBRA, four genes (ICAM1, NNAT, RUNX1, and S100A10) were analyzed in primary human pituitary tumors, each displaying significantly reduced mRNA levels relative to normal pituitary (P < 0.05). For two of these genes, NNAT and S100A10, decreased expression was associated with increased promoter CGI methylation. Induced expression of Nnat in stable transfected AtT-20 cells inhibited cell proliferation. To our knowledge, this is the first report of array-based "epigenetic unmasking" in combination with Dnmt1 knockdown and reveals the potential of this strategy toward identifying genes silenced by epigenetic mechanisms across species boundaries.

[PMID: 19417133]
Reactivation of silenced tumor suppressor genes by 5-azacytidine (Vidaza) and its congener 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) has provided an alternate approach to cancer therapy. We have shown previously that these drugs selectively and rapidly induce degradation of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 by a proteasomal pathway. Because the toxicity of these compounds is largely due to their incorporation into DNA, it is critical to explore novel, nonnucleoside compounds that can effectively reactivate the silenced genes. Here, we report that a quinoline-based compound, designated SGI-1027, inhibits the activity of DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B as well M. SssI with comparable IC(50) (6-13 micromol/L) by competing with S-adenosylmethionine in the methylation reaction. Treatment of different cancer cell lines with SGI-1027 resulted in selective degradation of DNMT1 with minimal or no effects on DNMT3A and DNMT3B. At a concentration of 2.5 to 5 micromol/L (similar to that of decitabine), complete degradation of DNMT1 protein was achieved within 24 h without significantly affecting its mRNA level. MG132 blocked SGI-1027-induced depletion of DNMT1, indicating the involvement of proteasomal pathway. Prolonged treatment of RKO cells with SGI-1027 led to demethylation and reexpression of the silenced tumor suppressor genes P16, MLH1, and TIMP3. Further, this compound did not exhibit significant toxicity in a rat hepatoma (H4IIE) cell line. This study provides a novel class of DNA hypomethylating agents that have the potential for use in epigenetic cancer therapy.

[PMID: 18302924]
DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) has a higher specific activity on hemimethylated DNA than on unmethylated DNA, but this preference is too small to explain the faithful mitotic inheritance of genomic methylation patterns. New genetic studies in plants and mammals have identified a novel factor that increases the fidelity of maintenance methylation.

[PMID: 16963560]
Previous studies have shown that DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) 1 is required for maintenance of bulk DNA methylation and is essential for mouse development. However, somatic disruption of DNMT1 in the human cancer cell line HCT116 was not lethal and caused only minor decreases in methylation. Here, we report the identification of a truncated DNMT1 protein, which was generated by the disruption of DNMT1 in HCT116 cells. The truncated protein, which had parts of the regulatory N-terminal domain deleted but preserved the catalytic C-terminal domain, was present at different levels in all DNMT1 single-knockout and DNMT1/DNMT3b double-knockout cell lines tested and retained hemimethylase activity. DNMT1 RNAi resulted in decreased cell viability in WT and knockout cells and further loss of DNA methylation in DNMT1 knockout cells. Furthermore, we observed a delay in methylation after replication and an increase in hemimethylation of specific CpG sites in cells expressing the truncated protein. Remethylation studies after drug-induced hypomethylation suggest a putative role of DNMT1 in the de novo methylation of a subtelomeric repeat, D4Z4, which is lost in cells lacking full-length DNMT1. Our data suggest that DNMT1 might be essential for maintenance of DNA methylation, proliferation, and survival of cancer cells.

[PMID: 17989773]
Site-specific methylation of cytosines is a key epigenetic mark of vertebrate DNA. While a majority of the methylated residues are in the symmetrical (meC)pG:Gp(meC) configuration, a smaller, but significant fraction is found in the CpA, CpT and CpC asymmetric (non-CpG) dinucleotides. CpG methylation is reproducibly maintained by the activity of the DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) on the newly replicated hemimethylated substrates (meC)pG:GpC. On the other hand, establishment and hereditary maintenance of non-CpG methylation patterns have not been analyzed in detail. We previously reported the occurrence of site- and allele-specific methylation at both CpG and non-CpG sites. Here we characterize a hereditary complex of non-CpG methylation, with the transgenerational maintenance of three distinct profiles in a constant ratio, associated with extensive CpG methylation. These observations raised the question of the signal leading to the maintenance of the pattern of asymmetric methylation. The complete non-CpG pattern was reinstated at each generation in spite of the fact that the majority of the sperm genomes contained either none or only one methylated non-CpG site. This observation led us to the hypothesis that the stable CpG patterns might act as blueprints for the maintenance of non-CpG DNA methylation. As predicted, non-CpG DNA methylation profiles were abrogated in a mutant lacking Dnmt1, the enzymes responsible for CpG methylation, but not in mutants defective for either Dnmt3a or Dnmt2.

[PMID: 22898819]
For cytosine (C) demethylation of vertebrate DNA, it is known that the TET proteins could convert 5-methyl C (5-mC) to 5-hydroxymethyl C (5-hmC). However, DNA dehydroxymethylase(s), or enzymes able to directly convert 5-hmC to C, have been elusive. We present in vitro evidence that the mammalian de novo DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B, but not the maintenance enzyme DNMT1, are also redox-dependent DNA dehydroxymethylases. Significantly, intactness of the C methylation catalytic sites of these de novo enzymes is also required for their 5-hmC dehydroxymethylation activity. That DNMT3A and DNMT3B function bidirectionally both as DNA methyltransferases and as dehydroxymethylases raises intriguing and new questions regarding the structural and functional aspects of these enzymes and their regulatory roles in the dynamic modifications of the vertebrate genomes during development, carcinogenesis, and gene regulation.

[PMID: 17965600]
DNA methyltransferase 1 methylates hemi-methylated CG sites generated during DNA replication. Serine 515 of this enzyme has been shown to be phosphorylated. To explore the importance of S515 phosphorylation, we generated mutants of Dnmt1 which removed the phosphorylation potential (S515A) or mimic phosphoserine (S515E), purified the proteins from insect cells and analyzed their DNA methylation activity in vitro. The S515E mutant was found to be active, while S515A mutant had severe loss in activity when compared to the wild type protein. The loss of activity of the S515A variant was not due to loss of DNA binding capacity. Furthermore, we show that a phosphorylated peptide whose sequence mimics the surrounding of Ser515 (EKIYIS(P)KIVVE) inhibited the activity of wild type Dnmt1 ten-fold more than the non-phosphorylated peptide. The inhibition was specific for Dnmt1 and for the particular peptide sequence. Our data suggest that phosphorylation of Ser515 is important for an interaction between the N-terminal domain of Dnmt1 and its catalytic domain that is necessary for activity and that this interaction is specifically disrupted by the phosphorylated peptide. We conclude that phosphorylation of Dnmt1 at Ser515 could be an important regulator of Dnmt1 activity during cell cycle and after proliferative stimuli.

[PMID: 22284370]
DNA methylation, histone modifications and nucleosome occupancy act in concert for regulation of gene expression patterns in mammalian cells. Recently, G9a, a H3K9 methyltransferase, has been shown to play a role in establishment of DNA methylation at embryonic gene targets in ES cells through recruitment of de novo DNMT3A/3B enzymes. However, whether G9a plays a similar role in maintenance of DNA methylation in somatic cells is still unclear. Here we show that G9a is not essential for maintenance of DNA methylation in somatic cells. Knockdown of G9a has no measurable effect on DNA methylation levels at G9a-target loci. DNMT3A/3B remain stably anchored to nucleosomes containing methylated DNA even in the absence of G9a, ensuring faithful propagation of methylated states in cooperation with DNMT1 through somatic divisions. Moreover, G9a also associates with nucleosomes in a DNMT3A/3B and DNA methylation-independent manner. However, G9a knockdown synergizes with pharmacologic inhibition of DNMTs resulting in increased hypomethylation and inhibition of cell proliferation. Taken together, these data suggest that G9a is not involved in maintenance of DNA methylation in somatic cells but might play a role in re-initiation of de novo methylation after treatment with hypomethylating drugs, thus serving as a potential target for combinatorial treatments strategies involving DNMTs inhibitors.

[PMID: 19825994]
DNA methylation is an epigenetic mark essential for mammalian development, genomic stability, and imprinting. DNA methylation patterns are established and maintained by three DNA methyltransferases: DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B. Interestingly, all three DNMTs make use of alternative splicing. DNMT3B has nearly 40 known splice variants expressed in a tissue- and disease-specific manner, but very little is known about the role of these splice variants in modulating DNMT3B function. We describe here the identification and characterization of a novel alternatively spliced form of DNMT3B lacking exon 5 within the NH(2)-terminal regulatory domain. This variant, which we term DNMT3B3Delta5 because it is closely related in structure to the ubiquitously expressed DNMT3B3 isoform, is highly expressed in pluripotent cells and brain tissue, is downregulated during differentiation, and is conserved in the mouse. Creation of pluripotent iPS cells from fibroblasts results in marked induction of DNMT3B3Delta5. DNMT3B3Delta5 expression is also altered in human disease, with tumor cell lines displaying elevated or reduced expression depending on their tissue of origin. We then compared the DNA binding and subcellular localization of DNMT3B3Delta5 versus DNMT3B3, revealing that DNMT3B3Delta5 possessed significantly enhanced DNA binding affinity and displayed an altered nuclear distribution. Finally, ectopic overexpression of DNMT3B3Delta5 resulted in repetitive element hypomethylation and enhanced cell growth in a colony formation assay. Taken together, these results show that DNMT3B3Delta5 may play an important role in stem cell maintenance or differentiation and suggest that sequences encoded by exon 5 influence the functional properties of DNMT3B.

[PMID: 19966177]
Estrogens play a critical role in brain development by acting on areas that express estrogen receptors. In the rodent cortex, estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) mRNA expression is high early in postnatal development but declines starting at postnatal day (PND) 10 and is virtually absent in the adult cortex. The mechanisms controlling this regulation are largely unknown. Methylation is important for gene silencing during development in many tissues, including the brain. In the present study, we examined the methylation status of ER alpha 5' untranslated exons during early postnatal development in male and female mice using methylation-specific PCR and pyrosequencing. Several regions of ER alpha promoter displayed a significant increase in methylation at PND 18 and 25 compared with PND 4. DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) are important for the initiation and maintenance of methylation. Real-time PCR showed that DNMT3A, the de novo DNMT peaked at PND 10 and was decreased by PND 25. DNMT1, which is important for maintenance of methylation, increased across development and stayed high in adult cortex. The methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is also important for stabilization of methylation. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed a correlation between association of MeCP2 with ER alpha promoter and the increase in methylation and decrease in ER alpha expression after PND 10. In mice containing a mutant MeCP2 protein, ER alpha mRNA expression and promoter methylation patterns across development were different compared with wild-type mice. These data suggest that methylation of ER alpha promoters regulates ER alpha mRNA expression in the cortex during postnatal development in a MeCP2-dependent fashion.

[PMID: 22934696]
Epigenetic alterations have been implicated in the development and progression of human cancer. It is noteworthy that epigenetic modifications, in contrast to genetic mutations, are intrinsically reversible. This triggers an impressive interest of researchers in treatment of cancer patients via targeting epigenetic mechanisms, leading to subsequent intensive investigations of epigenetic drugs as a novel therapeutic intervention. DNA methylation, the major form of epigenetic modifications, is catalyzed by the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 and/or the de novo methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B. Aberrant expression of DNMTs and disruption of DNA methylation are closely associated with multiple forms of cancer, although the exact mechanisms underlying this link remain elusive. An array of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) frequently sustain promoter hypermethylation, which results in epigenetic silencing of these genes and makes cancer cells acquire growth advantages. DNA demethylating agents, re-activating TSGs via inhibiting hypermethylation of their promoter regions, are currently being tested in clinical trials, and several of them are already applied in clinics. DNA demethylating agents, used either alone or in combination with other agents, such as chemotherapeutic drugs and the histone deacetylase inhibitors, have shown to be effective in treatment of cancer, although only in a small set of patients. In this review, we examine and discuss the most recent advances in epigenetic therapy of cancer, with a focus on DNA demethylating agents.

[PMID: 20864525]
Correction of double strand DNA breaks proceeds in an error-free pathway of homologous recombination (HR), which can result in gene silencing of half of the DNA molecules caused by action by DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) (Cuozzo, C., Porcellini, A., Angrisano, T., Morano, A., Lee, B., Di Pardo, A., Messina, S., Iuliano, R., Fusco, A., Santillo, M. R., Muller, M. T., Chiariotti, L., Gottesman, M. E., and Avvedimento, E. V. (2007) PLoS Genet. 3, e110). To explore the mechanism that leads to HR-induced silencing, a genetic screen was carried out based on the silencing of a GFP reporter to identify potential partners. DMAP1, a DNMT1 interacting protein, was identified as a mediator of this process. DMAP1 is a potent activator of DNMT1 methylation in vitro, suggesting that DMAP1 is a co-repressor that supports the maintenance and de novo action of DNMT1. To examine critical roles for DMAP1 in vivo, lentiviral shRNA was used to conditionally reduce cellular DMAP1 levels. The shRNA transduced cells grew poorly and eventually ceased their growth. Analysis of the tumor suppressor gene p16 methylation status revealed a clear reduction in methylated CpGs in the shRNA cells, suggesting that reactivation of a tumor suppressor gene pathway caused the slow growth phenotype. Analysis of HR, using a fluorescence-based reporter, revealed that knocking down DMAP1 also caused hypomethylation of the DNA repair products following gene conversion. DMAP1 was selectively enriched in recombinant GFP chromatin based on chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. The picture that emerges is that DMAP1 activates DNMT1 preferentially at sites of HR repair. Because DMAP1 depleted cells display enhanced HR, we conclude that it has additional roles in genomic stability.

[PMID: 21625467]
The low success rate of somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) in mammalian cloning is largely due to imprinting problems. However, little is known about the mechanisms of reprogramming imprinted genes during SCNT. Parental origin-specific DNA methylation regulates the monoallelic expression of imprinted genes. In natural fertilization, methylation imprints are established in the parental germline and maintained throughout embryonic development. However, it is unclear whether methylation imprints are protected from global changes of DNA methylation in cloned preimplantation embryos. Here, we demonstrate that cloned porcine preimplantation embryos exhibit demethylation at differentially methylated regions (DMRs) of imprinted genes; in particular, demethylation occurs during the first two cell cycles. By RNAi-mediated knockdown, we found that Dnmt1 is required for the maintenance of methylation imprints in porcine preimplantation embryos. However, no clear signals were detected in the nuclei of oocytes and preimplantation embryos by immunofluorescence. Thus, Dnmt1 is present at very low levels in the nuclei of porcine oocytes and preimplantation embryos and maintains methylation imprints. We further showed that methylation imprints were rescued in nonenucleated metaphase II (MII) oocytes. Our results indicate that loss of Dnmt1 in the maternal nucleus during SCNT significantly contributes to the unfaithful maintenance of methylation imprints in cloned embryos.

[PMID: 23029374]
Primordial germ cells (PGCs) sequentially induce specific genes required for their development. We focused on epigenetic changes that regulate PGC-specific gene expression. mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella are preferentially expressed in PGCs, and their expression is upregulated during PGC differentiation. Here, we first determined DNA methylation status of mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella regulatory regions in epiblast and in PGCs, and found that they were hypomethylated in differentiating PGCs after E9.0, in which those genes were highly expressed. We used siRNA to inhibit a maintenance DNA methyltransferase, Dnmt1, in embryonic stem (ES) cells and found that the flanking regions of all three genes became hypomethylated and that expression of each gene increased 1.5- to 3-fold. In addition, we also found 1.5- to 5-fold increase of the PGC genes in the PGCLCs (PGC-like cells) induced form ES cells by knockdown of Dnmt1. We also obtained evidence showing that methylation of the regulatory region of mil-1 resulted in 2.5-fold decrease in expression in a reporter assay. Together, these results suggested that DNA demethylation does not play a major role on initial activation of the PGC genes in the nascent PGCs but contributed to enhancement of their expression in PGCs after E9.0. However, we also found that repression of representative somatic genes, Hoxa1 and Hoxb1, and a tissue-specific gene, Gfap, in PGCs was not dependent on DNA methylation; their flanking regions were hypomethylated, but their expression was not observed in PGCs at E13.5. Their promoter regions showed the bivalent histone modification in PGCs, that may be involved in repression of their expression. Our results indicated that epigenetic status of PGC genes and of somatic genes in PGCs were distinct, and suggested contribution of epigenetic mechanisms in regulation of the expression of a specific gene set in PGCs.

[PMID: 22633409]
The maintenance methylation of hemimethylated CpG sites by the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 is the molecular basis of the inheritance of DNA methylation patterns. Based on structural data and kinetics obtained with a truncated form of Dnmt1, an autoinhibition model for the specificity of Dnmt1 was proposed in which unmethylated DNA binds to Dnmt1's CXXC domain, which prevents its methylation. We have prepared CXXC domain variants that lost DNA binding. Corresponding full-length Dnmt1 variants did not display a reduction in specificity, indicating that the autoinhibition model does not apply in full-length Dnmt1. Furthermore, we show that the Dnmt1 M1235S variant, which carries an exchange in the catalytic domain of the enzyme, has a marked reduction in specificity, indicating that the recognition of the hemimethylated state of target sites resides within the catalytic domain.

[PMID: 20139415]
A real-time assay for CpG-specific cytosine-C5 methyltransferase activity has been developed. The assay applies a break light oligonucleotide in which the methylation of an unmethylated 5'-CG-3' site is enzymatically coupled to the development of a fluorescent signal. This sensitive assay can measure rates of DNA methylation down to 0.34 +/- 0.06 fmol/s. The assay is reproducible, with a coefficient of variation over six independent measurements of 4.5%. Product concentration was accurately measured from fluorescence signals using a linear calibration curve, which achieved a goodness of fit (R(2)) above 0.98. The oligonucleotide substrate contains three C5-methylated cytosine residues and one unmethylated 5'-CG-3' site. Methylation yields an oligonucleotide containing the optimal substrate for the restriction enzyme GlaI. Cleavage of the fully methylated oligonucleotide leads to separation of fluorophore from quencher, giving a proportional increase in fluorescence. This method has been used to assay activity of DNMT1, the principle maintenance methyltransferase in human cells, and for the kinetic characterization of the bacterial cytosine-C5 methyltransferase M.SssI. The assay has been shown to be suitable for the real-time monitoring of DNMT1 activity in a high-throughput format, with low background signal and the ability to obtain linear rates of methylation over long periods, making this a promising method of high-throughput screening for inhibitors.

[PMID: 20364115]
Methylation of cytosine residues in the context of CpG dinucleotides within mammalian DNA is an epigenetic modification with profound effects on transcriptional regulation. A group of enzymes, the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) tightly regulate both the initiation and maintenance of these methyl marks. Loss of critical components of this enzymatic machinery results in growth, viability, and differentiation defects in both mice and humans, supporting the notion that this epigenetic modification is essential for proper development. Beyond this, DNA methylation also provides a potent epigenetic mechanism for cellular memory needed to silence repetitive elements and preserve lineage specificity over repeated cell divisions throughout adulthood. Recent work highlighting the specialized roles of DNA methylation and methyltransferases in maintaining adult somatic stem cell function suggests that further dissection of these mechanisms will shed new light on the complex nature of self-renewal.

[PMID: 16500889]
DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) has a central role in copying the pattern of DNA methylation after replication which is one manifestation of epigenetic inheritance. With oligonculeotide substrates we show that mouse Dnmt1 has a 30- to 40-fold preference for hemimethylated DNA that is almost lost after addition of fully methylated oligonucleotides. Using long hemimethylated DNA substrates that carry defined methylation patterns and bisulfite analysis of the methylation reaction products, we show a 15-fold preference for hemimethylated CG sites. Dnmt1 moves along the DNA in a random walk methylating hemimethylated substrates with high processivity (>50 sites are visited on average which corresponds to linear diffusion over 6000 bp). The frequency of skipping sites is very low (<0.3%) and there is no detectable flanking sequence preference. CGCTC sites tend to terminate the processive methylation of DNA by Dnmt1. Unmethylated DNA is modified non-processively with a preference for methylation at CCGG sites. We simulate the propagation of methylation patterns using a stochastic model with the specificity of Dnmt1 observed here and conclude that either methylation of several sites is required to propagate the methylation information over several cellular generations or additional epigenetic information must be used.

[PMID: 21553025]
Studies carried out in cultured cells have implicated modifiers of epigenetic reprogramming in the regulation of telomere length, reporting elongation in cells that were null for DNA methyltransferase DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), both de novo DNA methyltransferases, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b or various histone methyltransferases. To investigate this further, we assayed telomere length in whole embryos or adult tissue from mice carrying mutations in four different modifiers of epigenetic reprogramming: Dnmt1, DNA methyltransferase 3-like, structural maintenance of chromosomes hinge domain containing 1, and forkhead box O3a. Terminal restriction fragment analysis was used to compare telomere length in homozygous mutants, heterozygous mutants and wild-type littermates. Contrary to expectation, we did not detect overall lengthening in the mutants, raising questions about the role of epigenetic processes in telomere length in vivo.

[PMID: 20071334]
The genome of extraembryonic tissue, such as the placenta, is hypomethylated relative to that in somatic tissues. However, the origin and role of this hypomethylation remains unclear. The DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, -3A, and -3B are the primary mediators of the establishment and maintenance of DNA methylation in mammals. In this study, we investigated promoter methylation-mediated epigenetic down-regulation of DNMT genes as a potential regulator of global methylation levels in placental tissue. Although DNMT3A and -3B promoters lack methylation in all somatic and extraembryonic tissues tested, we found specific hypermethylation of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) gene and found hypomethylation of the DNMT3L gene in full term and first trimester placental tissues. Bisulfite DNA sequencing revealed monoallelic methylation of DNMT1, with no evidence of imprinting (parent of origin effect). In vitro reporter experiments confirmed that DNMT1 promoter methylation attenuates transcriptional activity in trophoblast cells. However, global hypomethylation in the absence of DNMT1 down-regulation is apparent in non-primate placentas and in vitro derived human cytotrophoblast stem cells, suggesting that DNMT1 down-regulation is not an absolute requirement for genomic hypomethylation in all instances. These data represent the first demonstration of methylation-mediated regulation of the DNMT1 gene in any system and demonstrate that the unique epigenome of the human placenta includes down-regulation of DNMT1 with concomitant hypomethylation of the DNMT3L gene. This strongly implicates epigenetic regulation of the DNMT gene family in the establishment of the unique epigenetic profile of extraembryonic tissue in humans.

[PMID: 22323818]
DNMT1, the major maintenance DNA methyltransferase in animals, helps to regulate gene expression, genome imprinting, and X-chromosome inactivation. We report on the crystal structure of a productive covalent mouse DNMT1(731-1602)-DNA complex containing a central hemimethylated CpG site. The methyl group of methylcytosine is positioned within a shallow hydrophobic concave surface, whereas the cytosine on the target strand is looped out and covalently anchored within the catalytic pocket. The DNA is distorted at the hemimethylated CpG step, with side chains from catalytic and recognition loops inserting through both grooves to fill an intercalation-type cavity associated with a dual base flip-out on partner strands. Structural and biochemical data establish how a combination of active and autoinhibitory mechanisms ensures the high fidelity of DNMT1-mediated maintenance DNA methylation.

[PMID: 22073356]
DNA methyltransferase-1 (Dnmt1) is involved in the maintenance of DNA methylation patterns and is crucial for normal mammalian development. The aim of the present study was to assess the localization of Dnmt1 in cow, during the latest phases of oocyte differentiation and during the early stages of segmentation. Dnmt1 expression and localization were assessed in oocytes according to the chromatin configuration, which in turn provides an important epigenetic mechanism for the control of global gene expression and represents a morphological marker of oocyte differentiation. We found that the initial chromatin condensation was accompanied by a slight increase in the level of global DNA methylation, as assessed by 5-methyl-cytosine immunostaining followed by laser scanning confocal microscopy analysis (LSCM). RT-PCR confirmed the presence of Dnmt1 transcripts throughout this phase of oocyte differentiation. Analogously, Dnmt1 immunodetection and LSCM indicated that the protein was always present and localized in the cytoplasm, regardless the chromatin configuration and the level of global DNA methylation. Moreover, our data indicate that while Dnmt1 is retained in the cytoplasm in metaphase II stage oocytes and zygotes, it enters the nuclei of 8-16 cell stage embryos. As suggested in mouse, the functional meaning of the presence of Dnmt1 in the bovine embryo nuclei could be the maintainement of the methylation pattern of imprinted genes. In conclusion, the present work provides useful elements for the study of Dnmt1 function during the late stage of oocyte differentiation, maturation and early embryonic development in mammals.

[PMID: 21389349]
Dnmt1 (DNA methyltransferase 1) is the principal enzyme responsible for maintenance of cytosine methylation at CpG dinucleotides in the mammalian genome. The N-terminal replication focus targeting sequence (RFTS) domain of Dnmt1 has been implicated in subcellular localization, protein association, and catalytic function. However, progress in understanding its function has been limited by the lack of assays for and a structure of this domain. Here, we show that the naked DNA- and polynucleosome-binding activities of Dnmt1 are inhibited by the RFTS domain, which functions by virtue of binding the catalytic domain to the exclusion of DNA. Kinetic analysis with a fluorogenic DNA substrate established the RFTS domain as a 600-fold inhibitor of Dnmt1 enzymatic activity. The crystal structure of the RFTS domain reveals a novel fold and supports a mechanism in which an RFTS-targeted Dnmt1-binding protein, such as Uhrf1, may activate Dnmt1 for DNA binding.

[PMID: 22088914]
A subset of genes, known as imprinted genes, is present in the mammalian genome. Genomic imprinting governs the monoallelic expression of these genes, depending on whether the gene was inherited from the sperm or the egg. This parent-of-origin specific gene expression is generally dependent on the epigenetic modification, DNA methylation, and the DNA methylation status of CpG dinucleotides residing in loci known as differentially methylated regions (DMRs). The enzymatic machinery responsible for the addition of methyl (-CH(3)) groups to the cytosine residue in the CpG dinucleotides are known as DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Correct establishment and maintenance of methylation patterns at imprinted genes has been associated with placental function and regulation of embryonic/fetal development. Much work has been carried out on imprinted genes in mouse and human; however, little is known about the methylation dynamics in the bovine oocyte. The primary objective of the present study was to characterize the establishment of methylation at maternally imprinted genes in bovine growing oocytes and to determine if the expression of the bovine DNMTs-DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and DNMT3L-was coordinated with DNA methylation during oocyte development. To this end, a panel of maternally imprinted genes was selected (SNRPN, MEST, IGF2R, PEG10, and PLAGL1) and putative DMRs for MEST, IGF2R, PEG10, and PLAGL1 were identified within the 5' regions for each gene; the SNRPN DMR has been reported previously. Conventional bisulfite sequencing revealed that methylation marks were acquired at all five DMRs investigated in an oocyte size-dependent fashion. This was confirmed for a selection of genes using pyrosequencing analysis. Furthermore, mRNA expression and protein analysis revealed that DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and DNMT3L are also present in the bovine oocyte during its growth phase. This study demonstrates for the first time that an increase in bovine imprinted gene DMR methylation occurs during oocyte growth, as is observed in mouse.

[PMID: 21163962]
Maintenance of genomic methylation patterns is mediated primarily by DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1). We have solved structures of mouse and human DNMT1 composed of CXXC, tandem bromo-adjacent homology (BAH1/2), and methyltransferase domains bound to DNA-containing unmethylated CpG sites. The CXXC specifically binds to unmethylated CpG dinucleotide and positions the CXXC-BAH1 linker between the DNA and the active site of DNMT1, preventing de novo methylation. In addition, a loop projecting from BAH2 interacts with the target recognition domain (TRD) of the methyltransferase, stabilizing the TRD in a retracted position and preventing it from inserting into the DNA major groove. Our studies identify an autoinhibitory mechanism, in which unmethylated CpG dinucleotides are occluded from the active site to ensure that only hemimethylated CpG dinucleotides undergo methylation.

[PMID: 17033890]
DNA methylation plays an important role in the gene-silencing network of higher eukaryotes. We have analyzed the 21.5-kb maintenance methyltransferase (M-MTase) gene, met1, of the multicellular green alga Volvox carteri. The met1 transcript was detected only during the period when DNA replication and cell division are taking place. It encodes a 238 kDa protein containing eight C-terminal activity domains typical of M-MTases, plus upstream DNA-binding domains including the ProDom domain PD003757, which experimental analyses in animal systems have indicated is required for targeting the enzyme to DNA-replication foci. Several insertions of unknown function make Volvox Met1 the largest known member of the Met1/Dnmt1 family. Here we also show that several endogenous transposon families are CpG-methylated in Volvox, which we think causes them to be inactive. This view is supported by the observation that an in vitro CpG-methylated gene introduced into Volvox was maintained in the methylated and silent state over >100 generations. Thus, we believe that Met1 recognizes and perpetuates the in vitro methylation signal, and that the silencing machinery is then able to transduce such a methylation-only signal into a stable heterochromatic (and silent) state.

[PMID: 17576694]
Postreplicative maintenance of genomic methylation patterns was proposed to depend largely on the binding of DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) to PCNA, a core component of the replication machinery. We investigated how the slow and discontinuous DNA methylation could be mechanistically linked with fast and processive DNA replication. Using photobleaching and quantitative live cell imaging we show that Dnmt1 binding to PCNA is highly dynamic. Activity measurements of a PCNA-binding-deficient mutant with an enzyme-trapping assay in living cells showed that this interaction accounts for a 2-fold increase in methylation efficiency. Expression of this mutant in mouse dnmt1-/- embryonic stem (ES) cells restored CpG island methylation. Thus association of Dnmt1 with the replication machinery enhances methylation efficiency, but is not strictly required for maintaining global methylation. The transient nature of this interaction accommodates the different kinetics of DNA replication and methylation while contributing to faithful propagation of epigenetic information.

[PMID: 21507353]
Dnmt1, the principal DNA methyltransferase in mammalian cells, is a large and a highly dynamic enzyme with multiple regulatory features that can control DNA methylation in cells. This chapter highlights how insights into Dnmt1 structure and function can advance our understanding of DNA methylation in cells. The allosteric site(s) on Dnmt1 can regulate processes of de novo and maintenance DNA methylation in cells. Remaining open questions include which molecules, by what mechanism, bind at the allosteric site(s) in cells? Different phosphorylation sites on Dnmt1 can change its activity or ability to bind DNA target sites. Thirty-one different molecules are currently known to have physical and/or functional interaction with Dnmt1 in cells. The Dnmt1 structure and enzymatic mechanism offer unique insights into those interactions. The interacting molecules are involved in chromatin organization, DNA repair, cell cycle regulation, and apoptosis and also include RNA polymerase II, some RNA-binding proteins, and some specific Dnmt1-inhibitory RNA molecules. Combined insights from studies of different enzymatic features of Dnmt1 offer novel ideas for development of drug candidates, and can be used in selection of promising drug candidates from more than 15 different compounds that have been identified as possible inhibitors of DNA methylation in cells.

[PMID: 21913078]
DNA methylation plays a significant role in the expression of the genetic code and affects early growth and development through its influence on gene expression. DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) is the enzyme responsible for maintaining the methylation marks through cell division. However, the de novo methyltransferases, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b, can also contribute to the maintenance of the methylation pattern. Manipulation of these enzymes, especially Dnmt1, provides a means to alter DNA methylation levels. Manipulation of the DNA methylation pattern of somatic cells will allow a better understanding of the different molecular process associated with chromatin structure and gene expression. Different approaches to artificially manipulate the expression of Dnmt1 in somatic cells include the addition of 5-azacytidine, culture of cells for an extended period of time, and the use of small interfering RNA technologies.

[PMID: 16807237]
The Cdc25C phosphatase mediates cellular entry into mitosis in mammalian cells. Cdc25C activates Cdc2 for entry into mitosis by dephosphorylating Thr and Tyr at the site of inhibitory phosphorylation. The Cdc25C gene contains tumor suppressor p53 binding sites and is demonstrated to contribute to the p53-dependent cell cycle arrest upon DNA damage. Here we show that both Cdc25C and Cdc2 were down-regulated in wild-type HCT116 cells but not in p53-null, DNMT1-null or DNMT1and DNMT3b-null cells, upon p53 stabilization following doxorubicin-mediated DNA damage. Furthermore, zebularine, a drug that selectively traps and depletes nuclear DNMT1 and DNMT3b, relieved p53-mediated repression of endogenous Cdc25C and Cdc2. Methylation analysis of the Cdc25C and Cdc2 promoter displayed internal CG methylation proximal to the p53 binding site upon DNA damage in a p53-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of doxorubicin treated wild-type HCT116 cells showed the presence of DNMT1, p53, H3K9me2, and the transcriptional repressor HDAC1 on the Cdc25C and Cdc2 promoters, suggesting their involvement as repressive complexes in Cdc25C and Cdc2 gene silencing. Thus, the general mechanism of p53-mediated gene repression may involve recruitment of other repressive factors.

[PMID: 22538524]
Plant response to stress includes changes in gene expression and chromatin structure. Our previous work showed that Arabidopsis thaliana Dicer-like (DCL) mutants were impaired in transgenerational response to stress that included an increase in recombination frequency, cytosine methylation and stress tolerance. It can be hypothesized that changes in chromatin structure are important for an efficient stress response. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the stress response of ddm1, a mutant impaired in DDM1, a member of the SWI/SNF family of adenosine triphosphate-dependent chromatin remodeling genes. We exposed Arabidopsis thaliana ddm1 mutants to methyl methane sulfonate (MMS) and NaCl and found that these plants were more sensitive. At the same time, ddm1 plants were similar to wild-type plants in sensitivity to temperature and bleomycin stresses. Direct comparison to met1 plants, deficient in maintenance methyltransferase MET1, showed higher sensitivity of ddm1 plants to NaCl. The level of DNA strand breaks upon exposure to MMS increased in wild-type plants but decreased in ddm1 plants. DNA methylation analysis showed that heterozygous ddm1/DDM1 plants had lower methylation as compared to fourth generation of homozygous ddm1/ddm1 plants. Exposure to MMS resulted in a decrease in methylation in wild-type plants and an increase in ddm1 plants. Finally, in vitro DNA excision repair assay showed lower capacity for ddm1 mutant. Our results provided a new example of a link between genetic genome stability and epigenetic genome stability. We demonstrate that heterozygous ddm1/DDM1 plants are more sensitive to stress and have more severe changes in methylation than homozygous ddm1/ddm1 plants.

[PMID: 21518897]
Methylation of cytosine in DNA plays a crucial role in development through inheritable gene silencing. The DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 is responsible for the propagation of methylation patterns to the next generation via its preferential methylation of hemimethylated CpG sites in the genome; however, how Dnmt1 maintains methylation patterns is not fully understood. Here we report the crystal structure of the large fragment (291-1620) of mouse Dnmt1 and its complexes with cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine and its product S-adenosyl-L-homocystein. Notably, in the absence of DNA, the N-terminal domain responsible for targeting Dnmt1 to replication foci is inserted into the DNA-binding pocket, indicating that this domain must be removed for methylation to occur. Upon binding of S-adenosyl-L-methionine, the catalytic cysteine residue undergoes a conformation transition to a catalytically competent position. For the recognition of hemimethylated DNA, Dnmt1 is expected to utilize a target recognition domain that overhangs the putative DNA-binding pocket. Taking into considerations the recent report of a shorter fragment structure of Dnmt1 that the CXXC motif positions itself in the catalytic pocket and prevents aberrant de novo methylation, we propose that maintenance methylation is a multistep process accompanied by structural changes.

[PMID: 19932585]
The effect of DNA methylation on CXCR4 expression has been demonstrated in pancreatic cancer and melanoma cells, but little is known about the effect of DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3 (DNMT1 and DNMT3B) on CXCR4 expression. Employing lentiviral vectors, we created stable RNA interference-mediated knockdown of DNMT1 and DNMT3B in AsPC1 pancreatic cancer cells. Using reverse transcription real-time quantitative PCR and flow cytometric analysis, we evaluated the increase in the expression of CXCR4 transcript and protein levels in these cells. Bisulfite sequencing analysis showed that the level of promoter demethylation appeared more effective in cells with knockdown of DNMT1 than in those with DNMT3B knockdown. Furthermore, the combined RNA interference knockdown of both DNMT1 and DNMT3B increased promoter demethylation, leading to a slight increase in CXCR4 expression. However, the demethylating agent 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine exhibited the strongest effect on promoter demethylation, which correlated with the highest production of CXCR4 transcript and protein in AsPC1 cells. Our results indicate that DNMT1 plays the main role in maintenance of methylation of CXCR4 promoter, while DNMT3B may function as an accessory DNA methyltransferase to modulate CXCR4 expression in AsPC1 cells.

[PMID: 18297739]
Methylation of specific CG residues in the mammalian genome results in tissue-specific patterns of gene expression, which are critical for cell differentiation. Embryos that fail to establish and maintain proper DNA methylation patterns show severe developmental abnormalities as is the case of DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) -deficient embryos. Dnmt1 is the main maintenance methyltransferase in the mouse and its expression is regulated by a splicing mechanism that dictates the expression of stage-specific isoforms. Little is known about Dnmt1 expression in the cow and isoforms of Dnmt1 are yet unknown in this species. Here we demonstrate that the previously described bovine Dnmt1 transcript is ubiquitously expressed in embryos and fetal tissue. In addition, we report the identification of a splice variant of the bovine Dnmt1, which shows a ubiquitous expression pattern. This new transcript was detected using 5'RACE and genomic mapping and its expression pattern was shown to be consistent with a tissue-specific mode of regulation. Furthermore, our analysis shows that the expression of an oocyte-specific isoform of Dnmt1 is unlikely to occur in cattle. The newly reported isoform of Dnmt1 was demonstrated to be, similarly to Dnmt1a, polyadenylated and if translated possess the functional domains necessary for maintenance and de novo methyltransferase activity.

[PMID: 22048250]
DNA methylation mostly occurs within the context of CpG dinucleotides and is essential for embryonic development and gene repression. It is generally accepted that DNA methyltransferases carry out specific and non-overlapping functions, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b being responsible for the establishment of methylation around the time of implantation and Dnmt1 ensuring that methylation is faithfully copied to daughter cells via what has come to be known as "maintenance methylation." This longstanding view has been challenged over the years with the observation that Dnmt1 alone is incapable of perfect maintenance methylation. A new model is emerging that takes into account a contribution of the de novo enzymes Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b in the maintenance of the DNA methylation. We recently showed that certain germ line genes are specific targets of Dnmt3b, and that Dnmt3b remains bound to their promoter regions in somatic cells via interaction with the transcriptional repressor E2F6. It is tempting to consider an ongoing role for Dnmt3b in the methylation of germ line genes in somatic cells. We propose here observations in support of the hypothesis that the maintenance of methylation and subsequent silencing of a handful of germ line genes requires Dnmt3b but not Dnmt1. In addition to suggesting a new role for Dnmt3b in the protection of somatic cells against the promiscuous expression of the germ line program, these observations are of particular interest in the field of carcinogenesis, given that the expression of catalytically inactive Dnmt3b isoforms and aberrant expression of germ line genes are commonly observed in cancer cells.

[PMID: 20348135]
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) is a nucleoside analogue with cytotoxic and DNA demethylating effects. Here we show that 5-aza-dC induces the proteasomal degradation of free (non-chromatin bound) DNMT1 through a mechanism which is dependent on DNA synthesis and the targeting of incorporated 5-aza-dC residues by DNMT1 itself. Thus, 5-aza-dC induces Dnmt1 degradation in wild-type mouse ES cells, but not in Dnmt [3a(-/-), 3b(-/-)] mouse ES cells which express Dnmt1 but lack DNA methylation (<0.7% of CpG methylated) and contain few hemi-methylated CpG sites, these being the preferred substrates for Dnmt1. We suggest that adducts formed between DNMT1 and 5-aza-dC molecules in DNA induce a ubiquitin-E3 ligase activity which preferentially targets free DNMT1 molecules for degradation by the proteasome. The proteasome inhibitor MG132 prevents DNMT1 degradation and reduces hypomethylation induced by 5-aza-dC.

[PMID: 17929180]
DNA methylation is catalyzed by a family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) including the maintenance enzyme DNMT 1 and de novo methyltransferases DNMT 3a and DNMT 3b. Elevated levels of DNMTs have been found in cancer cells and in several types of human tumors. A polymorphism found in DNMT3b has been associated with increased risk for several cancers. The factors influencing DNMT expression in human tissues have not been clearly determined. he present study examined TDNMT3a and DNMT3b levels in human liver tissue samples and compared the effect of ageing, cigarette smoking, and gender. DNMT3a and DNMT3b expression levels in the samples from older individuals (56-78 years, n = 28) were both significantly higher than those of the younger group (16-48 years, n = 27) (73.2 +/- 3.4 vs 8.3 +/- 2.8 and 56.1 +/- 1.9 vs 17.5 +/- 5.7, respectively; p < 0.05). Levels of DNMT3b in females were significantly higher than those in males (75.4 +/- 2.2 vs 16.3 +/- 4.7; p < 0.05); however, DNMT3a levels were similar for females and males (52.7 +/- 2.7 vs 48.4 +/- 2.0). Expression levels of DNMT3a and DNMT3b were similar in smokers and nonsmokers (58.1 +/- 3.5 vs 60.8 +/- 3.1 and 54.5 +/- 2.3 vs 48.3 +/- 1.8, respectively). Genotyping for DNMT3b (C-->T) variant in this sample pool showed a frequency distribution of CC (41%), CT (50%), and TT (9%). The findings from this study suggest that ageing and gender may be important factors influencing DNA methylation status.

[PMID: 19016755]
In contrast to normal cells, cancer cells exhibit both genetic and epigenetic instability. These unique properties give rise to genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity in a given population of cancer cells and provide a means for the population to undergo phenotypic progression by clonal selection. DNA methylation at CpG dinucleotides is one of the epigenetic marks that are frequently disturbed in cancer cells. To understand how the CpG methylation pattern is changeable in cancer cells, it is necessary to know how it is faithfully maintained in normal cell proliferation. Toward this goal, we have developed a novel in vitro system that is based on the well-established SV40 in vitro replication system and functions to reconstitute concurrent DNA replication and DNA maintenance methylation reactions. We found that DNA methylation was maintained only when exogenous DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) were added to the reaction. We demonstrated that DNMT1 associates with replicating and/or replicated chromatin irrespective of the DNA methylation status of template DNA. Moreover, the PCNA-binding domain (PBD) of DNMT1 is not required for the association. Taken together, we suggest that DNMT1 is recruited to replicating and/or replicated chromatin in a constitutive manner independent of the DNA methylation reaction. The in vitro system described in this report is very useful for analyzing the molecular mechanism underlying the DNA maintenance methylation reaction.

[PMID: 21532572]
DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is crucial for maintenance of methylation, gene regulation and chromatin stability. DNA mismatch repair, cell cycle regulation in post-mitotic neurons and neurogenesis are influenced by DNA methylation. Here we show that mutations in DNMT1 cause both central and peripheral neurodegeneration in one form of hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy with dementia and hearing loss. Exome sequencing led to the identification of DNMT1 mutation c.1484A>G (p.Tyr495Cys) in two American kindreds and one Japanese kindred and a triple nucleotide change, c.1470-1472TCC>ATA (p.Asp490Glu-Pro491Tyr), in one European kindred. All mutations are within the targeting-sequence domain of DNMT1. These mutations cause premature degradation of mutant proteins, reduced methyltransferase activity and impaired heterochromatin binding during the G2 cell cycle phase leading to global hypomethylation and site-specific hypermethylation. Our study shows that DNMT1 mutations cause the aberrant methylation implicated in complex pathogenesis. The discovered DNMT1 mutations provide a new framework for the study of neurodegenerative diseases.

[PMID: 19819843]
DNA methylation is a postreplicative modification occurred in most prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes, which has a variety of important biological functions including regulation of gene expression, gene imprinting, preservation of chromosomal integrity, and X-chromosome inactivation. According to their structure and functions, DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) are divided into two major families in mammalian cells: maintenance methyltransferase (Dnmt1) and de novo methyltransferases (Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, and Dnmt3L). In addition, Dnmt2 also displays weak DNA methyltransferase catalytic activity, but newly founded function is to methylate cytosine 38 in the anti-codon loop of tRNAAsp. These Dnmts are crucial for mammalian growth and development. Dnmts deficiency will lead to embryonic development defects, cancer, and other diseases. Therefore, Dnmts could be important therapeutical targets. This article summarizes the classification, function, and recent research progress in DNA methyltransferases.

[PMID: 20820192]
Global DNA hypomethylation at CpG islands coupled with local hypermethylation is a hallmark for breast cancer, yet the mechanism underlying this change remains elusive. In this study, we showed that DNMT1, which encodes a methylation maintenance enzyme, is a transcriptional target of BRCA1. BRCA1 binds to the promoter of the DNMT1 gene through a potential OCT1 site and the binding is required for maintaining a transcriptional active configuration of the promoter in both mouse and human cells. We further demonstrated that impaired function of BRCA1 leads to global DNA hypomethylation, loss of genomic imprinting, and an open chromatin configuration in several types of tissues examined in a BRCA1 mutant mouse model at premaligant stages. BRCA1 deficiency is also associated with significantly increased expression levels of several protooncogenes, including c-Fos, Ha-Ras, and c-Myc, with a higher expression in tumors, while premalignant mammary epithelial cells displayed an intermediate state between tumors and controls. In human clinical samples, reduced expression of BRCA1 correlates with decreased levels of DNMT1, and reduced methylation of CpG islands. Thus, BRCA1 prevents global DNA hypomethylation through positively regulating DNMT1 expression, and this provides one of mechanisms for BRCA1-associated breast cancer formation.

[PMID: 19173286]
DNA methylation is a major epigenetic modification and plays a crucial role in the regulation of gene expression. Within the family of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts), Dnmt3a and 3b establish methylation marks during early development, while Dnmt1 maintains methylation patterns after DNA replication. The maintenance function of Dnmt1 is regulated by its large regulatory N-terminal domain that interacts with other chromatin factors and is essential for the recognition of hemi-methylated DNA. Gelfiltration analysis showed that purified Dnmt1 elutes at an apparent molecular weight corresponding to the size of a dimer. With protein interaction assays we could show that Dnmt1 interacts with itself through its N-terminal regulatory domain. By deletion analysis and co-immunoprecipitations we mapped the dimerization domain to the targeting sequence TS that is located in the center of the N-terminal domain (amino acids 310-629) and was previously shown to mediate replication independent association with heterochromatin at chromocenters. Further mutational analyses suggested that the dimeric complex has a bipartite interaction interface and is formed in a head-to-head orientation. Dnmt1 dimer formation could facilitate the discrimination of hemi-methylated target sites as has been found for other palindromic DNA sequence recognizing enzymes. These results assign an additional function to the TS domain and raise the interesting question how these functions are spatially and temporarily co-ordinated.

[PMID: 19450230]
DNA methylation regulates gene expression through a complex network of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions in chromatin. The maintenance methylase, DNMT1 (DNA methyltransferase 1), is a prominent enzyme in the process that is linked to DNA replication and drives the heritable nature of epigenetic modifications. The mechanistic details that explain how DNMT1 catalytic action is directed and regulated in chromatin are important in our overall understanding of gene control. In this work, we show that DNMT1 is modified by SUMOylation and we have mapped these SUMOylation sites by defined mutations. SUMOylated DNMT1 is catalytically active on genomic DNA in vivo and we find that SUMOylation significantly enhances the methylase activity of DNMT1 both in vitro and in chromatin. These data suggest that SUMOylation modulates the endogenous activity of a prominent epigenetic maintenance pathway in somatic cells.

[PMID: 22563479]
Silencing of genes by hypermethylation contributes to cancer progression and has been shown to occur with increased frequency at specific genomic loci. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the establishment and maintenance of aberrant methylation marks are still elusive. The de novo DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) has been suggested to play an important role in the generation of cancer-specific methylation patterns. Previous studies have shown that a reduction of DNMT3B protein levels induces antiproliferative effects in cancer cells that were attributed to the demethylation and reactivation of tumor suppressor genes. However, methylation changes have not been analyzed in detail yet. Using RNA interference we reduced DNMT3B protein levels in colon cancer cell lines. Our results confirm that depletion of DNMT3B specifically reduced the proliferation rate of DNMT3B-overexpressing colon cancer cell lines. However, genome-scale DNA methylation profiling failed to reveal methylation changes at putative DNMT3B target genes, even in the complete absence of DNMT3B. These results show that DNMT3B is dispensable for the maintenance of aberrant DNA methylation patterns in human colon cancer cells and they have important implications for the development of targeted DNA methyltransferase inhibitors as epigenetic cancer drugs.

[PMID: 20035856]
T cell DNA methylation levels decline with age, activating genes such as KIR and TNFSF7 (CD70), implicated in lupus-like autoimmunity and acute coronary syndromes. The mechanisms causing age-dependent DNA demethylation are unclear. Maintenance of DNA methylation depends on DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) and intracellular S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) levels, and is inhibited by S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH). SAM levels depend on dietary micronutrients including folate and methionine. SAH levels depend on serum homocysteine concentrations. T cell Dnmt1 levels also decline with age. We hypothesized that age-dependent Dnmt1 decreases synergize with low folate, low methionine or high homocysteine levels to demethylate and activate methylation-sensitive genes. T cells from healthy adults ages 22-81, stimulated and cultured with low folate, low methionine, or high homocysteine concentrations showed demethylation and overexpression of KIR and CD70 beginning at age approximately 50 and increased further with age. The effects were reproduced by Dnmt1 knockdowns in T cells from young subjects. These results indicate that maintenance of T cell DNA methylation patterns is more sensitive to low folate and methionine levels in older than younger individuals, due to low Dnmt1 levels, and that homocysteine further increases aberrant gene expression. Thus, attention to proper nutrition may be particularly important in the elderly.

[PMID: 22413869]
Early pregnancy loss (EPL) is a frustrating clinical problem, whose mechanisms are not completely understood. DNA methylation, which includes maintenance methylation and de novo methylation directed by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), is important for embryo development. Abnormal function of these DNMTs may have serious consequences for embryonic development. To evaluate the possible involvement of DNA methylation in human EPL, the expression of DNMT proteins and global methylation of DNA were assessed in villous or decidua from EPL patients. The association of maintenance methylation with embryo implantation and development was also examined. We found that DNMT1 and DNMT3A were both expressed in normal human villous and decidua. DNMT1 expression and DNA global methylation levels were significantly down-regulated in villous of EPL. DNMT3A expression was not significantly changed in the EPL group compared to controls in either villous or decidua. We also found that disturbance of maintenance methylation with a DNMT1 inhibitor may result in a decreased global DNA methylation level and impaired embryonic development in the mouse model, and inhibit in vitro embryo attachment to endometrial cells. Our results demonstrate that defects in DNA maintenance methylation in the embryo, not in the mother, are associated with abnormal embryonic implantation and development. The findings of the current study provide new insights into the etiology of EPL.