[PMID: 21737084]
A hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HILIC LC-MS/MS) method using multiple scan modes was developed to separate and quantify 11 compounds and lipid classes including acetylcholine (AcCho), betaine (Bet), choline (Cho), glycerophosphocholine (GPC), lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylinositol (PI), phosphocholine (PCho) and sphingomyelin (SM). This includes all of the major choline-containing compounds found in foods. The method offers advantages over other LC methods since HILIC chromatography is readily compatible with electrospray ionization and results in higher sensitivity and improved peak shapes. The LC-MS/MS method allows quantification of all choline-containing compounds in a single run. Tests of method suitability indicated linear ranges of approximately 0.25-25 μg/ml for PI and PE, 0.5-50 μg/ml for PC, 0.05-5 μg/ml for SM and LPC, 0.5-25 μg/ml for LPE, 0.02-5 μg/ml for Cho, and 0.08-8 μg/ml for Bet, respectively. Accuracies of 83-105% with precisions of 1.6-13.2% RSD were achieved for standards over a wide range of concentrations, demonstrating that this method will be suitable for food analysis. 8 polar lipid classes were found in a lipid extract of egg yolk and different species of the same class were differentiated based on their molecular weights and fragment ion information. PC and PE were found to be the most abundant lipid classes consisting of 71% and 18% of the total phospholipids in egg yolk.

[PMID: 23217321]
A hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HILIC LC-MS/MS) method was developed and validated to simultaneously quantify six aqueous choline-related compounds and eight major phospholipids classes in a single run. HILIC chromatography was coupled to positive ion electrospray mass spectrometry. A combination of multiple scan modes including precursor ion scan, neutral loss scan and multiple reaction monitoring was optimized for the determination of each compound or class in a single LC/MS run. This work developed a simplified extraction scheme in which both free choline and related compounds along with phospholipids were extracted into a homogenized phase using chloroform/methanol/water (1:2:0.8) and diluted into methanol for the analysis of target compounds in a variety of sample matrices. The analyte recoveries were evaluated by spiking tissues and food samples with two isotope-labeled internal standards, PC-d(3) and Cho-d(3). Recoveries of between 90% and 115% were obtained by spiking a range of sample matrices with authentic standards containing all 14 of the target analytes. The precision of the analysis ranged from 1.6% to 13%. Accuracy and precision was comparable to that obtained by quantification of selected phospholipid classes using (31)P NMR. A variety of sample matrices including egg yolks, human diets and animal tissues were analyzed using the validated method. The measurements of total choline in selected foods were found to be in good agreement with values obtained from the USDA choline database.

[PMID: 22946920]
In bioanalysis, phospholipids may affect the precision and accuracy of LC-MS/MS methods and compromise the quality of the results, especially when samples in complex biomatrices are extracted by protein precipitation techniques. It was found that the retentive behavior of both common pharmaceuticals and physiologically relevant phospholipids under bare silica hydrophilic-interaction LC (HILIC) is more predictable than under reversed-phase conditions. In particular, the retention time of phospholipids was not significantly affected by varying the salt and acid modifiers in the mobile phases, but common pharmaceuticals can be shifted away from these phospholipid interferences through mobile phase modifiers. Several mass spectrometric techniques were applied to confirm this finding. HILIC chromatography is a valued tool in the development of robust bioanalytical assays with minimal and predictable phospholipid interferences. Furthermore, addition of a small amount of ion-pairing additives can reliably move pharmaceutical compounds away from these suppressive regions.

[PMID: 23073287]
Hydrophilic-interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) is a widely used technique for small polar molecule analysis and offers the advantage of improved sensitivity in mass spectrometry. Although HILIC is today frequently employed as an orthogonal fractionation method for peptides during the proteomic discovery phase, it is still seldom considered for quantification. In this study, the performances in terms of peak capacity and sensitivity of 3 HILIC columns were compared to traditional reversed phase liquid C(18) column in the context of targeted quantification of proteotypic peptides using selected reaction monitoring mode (SRM). The results showed that the maximum sensitivity in HILIC chromatography was achieved by using an amide column without salt buffer and that the signal increased compared to classic reversed phase chromatography. However, the intensity improvement is quite low compared to the one obtained for small molecules. This is due on one hand to a higher matrix effect in HILIC and on the other hand to a change of charge states of peptides in organic solvent (doubly charged to monocharged). The doubly charged ions can be more readily dissociated than singly charged ions, making them ideal for SRM peptide quantification. As a result "supercharging" reagents are added to the mobile phase to shift from predominant singly charged ions to the more favorable doubly charged species. Using such optimized conditions, peptide signal is improved by a factor of between two and ten for 88% of the peptides of the 81 peptides investigated.

[PMID: 21238772]
Uric acid is the end-product of purine metabolism and a major antioxidant in humans. The concentrations of uric acid in plasma and urine are associated with various diseases and routinely measured in clinical and biomedical laboratories using enzymatic conversion and colorimetric measurement. In this study a hydrophilic interaction chromatographic (HILIC) method was developed for simultaneous determination of uric acid and creatinine, a biomarker of urine dilution and renal function, in human urine. Urine samples were pretreated by dilution, protein precipitation, centrifugation and filtration. Uric acid and creatinine were separated from other components in urine samples and quantified using HILIC chromatography. A linear relationship between the ratio of the peak area of the standards to that of the internal standard and the concentration of the standards was obtained for both uric acid and creatinine with the square of correlation coefficients >0.999 for both analytes. The detection limits were 0.04 μg/mL for creatinine and 0.06 μg/mL for uric acid. The described HILIC method has proved to be simple, accurate, robust and reliable.

[PMID: 21316059]
For the analysis of highly hydrophilic and polar compounds, Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (HILIC) has been established as a valuable complementary approach to reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC). Moreover, the use of mobile phases with a high percentage of organic solvent in HILIC separation is beneficial for mass spectrometric (MS) detection, because of enhanced ionization which results in an increased sensitivity. In this review, various applications of HILIC are described for a number of environmental and food contaminants together with detailed methodological descriptions and the advantages or drawbacks of HILIC compared to other LC methods are critically discussed. In the first part of the review, an overview is given of the work that has been carried out with HILIC for the analysis of pharmaceuticals and pesticides in environmental samples. HILIC has shown its applicability for polar pharmaceuticals, such as antibiotics, estrogens and their metabolites, drugs of abuse, cytostatics, metformin and contrast agents. In the pesticide group, HILIC chromatography was helpful for polar phenylurea and organophosphorus pesticides. The second part of the review focuses on the analysis of antibiotic residues in food and feed with HILIC, while in the pesticide group, HILIC experiments have been reported for dithiocarbamates and quaternary ammonium compounds. The last chapter gives an overview of the analysis by HILIC of miscellaneous analytes in aquatic and food/feed samples.