[PMID: 24124207]
Gene looping, defined as the physical interaction between the promoter and terminator regions of a RNA polymerase II-transcribed gene, is widespread in yeast and mammalian cells. Gene looping has been shown to play important roles in transcription. Gene-loop formation is dependent on regulatory proteins localized at the 5' and 3' ends of genes, such as TFIIB. However, whether other factors contribute to gene looping remains to be elucidated. Here, we investigated the contribution of intrinsic DNA and chromatin structures to gene looping. We found that Saccharomyces cerevisiae looped genes show high DNA bendability around middle and 3/4 regions in open reading frames (ORFs). This bendability pattern is conserved between yeast species, whereas the position of bendability peak varies substantially among species. Looped genes in human cells also show high DNA bendability. Nucleosome positioning around looped ORF middle regions is unstable. We also present evidence indicating that this unstable nucleosome positioning is involved in gene looping. These results suggest a mechanism by which DNA bendability and unstable nucleosome positioning could assist in the formation of gene loops.

[PMID: 22081613]
TFIIB is essential for transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. TFIIB also cross-links to terminator regions and is required for gene loops that juxtapose promoter-terminator elements in a transcription-dependent manner. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae sua7-1 mutation encodes an altered form of TFIIB (E62K) that is defective for both start site selection and gene looping. Here we report the isolation of an ssl2 mutant, encoding an altered form of TFIIH, as a suppressor of the cold-sensitive growth defect of the sua7-1 mutation. Ssl2 (Rad25) is orthologous to human XPB and is a member of the SF2 family of ATP-dependent DNA helicases. The ssl2 suppressor allele encodes an arginine replacement of the conserved histidine residue (H508R) located within the DEVH-containing helicase domain. In addition to suppressing the TFIIB E62K growth defect, Ssl2 H508R partially restores both normal start site selection and gene looping. Moreover, Ssl2, like TFIIB, associates with promoter and terminator regions, and the diminished association of TFIIB E62K with the PMA1 terminator is restored by the Ssl2 H508R suppressor. These results define a novel, functional interaction between TFIIB and Ssl2 that affects start site selection and gene looping.

[PMID: 17803944]
Recent studies demonstrated the existence of gene loops that juxtapose the promoter and terminator regions of genes with exceptionally long ORFs in yeast. Here we report that looping is not idiosyncratic to long genes but occurs between the distal ends of genes with ORFs as short as 1 kb. Moreover, looping is dependent upon the general transcription factor TFIIB: the E62K (glutamic acid 62 --> lysine) form of TFIIB adversely affects looping at every gene tested, including BLM10, SAC3, GAL10, SEN1, and HEM3. TFIIB crosslinks to both the promoter and terminator regions of the PMA1 and BLM10 genes, and its association with the terminator, but not the promoter, is adversely affected by E62K and by depletion of the Ssu72 component of the CPF 3' end processing complex, and is independent of TBP. We propose a model suggesting that TFIIB binds RNAP II at the terminator, which in turn associates with the promoter scaffold.

[PMID: 21835917]
Gene looping, defined as the interaction of the promoter and the terminator regions of a gene during transcription, requires transcription factor IIB (TFIIB). We have earlier demonstrated association of TFIIB with the distal ends of a gene in an activator-dependent manner (El Kaderi, B., Medler, S., Raghunayakula, S., and Ansari, A. (2009) J. Biol. Chem. 284, 25015-25025). The presence of TFIIB at the 3' end of a gene required its interaction with cleavage factor 1 (CF1) 3' end processing complex subunit Rna15. Here, employing affinity chromatography and glycerol gradient centrifugation, we show that TFIIB associates with poly(A) polymerase and the entire CF1 complex in yeast cells. The factors required for general transcription such as TATA-binding protein, RNA polymerase II, and TFIIH are not a component of the TFIIB complex. This holo-TFIIB complex was resistant to MNase digestion. The complex was observed only in the looping-competent strains, but not in the looping-defective sua7-1 strain. The requirement of Rna15 in gene looping has been demonstrated earlier. Here we provide evidence that poly(A) polymerase (Pap1) as well as CF1 subunits Rna14 and Pcf11 are also required for loop formation of MET16 and INO1 genes. Accordingly, cross-linking of TFIIB to the 3' end of genes was abolished in the mutants of Pap1, Rna14, and Pcf11. We further show that in sua7-1 cells, where holo-TFIIB complex is not formed, the kinetics of activated transcription is altered. These results suggest that a complex of TFIIB, CF1 subunits, and Pap1 exists in yeast cells. Furthermore, TFIIB interaction with the CF1 complex and Pap1 is crucial for gene looping and transcriptional regulation.

[PMID: 19602510]
Gene looping juxtaposes the promoter and terminator regions of RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes in yeast and mammalian cells. Here we report an activator-dependent interaction of transcription initiation and termination factors during gene looping in budding yeast. Chromatin analysis revealed that MET16, INO1, and GAL1p-BUD3 are in a stable looped configuration during activated transcription. Looping was nearly abolished in the absence of transcription activators Met28, Ino2, and Gal4 of MET16, INO1, and GAL1p-BUD3 genes, respectively. The activator-independent increase in transcription was not accompanied by loop formation, thereby suggesting an essential role for activators in gene looping. The activators did not facilitate loop formation directly because they did not exhibit an interaction with the 3' end of the genes. Instead, activators physically interacted with the general transcription factor TFIIB when the genes were activated and in a looped configuration. TFIIB cross-linked to both the promoter and the terminator regions during the transcriptionally activated state of a gene. The presence of TFIIB on the terminator was dependent on the Rna15 component of CF1 3' end processing complex. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed a physical interaction of Rna15 with TFIIB. We propose that the activators facilitate gene looping through their interaction with TFIIB during transcriptional activation of genes.

[PMID: 18550805]
Most nucleosomes are well-organized at the 5' ends of S. cerevisiae genes where "-1" and "+1" nucleosomes bracket a nucleosome-free promoter region (NFR). How nucleosomal organization is specified by the genome is less clear. Here we establish and inter-relate rules governing genomic nucleosome organization by sequencing DNA from more than one million immunopurified S. cerevisiae nucleosomes (displayed at http://atlas.bx.psu.edu/). Evidence is presented that the organization of nucleosomes throughout genes is largely a consequence of statistical packing principles. The genomic sequence specifies the location of the -1 and +1 nucleosomes. The +1 nucleosome forms a barrier against which nucleosomes are packed, resulting in uniform positioning, which decays at farther distances from the barrier. We present evidence for a novel 3' NFR that is present at >95% of all genes. 3' NFRs may be important for transcription termination and anti-sense initiation. We present a high-resolution genome-wide map of TFIIB locations that implicates 3' NFRs in gene looping.