[PMID: 22632831]
The structure of the complex between the transcription cofactor Vgll1 and the transcription factor TEAD4, the mammalian equivalent of the Drosophila Vestigial and Scalloped, respectively, is determined in this study. Remarkably, Vgll1 interacts with TEAD in a manner similar to the transcription coactivators, as well as oncogenes YAP and TAZ, despite having a varied primary sequence. Vgll1-TEAD complex upregulates the expression of IGFBP-5, a proliferation-promoting gene, and facilitates anchorage-independent cell proliferation. The YAP/TAZ-TEAD complex also upregulates several other proliferation-promoting genes and also promotes anchorage-independent cell proliferation. Given its structural and functional similarity to YAP/TAZ, Vgll1 has the potential to promote cancer progression.

[PMID: 16332960]
The T-box transcription factor TBX5 plays essential roles in cardiac and limb development. Various mutations in the TBX5 gene have been identified in patients with Holt-Oram syndrome, which is characterized by congenital defects in the heart and upper extremities. In this study, we identified a WW-domain-containing transcriptional regulator TAZ as a potent TBX5 coactivator. TAZ directly associates with TBX5 and markedly stimulates TBX5-dependent promoters by interacting with the histone acetyltransferases p300 and PCAF. YAP, a TAZ-related protein with conserved functional domains, also stimulates TBX5-dependent transcription, possibly by forming a heterodimer with TAZ. TBX5 lacks a PY motif, which mediates the association of other proteins with TAZ, and interacts with TAZ through multiple domains including its carboxyl-terminal structure. Truncation mutants of TBX5 identified in patients with Holt-Oram syndrome were markedly impaired in their ability to associate with and be stimulated by TAZ. These findings reveal key roles for TAZ and YAP in the control of TBX5-dependent transcription and suggest the involvement of these coactivators in cardiac and limb development.

[PMID: 23380592]
TEAD proteins are transcription factors that are crucial for development, but also play a role in cancers. Several developmentally and pathologically important genes are upregulated by TEADs. TEADs have a TEA domain that enables them to bind specific DNA elements and a transactivation domain that enables them to interact with coactivators. TEADs on their own are unable to activate transcription and they require the help of coactivators. Several TEAD-interacting coactivators are known and they can be classified into three groups: (1) YAP and its paralog TAZ; (2) Vgll proteins; and (3) p160s. Accordingly, these coactivators also play a role in development and cancers. Recent studies have shown that TEADs and their coactivators aid in the progression of various cancers, including the difficult to treat glioblastoma, liver and ovarian cancers. They facilitate cancer progression through expression of proliferation promoting genes such as c-myc, survivin, Axl, CTGF and Cyr61. There is also a good correlation between high TEAD or its coactivator expression and poor prognosis in various cancers. Given the fact that TEADs and their coactivators need to work together for a functional outcome, disrupting the interaction between them appears to be a viable option for cancer therapy. Structures of TEAD-coactivator complexes have been elucidated and will facilitate drug design and development.

[PMID: 23985334]
YAP and TAZ are transcription coactivators and effectors of the Hippo pathway, which play a key role in organ size control. Through interaction with transcription factors such as TEADs, they activate gene transcription and thus promote cell proliferation, inhibit apoptosis, and regulate cell differentiation. Dysregulation of YAP/TAZ was found to correlate with human cancers. The oncogenic roles of these proteins were also demonstrated in animal models. The growth promoting activity of YAP/TAZ is limited by the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway through phosphorylation-induced cytoplasmic retention and destabilization. Recently, it was found that YAP and TAZ mediate responses to several extracellular signals including mechanical stress, GPCR signaling, and the Wnt signaling pathway. All these growth-regulating signals play important roles in normal development and cancer. In this review, we would like to discuss the function of YAP and TAZ as effectors of these physiological signals.

[PMID: 25097035]
The discovery of the Hippo pathway can be traced back to two areas of research. Genetic screens in fruit flies led to the identification of the Hippo pathway kinases and scaffolding proteins that function together to suppress cell proliferation and tumor growth. Independent research, often in the context of muscle biology, described Tead (TEA domain) transcription factors, which bind CATTCC DNA motifs to regulate gene expression. These two research areas were joined by the finding that the Hippo pathway regulates the activity of Tead transcription factors mainly through phosphorylation of the transcriptional coactivators Yap and Taz, which bind to and activate Teads. Additionally, many other signal transduction proteins crosstalk to members of the Hippo pathway forming a Hippo signal transduction network. We discuss evidence that the Hippo signal transduction network plays important roles in myogenesis, regeneration, muscular dystrophy, and rhabdomyosarcoma in skeletal muscle, as well as in myogenesis, organ size control, and regeneration of the heart. Understanding the role of Hippo kinases in skeletal and heart muscle physiology could have important implications for translational research.

[PMID: 20439427]
The Hippo signaling pathway is gaining recognition as an important player in both organ size control and tumorigenesis, which are physiological and pathological processes that share common cellular signaling mechanisms. Upon activation by stimuli such as high cell density in cell culture, the Hippo pathway kinase cascade phosphorylates and inhibits the Yes-associated protein (YAP)/TAZ transcription coactivators representing the major signaling output of the pathway. Altered gene expression resulting from YAP/TAZ inhibition affects cell number by repressing cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis, thereby limiting organ size. Recent studies have provided new insights into the Hippo signaling pathway, elucidating novel phosphorylation-dependent and independent mechanisms of YAP/Yki inhibition by the Hippo pathway, new Hippo pathway components, novel YAP target transcription factors and target genes, and the three-dimensional structure of the YAP-TEAD complex, and providing further evidence for the involvement of YAP and the Hippo pathway in tumorigenesis.