[PMID: 2190528]
Familial aggregations of defined malignancies are of great importance for determining the genetic factors involved, as has been demonstrated for familial and sporadic retinoblastoma. In nearly all organs, neoplasms occur that are inherited similar to familial retinoblastoma (Rb). For example, more than 5% of all women suffering from breast cancer belong to breast cancer families in which the occurrence of the malignancy suggests an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Familial colon cancer is associated with several well-known autosomal dominantly inherited polyposis syndromes, and also other susceptibilities without obvious clinical features. Site-specific cancers are often accompanied by other malignancies. In addition, there seem to be predispositions to a wider range of different, but well-defined neoplasms: e.g., adenocarcinomatosis of the colon and the endometrium, or the Li-Fraumeni/SBLA syndrome. The latter shows a spectrum of sarcoma, brain tumours, breast cancer, leukaemias, lung and adenocortical cancer. The genes leading to these types of dominantly inherited predispositions appear to be the tentatively so-called tumour suppressor genes, for which the Rb gene serves as a model. It manifests itself recessively on the level of the individual cell, which means both alleles must be deleted or inactivated before a retinoblast develops into a neoplastic cell. Clinical, epidemiological and molecular genetic studies have yet to establish whether the Rb model can be extended to all other forms of dominantly inherited human cancers.

[PMID: 7981072]
We report a family with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) in whom we have been unable to detect a mutation in the coding sequence of the p53 gene. Analysis of linkage to three polymorphic markers within p53 enabled direct involvement of p53 to be excluded. This is the first example of a LFS family in whom exclusion of p53 has been possible. Four affected members of the family with sarcoma or premenopausal breast cancer showed increased expression of p53 protein in their normal tissues as detected by immunohistochemistry. It therefore appears that the LFS phenotype has been conferred by an aberrant gene, showing a dominant pattern of inheritance, which may be acting to compromise normal p53 function rather than by a mutation in p53 itself. In order to try to determine the chromosomal location of this putative gene, we have carried out studies of linkage to candidate loci. By these means we have excluded involvement of Rb1 and BRCA1 on chromosomes 13q and 17q respectively. The MDM2 oncogene on chromosome 12q was considered to be the prime candidate as MDM2 is amplified in sarcomas and the MDM2 product binds to p53. Furthermore, p53 mutation and amplification of MDM2 have been shown to be mutually exclusive events in tumour development. Linkage analysis to two polymorphic markers within MDM2 yielded a three-point LOD score of -5.4 at a recombination fraction theta equal to zero. Therefore MDM2 could be excluded. It is possible that the gene which is responsible for cancer susceptibility in this family, possibly via interaction with p53, will be important in the histogenesis of breast cancer in general. We are now carrying out further studies to locate and identify this gene.

[PMID: 16772121]
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is characterized by early-onset carcinogenesis involving multiple tumor types and shows autosomal dominant inheritance. Approximately 70% of LFS cases are due to germline mutations in the TP53 gene on chromosome 17p13.1. Mutations have also been found in the CHEK2 gene on chromosome 22q11, and others have been mapped to chromosome 11q23. While characterizing an LFS family with a documented defect in TP53, we found one family member who developed bilateral breast cancer at age 37 yet was homozygous for wild-type TP53. Her mother also developed early-onset primary bilateral breast cancer, and a sister had unilateral breast cancer and a soft tissue sarcoma. Cytogenetic analysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization of a primary skin fibroblast cell line revealed that the patient had a novel balanced reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 11 and 15: t(11;15)(q23;q15). This translocation was not present in a primary skin fibroblast cell line from a brother with neuroblastoma, who was heterozygous for the TP53 mutation. There was no evidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in either the patient or her mother, although a nephew did develop leukemia and died in childhood. These data may implicate the region at breakpoint 11q23 and/or 15q15 as playing a significant role in predisposition to breast cancer development.

[PMID: 9302689]
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a rare autosomal-dominant disease whose hallmark is a predisposition to a wide range of cancers among members of a family. Many of these families have a germline mutation within the tumor suppressor gene TP53, which encodes the p53 protein. The inheritance of a mutant TP53 allele results in a 25-fold increase in the chance of developing cancer by 50 years of age, compared with the general population. TP53 mutations are also very common in the development of somatic tumors. This article reviews the biological and biochemical role of p53 in the susceptibility to cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

[PMID: 22672556]
Li-Fraumeni-Syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal-dominant, inherited tumour predisposition syndrome associated with heterozygous germline mutations in the TP53 gene. Patients with LFS are at a high risk to develop early-onset breast cancer and multiple malignancies, among which sarcomas are the most common. A high incidence of childhood tumours and close to 100% penetrance has been described. Knowledge of the genetic status of the TP53 gene in these patients is critical not only due to the increased risk of malignancies, but also because of the therapeutic implications, since a higher rate of radiation-induced secondary tumours in these patients has been observed. We report a patient with LFS harbouring heterozygous, pathogenic TP53 germline mutation, who was affected by four synchronous malignancies at the age of 40: a myxofibrosarcoma of the right upper arm, bilateral breast cancer and a periadrenal liposarcoma. Radiological treatments and a surveillance program were adjusted according to recommendations for LFS patients. Management of tumour treatment of patients with LFS is different to the general population because of their risk for secondary cancers in the radiation field. Screening procedures should take a possibly elevated risk for radiation induced cancer into account.

[PMID: 20075382]
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant, autosomal dominant, human familial cancer predisposition. Although a key role for the tumor suppressor p53 has been implicated in LFS, the genetic and cellular mechanisms underpinning this disease remain unknown. Therefore, modeling LFS in a vertebrate system that is accessible to both large-scale genetic screens and in vivo cell biological studies will facilitate the in vivo dissection of disease mechanisms, help identify candidate genes, and spur the discovery of therapeutic compounds. Here, we describe a forward genetic screen in zebrafish embryos that was used to identify LFS candidate genes, which yielded a p53 mutant (p53(I166T)) that as an adult develops tumors, predominantly sarcomas, with 100% penetrance. As in humans with LFS, tumors arise in heterozygotes and display loss of heterozygosity (LOH). This report of LOH indicates that Knudson's two-hit hypothesis, a hallmark of human autosomal dominant cancer syndromes, can be modeled in zebrafish. Furthermore, as with some LFS mutations, the zebrafish p53(I166T) allele is a loss-of-function allele with dominant-negative activity in vivo. Additionally, we demonstrate that the p53 regulatory pathway, including Mdm2 regulation, is evolutionarily conserved in zebrafish, providing a bona fide biological context in which to systematically uncover novel modifier genes and therapeutic agents for human LFS.