[PMID: 23460532]
Modulation of the immune system by targeting coinhibitory and costimulatory receptors has become a promising new approach of immunotherapy for cancer. The recent approval of the CTLA-4-blocking antibody ipilimumab for the treatment of melanoma was a watershed event, opening up a new era in the field of immunotherapy. Ipilimumab was the first treatment to ever show enhanced overall survival (OS) for patients with stage IV melanoma. However, measuring response rates using standard Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) or modified World Health Organization criteria or progression-free survival does not accurately capture the potential for clinical benefit for ipilimumab-treated patients. As immunotherapy approaches are translated into more tumor types, it is important to study biomarkers, which may be more predictive of OS to identify the patients most likely to have clinical benefit. Ipilimumab is the first-in-class of a series of immunomodulating antibodies that are in clinical development. Anti-PD1 (nivolumab and MK-3475), anti-PD-L1 (BMS-936 559, RG7446, and MEDI4736), anti-CD137 (urelumab), anti-OX40, anti-GITR, and anti-CD40 monoclonal antibodies are just some of the agents that are being actively investigated in clinical trials, each having the potential for combination with the ipilimumab to enhance its effectiveness. Development of rational combinations of immunomodulatory antibodies with small-molecule pathway inhibitor therapies such as vemurafenib makes the discovery of predictive biomarkers even more important. Identifying reliable biomarkers is a necessary step in personalizing the treatment of each patient's cancer through a baseline assessment of tumor gene expression and/or immune profile to optimize therapy for the best chance of therapeutic success.

[PMID: 20460501]
T-cell expression of programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) down-regulates the immune response against malignancy by interacting with cognate ligands (eg, PD-L1) on tumor cells; however, little is known regarding PD-1 and natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells exert cytotoxicity against multiple myeloma (MM), an effect enhanced through novel therapies. We show that NK cells from MM patients express PD-1 whereas normal NK cells do not and confirm PD-L1 on primary MM cells. Engagement of PD-1 with PD-L1 should down-modulate the NK-cell versus MM effect. We demonstrate that CT-011, a novel anti-PD-1 antibody, enhances human NK-cell function against autologous, primary MM cells, seemingly through effects on NK-cell trafficking, immune complex formation with MM cells, and cytotoxicity specifically toward PD-L1(+) MM tumor cells but not normal cells. We show that lenalidomide down-regulates PD-L1 on primary MM cells and may augment CT-011's enhancement of NK-cell function against MM. We demonstrate a role for the PD-1/PD-L1 signaling axis in the NK-cell immune response against MM and a role for CT-011 in enhancing the NK-cell versus MM effect. A phase 2 clinical trial of CT-011 in combination with lenalidomide for patients with MM should be considered.

[PMID: 21577144]
We have developed a cancer vaccine in which autologous tumor is fused with dendritic cells (DCs) resulting in the presentation of tumor antigens in the context of DC-mediated costimulation. In clinical trials, immunologic responses have been observed, however responses may be muted by inhibitory pathways. The PD1/PDL1 pathway is an important element contributing to tumor-mediated immune suppression. In this study, we demonstrate that myeloma cells and DC/tumor fusions strongly express PD-L1. Compared with a control population of normal volunteers, increased PD-1 expression was observed on T cells isolated from patients with myeloma. It is interesting to note that after autologous transplantation, T-cell expression of PD-1 returned to levels seen in normal controls. We examined the effect of PD-1 blockade on T-cell response to DC/tumor fusions ex vivo. Presence of CT-011, an anti-PD1 antibody, promoted the vaccine-induced T-cell polarization towards an activated phenotype expressing Th1 compared with Th2 cytokines. A concomitant decrease in regulatory T cells and enhanced killing in a cytotoxicity assay was observed. In summary, we demonstrate that PD-1 expression is increased in T cells of patients with active myeloma, and that CT-011 enhances activated T-cell responses after DC/tumor fusion stimulation.

[PMID: 23263823]
Programmed death 1 (PD-1) is a T cell co-inhibitory receptor with two ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2. In cancer, this pathway plays a major role in immune resistance in the tumor environment. Blockade of this pathway can enhance antitumor immune responses. This review discusses the preclinical rationale for PD-1 pathway inhibition in advanced renal cell carcinoma and prostate cancer, in addition to the clinical activity and toxicity of the anti-PD-L1 antibody BMS-936559, as well as anti-PD-1 antibodies MK-3475 and BMS-936558.

[PMID: 21710477]
Programmed death-1 receptor (PD-1) is expressed on T cells following TCR activation. Binding of this receptor to its cognate ligands, programmed death ligand (PDL)-1 and PDL-2, down-regulates signals by the TCR, promoting T-cell anergy and apoptosis, thus leading to immune suppression. Here, we find that using an anti-PD-1 antibody (CT-011) with Treg-cell depletion by low-dose cyclophosphamide (CPM), combined with a tumor vaccine, induces synergistic antigen-specific immune responses and reveals novel activities of each agent in this combination. This strategy led to complete regression of established tumors in a significant percentage of treated animals, with survival prolongation. We show for the first time that combining CT-011 and CPM significantly increases the number of vaccine-induced tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells, with simultaneous decrease in infiltrating Treg cells. Interestingly, we find that CT-011 prolongs Treg-cell inhibition induced by CPM, leading to a sustainable significant synergistic decrease of splenic and tumor-infiltrated Treg cells. Surprisingly, we find that the anti-tumor effect elicited by the combination of CT-011 and CPM is dependent on both CD8(+) and CD4(+) T-cell responses, although the antigen we used is a class I MHC-restricted peptide. Thus, we describe a novel and effective therapeutic approach by combining multiple strategies to target several tumor-mediated immune inhibitory mechanisms.

[PMID: 18483370]
CT-011 is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that modulates the immune response through interaction with PD-1, a protein belonging to the B7 receptor family present on lymphocytes. The objectives of this phase I study were to assess the dose-limiting toxicities, to determine the maximum tolerated dose, and to study the pharmacokinetics of CT-011 administered once to patients with advanced hematologic malignancies. Seventeen patients were treated with escalating doses of CT-011 ranging from 0.2 to 6 mg/kg. For pharmacokinetic analysis, blood samples were withdrawn from the patients before and immediately after treatment and at 24 hours, 48 hours, and on days 7, 14, and 21. CT-011 blood levels were assessed with a specific ELISA and derived concentrations were used to calculate pharmacokinetic parameters. Activation of the immune system was assessed by measuring peripheral blood CD4+, CD8+, and CD69+ lymphocytes. The study showed the antibody to be safe and well tolerated in this patient population. No single maximum tolerated dose was defined in this study. Clinical benefit was observed in 33% of the patients with one complete remission. Pharmacokinetic analyses show that serum Cmax and the AUC of CT-011 increased proportionally with dose. The median t1/2 of CT-011 ranged from 217 to 410 hours. Sustained elevation in the percentage of peripheral blood CD4+ lymphocytes was observed up to 21 days following CT-011 treatment. A single administration of 0.2 to 6.0 mg/kg of CT-011 is safe and well tolerated in patients with advanced hematologic malignancies.