[PMID: 21122555]
In about 70% of patients Crohn's disease (CD) affects the small intestine. This disease location is stable over time and associated with a genetic background different from isolated colonic disease. A characteristic feature of small intestinal host defense is the presence of Paneth cells at the bottom of the crypts of Lieberkühn. These cells produce different broad spectrum antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) most abundantly the α-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und DEFA6). In small intestinal Crohn's disease both these PC products are specifically reduced. As a functional consequence, ileal extracts from Crohn's disease patients are compromised in clearing bacteria and enteroadherent E. coli colonize the mucosa. Mechanisms for defective antimicrobial Paneth cell function are complex and include an association with a NOD2 loss of function mutation, a disturbance of the Wnt pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4), the autophagy factor ATG16L1, the endosomal stress protein XBP1, the toll-like receptor TLR9, the calcium mediated potassium channel KCNN4 as well as mutations or inactivation of HD5. Thus we conclude that small intestinal Crohn's disease is most likely a complex disease of the Paneth cell: Paneth's disease.

[PMID: 19397593]
Infection of mice with the parasite Trichinella spiralis leads to small intestinal inflammation, characterized by changes in mucosal architecture and subpopulations of epithelial cells. This model has been used to explore changes in the epithelial proliferative cell population and expression of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Histochemical and immunohistochemical studies were undertaken in duodenal samples. Location and number of Ki-67-positive cells were assessed using Score and Wincrypts program. Changes in mRNA transcripts were studied by real-time RT-PCR. T. spiralis infection induced an increase in total number of proliferative (Ki-67-positive) cells per half crypt on day 2 post-infection. Transcription of Math1, a transcription factor required for secretory cell differentiation in the intestine, was up-regulated on days 6-18 post-infection. At these time points, numbers of Paneth cells at the crypt base were also increased and the epithelial proliferative zone was shifted up the crypt-villus axis. Transcription of TGF-beta isoforms within the small intestine was up-regulated on days 6 and 12 post-infection, but anti-TGF-beta antibody treatment had no effect on T. spiralis-induced changes in mucosal architecture or increase in Paneth/intermediate cells. T. spiralis infection promotes an initial increase in small intestinal epithelial proliferation and subsequent cell differentiation along the secretory cell lineage. The resulting increase in numbers of Paneth cells at the crypt base causes the proliferative zone to move up the crypt-villus axis. Further studies are required to determine the significance of an increase in the expression of TGF-beta transcripts.

[PMID: 23006982]
Current models of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) propose that intraluminal microbes destroy intestinal mucosa and activate an inflammatory cascade that ends in necrosis. We suggest an alternate hypothesis wherein NEC is caused by injury to Paneth cells (PCs) in the intestinal crypts. PCs are specialized epithelia that protect intestinal stem cells from pathogens, stimulate stem cell differentiation, shape the intestinal microbiota, and assist in repairing the gut. Our novel model of NEC uses neonatal mice and ablates PCs followed by enteral infection. We contrast this model with other animal examples of NEC and the clinical disease. Selective destruction of PCs using dithizone likely releases tumor necrosis factor-α and other inflammatory mediators. We propose that this event produces inflammation in the submucosa, generates platelet-activating factor, and induces a coagulopathy. The role of PCs in NEC is consistent with the onset of disease in preterm infants after a period of PC-related maturation, the central role of PCs in crypt-related homeostasis, the anatomic location of pneumatosis intestinalis close to the crypts, and the proximity of PCs to occluded blood vessels that cause coagulation necrosis of the intestinal villi. We offer this hypothesis to promote new thoughts about how NEC occurs and its potential prevention.

[PMID: 24439803]
The intestinal epithelium is a classic example of a rapidly self-renewing tissue fueled by dedicated resident stem cells. These stem cells reside at the crypt base, generating committed progeny that mature into the various functional epithelial lineages while following a rapid migratory path toward the villi. Two models of intestinal stem cell location were proposed half a century ago and data have been presented in support of both models, dividing the scientific community. Molecular markers have been identified and validated using new techniques such as in vivo lineage tracing and ex vivo organoid culture. The intestinal stem cell niche comprises both epithelial cells, in particular the Paneth cell, and the stromal compartment, where cell-associated ligands and soluble factors regulate stem cell behavior. This review highlights the recent advances in identifying and characterizing the intestinal stem cells and their defining niche.

[PMID: 23232853]
Paneth cells have been reported in colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas; however, the frequency of colonic Paneth cell-containing adenomas is unknown as are their clinicopathologic features. A total of 152 consecutive colorectal adenomas from 103 patients (57 males and 46 females) were reviewed. The frequency of Paneth cells in this cohort of adenomas was determined and correlated with patient demographics. Twenty-six adenomas (17.1%) from 22 (21.4%) patients harbored Paneth cells, which were not limited to the base of the crypts but aberrantly located throughout the crypts. Patient age, adenoma size, villous features, and grade of dysplasia were not different between these 2 groups. Not surprisingly, Paneth cell-containing adenomas were more likely to occur in the proximal colon (84.6% vs. 55.6%; P=0.006). There was a strong association between male sex and Paneth cell-containing adenomas, as 23 of 26 (88.5%) of these adenomas occurred in male individuals compared with 71 of 126 (56.3%) non-Paneth cell-containing adenomas (P=0.002). Upon review of an additional 460 adenomas from 200 patients with varying numbers of adenomas (68 with 1 adenoma, 68 with 2 adenomas, and 64 with 3 or more adenomas), the risk of harboring synchronous adenomas was associated with villous morphology, proximal location, and the presence of a Paneth cell-containing adenoma. Thus, the presence of a Paneth cell-containing adenoma may be a marker for increased risk of developing colorectal neoplasia.

[PMID: 19788585]
Recently, there has been resurgence of interest in the question of small intestinal stem cells, their precise location and numbers in the crypts. In this article, we attempt to re-assess the data, including historical information often omitted in recent studies on the subject. The conclusion we draw is that the evidence supports the concept that active murine small intestinal stem cells in steady state are few in number and are proliferative. There are two evolving, but divergent views on their location (which may be more related to scope of capability and reversibility than to location) several lineage labelling and stem cell self-renewing studies (based on Lgr5 expression) suggest a location intercalated between the Paneth cells (crypt base columnar cells (CBCCs)), or classical cell kinetic, label-retention and radiobiological evidence plus other recent studies, pointing to a location four cell positions luminally from the base of the crypt The latter is supported by recent lineage labelling of Bmi-1-expressing cells and by studies on expression of Wip-1 phosphatase. The situation in the human small intestine remains unclear, but recent mtDNA mutation studies suggest that the stem cells in humans are also located above the Paneth cell zone. There could be a distinct and as yet undiscovered relationship between these observed traits, with stem cell properties both in cells of the crypt base and those at cell position 4.