[PMID: 19202000]
The lysosomal storage disorder Fabry disease is characterized by excessive globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) accumulation in major organs such as the heart and kidney. Defective lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (Gla) is responsible for excessive Gb3 accumulation, and one cell sensitive to the effects of Gb3 accumulation is vascular endothelium. Endothelial dysfunction is associated with Fabry disease and excessive cellular Gb3. We previously demonstrated that excessive vascular Gb3 in a mouse model of Fabry disease, the Gla-knockout (Gla(-/0)) mouse, results in abnormal vascular function, which includes abnormal endothelium-dependent contractions, a vascular phenomenon known to involve cyclooxygenase (COX). Therefore, we hypothesized that the vasculopathy in the Gla knockout mouse may be due to a vasoactive COX-derived product. To test this hypothesis, vascular reactivity experiments were performed in aortic rings from wild-type (Gla(+/0)) and Gla(-/0) mice in the presence and absence of specific and nonspecific COX inhibitors. Specific inhibition of COX1 or COX2 in endothelium-intact rings from Gla(-/0) mice decreased overall phenylephrine contractility compared with untreated Gla(-/0) rings, whereas COX inhibitors had no effect on contractility in endothelium-denuded rings. Nonspecific inhibition of COX with indomethacin (10 micromol/l) or COX1 inhibition with valeryl salicylate (3 mmol/l) improved endothelial function in rings from Gla(-/0) mice, but COX2 inhibition with NS-398 (1 micromol/l) further increased endothelial dysfunction in rings from Gla(-/0) mice. These results suggest that, in the Gla(-/0) mice, COX1 and COX2 activity are increased and localized in the endothelium, producing vasopressor and vasorelaxant products, which contribute to the Fabry-related vasculopathy.

[PMID: 9323559]
Human alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22; alpha-Gal A) is the lysosomal exoglycosidase responsible for the hydrolysis of terminal alpha-galactosyl residues from glycoconjugates and is the defective enzyme causing Fabry disease (McKusick 301500). An unusally elevated level of plasma alpha-Gal A activity (> 2.5 times the normal mean) was detected in two unrelated normal males and the elevated activities were inherited as X-linked traits in their families. Sequencing of the alpha-Gal A coding region, intron/exon boundaries and 5'-flanking region from the proband identified a single mutation, a G-->A transition 30 nt upstream from the initiation of translation codon in exon 1. The -30G-->A mutation occurred in a putative NF kappa B/Ets consensus binding site that was recently shown to inhibit protein binding to the 5'-untranslated region of the gene, providing a possible explanation for its high activity. To further characterize the mutation, the mRNA and protein expressed by this variant allele were studied. Purified plasma and lymphoblast alpha-Gal A activity from individuals with the -30G-->A mutation had normal physical and kinetic properties. In vitro translation of mRNAs from the cloned normal and high plasma activity alleles resulted in similar levels of alpha-Gal A protein, indicating that this mutation did not enhance translation. These findings suggest that the -30G-->A mutation in the 5'-untranslated region of the alpha-Gal A gene enhances transcription, presumably by interfering with the binding of negatively-acting transcription factors which normally decrease alpha-Gal A expression in various cells. Preliminary studies of the frequency of the -30G-->A mutation in 395 unrelated normal males of mixed ancestry revealed two additional unrelated individuals who had high plasma enzymatic activity and the mutation, confirming the effect of this mutation on enzyme expression and suggesting that about 0.5% of normal individuals have high plasma alpha-Gal A activity due to this variant allele.

[PMID: 15533650]
Sphingolipidoses are a subgroup of lysosomal storage diseases. They are defined as disorders caused by a genetic defect in catabolism of sphingosine-containing lipids. Catabolism of these lipids involves enzymes and activator proteins. After the discovery of lysosomes by de Duve and the demonstration of the first defective lysosomal enzyme by Hers in 1963, the first enzyme deficiency for sphingolipidoses was characterized in 1965 and all the defective enzymes were demonstrated in the last three decades. In 1984, the first activator protein was found and it expanded the concept of sphingolipidoses. In the following years, many researches have been undertaken to understand the molecular basis of these diseases, the mechanism of pathogenesis, the mechanism of lysosomal digestion of glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and the functional domains of lysosomal enzymes. New hypotheses and theories have been put forward for the mechanism of lysosomal digestion and pathogenesis. However, although much has been done, the pathogenesis of sphingolipidoses has not been fully elucidated. Mouse models of these diseases have facilitated the elucidation of pathogenesis and the development of therapeutic strategies for these diseases, which are not treatable at present except for Fabry and type 1 Gaucher disease. The purpose of this review is to collect information on the recent researches related to sphingolipidoses. The review includes the hydrolysis of GSLs in lysosome, mechanism of hydrolysis, pathogenesis and genetics of sphingolipidoses, a brief mouse model and therapeutic strategies of these diseases.

[PMID: 19146893]
Lysosomal storage diseases arise from a genetic loss-of-function defect in enzymes mediating key catabolic steps resulting in accumulation of substrate within the lysosome. Treatment of several of these disorders has been achieved by enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), in which a recombinant version of the defective enzyme is expressed in vitro and administered by infusion. However, in many cases the biodistribution of the administered protein does not match that of the accumulated substrate due to the glycosylation-mediated clearance of the enzymes from circulation, resulting in poor or absent substrate clearance from some tissues. To overcome this limitation, we have evaluated several peptide-based targeting motifs to redirect recombinant human alpha-galactosidase (rhalphaGal) to specific receptors. A reversible thiol-based PEGylation chemistry was developed to achieve multivalent peptide display with lysosomal release. In vitro, cell uptake was peptide dependent and independent of the normal mannose-6-phosphate receptor mediated pathway. Surprisingly, despite increased plasma half-life and decreased liver uptake, none of the peptide conjugates showed significantly altered biodistribution in alphaGal-knockout mice. This suggests that these peptide-based targeting motifs are unlikely to provide substantial therapeutic benefit likely due to the complexity of factors affecting PK and biodistribution.

[PMID: 15702403]
Anderson-Fabry disease (referred to as Fabry disease) is an X-linked disorder characterized by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A and the subsequent accumulation in various tissues of globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), the main substrate of the defective enzyme. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) offers a specific treatment for patients with Fabry disease, though monitoring of treatment is hampered by a lack of surrogate markers of response. In this study, the efficacy of long-term ERT in six Fabry hemizygotes and two symptomatic heterozygotes has been evaluated. Patients were administered recombinant alpha-galactosidase A every 2 weeks for up to a year. The efficacy of ERT was assessed by monitoring symptomatology and renal function. Urinary glycolipid concentration was estimated by a novel tandem mass spectrometric method. Urine glycolipid (Gb(3)) was elevated at baseline and fell impressively on ERT where patients were hemizygotes and in the absence of renal transplantation. In heterozygotes and in a recipient of a renal allograft, elevations and changes in urine glycolipids were less pronounced. In one patient, after several months of ERT, there was a transient increase in Gb(3) concentrations to baseline (pre-ERT) levels, associated with the presence of antibodies to the recombinant alpha-galactosidase A. The marked decline in urine Gb(3) on ERT, and its subsequent increase in association with an inhibitory antibody response, suggest that this analyte deserves further investigation as a potential marker of disease severity and response to treatment.

[PMID: 9395081]
Transgenic mice expressing a human mutant alpha-galactosidase with an R301Q substitution, which was found in a patient with a variant form of Fabry disease, were established. The mice transcribed a sufficient amount of alpha-galactosidase mRNA, but the steady-state levels of the enzyme protein were decreased in liver, kidney and heart, only residual activity being detected in these tissues. The mice will be useful for the clarification of the defective regulation of the structurally altered enzyme protein expressed by the mutant gene at the organ or individual level as well as for the evaluation of drugs that stabilize and/or activate the mutant alpha-galactosidase.