[PMID: 28413388]
Cushing's syndrome is a rare endocrine disorder that comprises a large group of signs and symptoms resulting from chronic exposure to excess corticosteroids. Most cases of Cushing's syndrome are due to increased adrenocorticotropic hormone production from a pituitary adenoma, which is referred to as Cushing's disease. Most of the signs and symptoms are nonspecific and common in the general population, making a diagnosis often challenging. However, several dermatological manifestations, such as fragile skin, easy bruising, and reddish purple striae, are more discriminatory. Because uncontrolled Cushing's syndrome of any etiology is associated with substantial morbidity, including increased cardiovascular disease and mortality, it is important to make an early diagnosis. Unfortunately, median delays of 2 years to diagnosis have been reported. We report a case of a woman who had multiple dermatological findings, including facial plethora, easy bruising, violaceous striae, hirsutism, and acne, the latter 2 signs reflecting androgen excess. Of interest, our patient presented with a chief complaint of hair loss, a common complaint in the general population that occurs with a greater frequency in patients with Cushing's disease and is attributed to androgenetic alopecia, but it is rarely the presenting symptom.

[PMID: 22918543]
Hypercortisolism due to an ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma (Cushing's disease) is a chronic condition associated with high morbidity and mortality if inadequately managed. Pasireotide is a multireceptor-targeted somatostatin analogue and is the only approved medical therapy for Cushing's disease that treats the underlying cause of the disorder. This paper reviews the available literature for medical-therapy-induced adenoma volume reduction in patients with Cushing's disease and reports the experience of a 53-year-old surgically, radiologically and medically naïve (de novo) female with a pituitary macroadenoma who declined surgery. This patient was treated with pasireotide as first-line therapy as part of the largest randomized Phase III study evaluating a medical therapy in patients with Cushing's disease (SOM230B2305 trial). Subcutaneous pasireotide significantly decreased tumor volume, suppressed cortisol secretion, and improved clinical signs and symptoms of Cushing's disease in this patient. Based on this experience, first-line pasireotide has the potential to achieve substantial tumor volume reduction in addition to significant improvements in cortisol levels and signs and symptoms in patients with Cushing's disease for whom surgery is not an option.

[PMID: 28850717]
Cushing's disease (CD) is a rare disabling condition caused by Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenomas of the pituitary. The majority of corticotropic adenomas are monoclonal and occur sporadically. Only rarely does CD arise in the context of genetic familial syndromes. Targeted sequencing of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes commonly mutated in other tumours did not identify recurrent mutations. In contrast, next generation sequencing allowed us recently to clarify the genetic basis of CD: we identified somatic driver mutations in the ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8) gene in a significant portion of corticotropinomas. These mutations represent a novel and unique mechanism leading to ACTH excess. Inhibition of USP8 or its downstream signalling pathways could represent a new therapeutic approach for the management of CD. In this review, we will focus on this new evidence and its implication for clinical care of affected patients.

[PMID: 15521676]
Cushing's syndrome due to an ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor is associated with serious morbidity and mortality. As there is no definitive medical treatment, surgical removal of the tumor via the transsphenoidal route remains the first choice. Postoperative hypocortisolemia is recognized as the best indicator of cure. To report the postoperative outcome and long-term follow-up of patients with surgically treated Cushing disease at the Rabin Medical Center. We reviewed the medical records of 27 patients with Cushing disease operated on between the period 1990 and 2003. The same experienced surgeon performed all surgeries. Cushing disease accounted for 15% of all pituitary surgeries in our center. The mean age was 46 years, and the female to male ratio was 25:2. Macroadenomas were found in 19% of cases, and a negative MRI in another 19%. The cure rate was 70% overall and 80% when only microadenomas were considered. There were no major perioperative complications. Four out of 8 surgical failures were re-operated, and three achieved cure. After a mean follow-up period of 5.9 years, there was only one recurrence. Our results are in accordance with those reported by others and confirm that in the hands of an experienced neurosurgeon, pituitary surgery constitutes an effective treatment for Cushing disease.

[PMID: 30148086]
Cushing's disease (CD) is a rare endocrine disorder associated with increased serum levels of cortisol secreted due to an underlying tumour in pituitary. Psychiatric disturbances like depression, psychosis, mania along with body image disturbances are seen in patients of CD. Hence, we undertook this research to find the prevalence and type of psychiatric disorders, body image disturbances, and self-esteem in patients of CD. Thirty-five patients diagnosed as CD as per the standard criteria by the endocrinologist were recruited after informed consent and ethics approval. Proforma with demographic details, Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, and Body Image Concern Inventory were used for assessment of the aims. 65% patients had psychopathology with 21% patients having major depressive disorder, 62% patients had mild, and 28% had moderate depression on BDI. 50% patients had body image disturbances and 60% had low self-esteem. Depression was found to have a negative correlation with self-esteem and positive correlation with body image disturbances. A high prevalence of psychopathology is seen in patients of CD which may often go undetected. Liaison with the endocrinologist would also work towards improving the issues of body image disturbances and self-esteem for better prognosis for the patient.

[PMID: 31666445]
Cushing's disease is primarily caused by autonomic hypersecretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from a pituitary adenoma. In Cushing's disease, mutations in the ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8) have been detected. These mutations are associated with hyperactivation of USP8 that prevent epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) degradation. This leads to increased EGFR stability and results in the maintenance of EGFR signaling in Cushing's disease. USP8 inhibitors can suppress the growth of various tumors. In this study, the effects of a potent USP8 inhibitor, DUBs-IN-2, on ACTH production and cell proliferation were examined in mouse corticotroph tumor (AtT-20) cells. Proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) mRNA levels and ACTH levels were decreased in AtT-20 cells by DUBs-IN-2. Further, cell proliferation was inhibited, and apoptosis was induced by DUBs-IN-2. Transcript levels of pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1 (Pttg1), a pituitary tumor growth marker, were increased; and transcript levels of stress response growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 45 (Gadd45β) and Cdk5 and ABL enzyme substrate 1 (Cables1) mRNA levels were increased in response to the drug. Gadd45β or Cables1 knockdown partially inhibited the DUBs-IN-2-induced decrease in cell proliferation, but not Pomc mRNA levels. Both GADD45β and CABLES1 may be responsible, at least in part, for the USP8-induced suppression of corticotroph tumor cell proliferation. USP-8 may be a new treatment target in Cushing's disease.