[PMID: 27177335]
Zinc finger proteins are a massive, diverse family of proteins that serve a wide variety of biological functions. However, the roles of them during meiosis are not yet clearly defined. Here, we report that Zfp207 localizes at the kinetochores during mouse oocyte meiotic maturation. Depletion of Zfp207 leads to a significantly higher proportion of impaired spindle organization and misaligned chromosomes in oocytes. This is coupled with the defective kinetochore-microtubule attachments, and resultantly increasing incidence of aneuploid metaphase II eggs. The precocious polar body extrusion and escape of metaphase I arrest induced by nocodazole treatment in Zfp207-depleted oocytes indicates that Zfp207 is essential for activation of SAC (Spindle Assembly Checkpoint) activity. Notably, we find that Zfp207 binds to Bub3 to form a complex and maintains its protein level in oocytes, and that overexpression of Bub3 is able to partially rescue the occurrence of aneuploid eggs in Zfp207-depleted oocytes. Collectively, we identify Zfp207 as a novel Bub3 binding protein in oocytes which plays an important role in controlling meiotic chromosome alignment and SAC function.

[PMID: 27609478]
During mitosis, Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs) change dramatically in morphology and composition, but little is known about function of PML in mitosis. Here, we show that PML is phosphorylated at T409 (PML p409) in a mitosis-specific manner. More importantly, PML p409 contributes to maintain the duration of pro-metaphase and regulates spindle checkpoint. Deficient PML p409 caused a shortening of pro-metaphase and challenged the nocodazole-triggered mitotic arrest. T409A mutation led to a higher frequency of misaligned chromosomes on metaphase plate, and subsequently death in late mitosis. In addition, inhibition of PML p409 repressed growth of tumor cells, suggesting that PML p409 is a potential target for cancer therapy. Collectively, our study demonstrated an important phosphorylated site of PML, which contributed to explore the role of PML in mitosis.

[PMID: 27262873]
Although glucagon secreted from pancreatic α cells plays a role in increasing glucose concentrations in serum, the mechanism regulating glucagon secretion from α cells remains unclear. Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1), identified as an adhesion molecule in α cells, has been reported not only to communicate among α cells and between nerve fibers, but also to prevent excessive glucagon secretion from α cells. Here, we investigated the effect of CADM1 expression on the movement of intracellular secretory granules in α cells because the granule transport is an important step in secretion. Spinning disk microscopic analysis showed that granules moved at a mean velocity of 0.236 ± 0.010 μm/s in the mouse α cell line αTC6 that expressed CADM1 endogenously. The mean velocity was significantly decreased in CADM1-knockdown (KD) cells (mean velocity: 0.190 ± 0.016 μm/s). The velocity of granule movement decreased greatly in αTC6 cells treated with the microtubule-depolymerizing reagent nocodazole, but not in αTC6 cells treated with the actin-depolymerizing reagent cytochalasin D. No difference in the mean velocity was observed between αTC6 and CADM1-KD cells treated with nocodazole. These results suggest that intracellular granules in pancreatic α cells move along the microtubule network, and that CADM1 influences their velocity.

[PMID: 27833610]
The initiation of T-cell signaling is critically dependent on the function of the member of Src family tyrosine kinases, Lck. Upon T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) triggering, Lck kinase activity induces the nucleation of signal-transducing hubs that regulate the formation of complex signaling network and cytoskeletal rearrangement. In addition, the delivery of Lck function requires rapid and targeted membrane redistribution, but the mechanism underpinning this process is largely unknown. To gain insight into this process, we considered previously described proteins that could assist in this process <i>via</i> their capacity to interact with kinases and regulate their intracellular translocations. An adaptor protein, receptor for activated C kinase 1 (RACK1), was chosen as a viable option, and its capacity to bind Lck and aid the process of activation-induced redistribution of Lck was assessed. Our microscopic observation showed that T-cell activation induces a rapid, concomitant, and transient co-redistribution of Lck and RACK1 into the forming immunological synapse. Consistent with this observation, the formation of transient RACK1-Lck complexes were detectable in primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cells with their maximum levels peaking 10 s after TCR-CD4 co-aggregation. Moreover, RACK1 preferentially binds to a pool of kinase active pY394<sup>Lck</sup>, which co-purifies with high molecular weight cellular fractions. The formation of RACK1-Lck complexes depends on functional SH2 and SH3 domains of Lck and includes several other signaling and cytoskeletal elements that transiently bind the complex. Notably, the F-actin-crosslinking protein, α-actinin-1, binds to RACK1 only in the presence of kinase active Lck suggesting that the formation of RACK1-pY394<sup>Lck</sup>-α-actinin-1 complex serves as a signal module coupling actin cytoskeleton bundling with productive TCR/CD4 triggering. In addition, the treatment of CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cells with nocodazole, which disrupts the microtubular network, also blocked the formation of RACK1-Lck complexes. Importantly, activation-induced Lck redistribution was diminished in primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cells by an adenoviral-mediated knockdown of RACK1. These results demonstrate that in T cells, RACK1, as an essential component of the multiprotein complex which upon TCR engagement, links the binding of kinase active Lck to elements of the cytoskeletal network and affects the subcellular redistribution of Lck.

[PMID: 27815897]
Cell cycle checkpoints are surveillance mechanisms that sequentially and continuously monitor cell cycle progression thereby contributing to the preservation of genetic stability. Among them, the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) prevents the occurrence of abnormal divisions by halting the metaphase to anaphase transition following the detection of erroneous microtubules-kinetochore attachment(s). Most synchronization strategies are based on the activation of cell cycle checkpoints to enrich the population of cells in a specific phase of the cell cycle. Here, we develop a two-step protocol of sequential cell synchronization and desynchronization employing antimitotic SAC-inducing agents (i.e., nocodazole or paclitaxel) in combination with the depletion of the SAC kinase MPS1. We describe cytofluorometric and time-lapse videomicroscopy methods to detect cell cycle progression, including the assessment of cell cycle distribution, quantification of mitotic cell fraction, and analysis of single cell fate profile of living cells. We applied these methods to validate the synchronization-desynchronization protocol and to qualitatively and quantitatively determine the impact of SAC inactivation on the activity of antimitotic agents.

[PMID: 27815904]
HeLa is one of the oldest and most commonly used cell lines in biomedical research. Owing to the ease of which they can be effectively synchronized by various methods, HeLa cells have been used extensively for studying the cell cycle. Here, we describe several protocols for synchronizing HeLa cells from different phases of the cell cycle, including G<sub>1</sub> phase using the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin, S phase with a double thymidine block procedure, and G<sub>2</sub> phase with the CDK1 inhibitor RO-3306. Cells can also be enriched in mitosis using nocodazole and mechanical shake-off. Releasing the cells from these blocks enables researchers to follow gene expression and other events through the cell cycle. We also describe several protocols, including flow cytometry, BrdU labeling, immunoblotting, and time-lapse microscopy, for validating the synchrony of the cells and monitoring the progression of the cell cycle.