[PMID: 26780438]
Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular matrix (ECM)-modifying enzyme that has been involved in cardiovascular remodeling. We explore the impact of LOX inhibition in ECM alterations induced by obesity in the cardiovascular system. LOX is overexpressed in the heart and aorta from rats fed a high-fat diet (HFD). β-Aminopropionitrile (BAPN), an inhibitor of LOX activity, significantly attenuated the increase in body weight and cardiac hypertrophy observed in HFD rats. No significant differences were found in cardiac function or blood pressure among any group. However, HFD rats showed cardiac and vascular fibrosis and enhanced levels of superoxide anion (O2(-)), collagen I and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) in heart and aorta and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in aorta, effects that were attenuated by LOX inhibition. Interestingly, BAPN also prevented the increase in circulating leptin levels detected in HFD fed animals. Leptin increased protein levels of collagen I, TGF-β and CTGF, Akt phosphorylation and O2(-) production in both cardiac myofibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells in culture, while LOX inhibition ameliorated these alterations. LOX knockdown also attenuated leptin-induced collagen I production in cardiovascular cells. Our findings indicate that LOX inhibition attenuates the fibrosis and the oxidative stress induced by a HFD on the cardiovascular system. The reduction of leptin levels by BAPN in vivo and the ability of this compound to inhibit leptin-induced profibrotic mediators and ROS production in cardiac and vascular cells suggest that interactions between leptin and LOX regulate downstream events responsible for myocardial and vascular fibrosis in obesity.

[PMID: 25146937]
Lysyl oxidase like-2 (LOXL2) belongs to the lysyl oxidase (LOX) family, which comprises Cu(2+)- and lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ)-dependent amine oxidases. LOXL2 is proposed to function similarly to LOX in the extracellular matrix (ECM) by promoting crosslinking of collagen and elastin. LOXL2 has also been proposed to regulate extracellular and intracellular cell signaling pathways. Dysregulation of LOXL2 has been linked to many diseases, including cancer, pro-oncogenic angiogenesis, fibrosis and heart diseases. In this review, we will give an overview of the current understandings and hypotheses regarding the molecular functions of LOXL2.

[PMID: 26582054]
A hallmark of heart failure (HF) is adverse extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, which is regulated by the collagen cross-linking enzyme, lysyl oxidase (LOX). In this study, we evaluate the efficacy of LOX inhibition to prevent adverse left ventricular (LV) remodeling and dysfunction using an experimental model of HF. Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to surgically induced volume overload (VO) by creation of aortocaval fistula (ACF). A LOX inhibitor, beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN; 100 mg/kg/day), was administered to rats with ACF or sham surgery at eight weeks postsurgery. Echocardiography was used to assess progressive alterations in cardiac ventricular structure and function. Left ventricular (LV) catheterization was used to assess alterations in contractility, stiffness, LV pressure and volume, and other indices of cardiac function. The LV ECM alterations were assessed by: (a) histological staining of collagen, (b) protein expression of collagen types I and III, (c) hydroxyproline assay, and (d) cross-linking assay. LOX inhibition attenuated VO-induced increases in cardiac stress, and attenuated increases in interstitial myocardial collagen, total collagen, and protein levels of collagens I and III. Both echocardiography and catheterization measurements indicated improved cardiac function post-VO in BAPN treated rats vs. untreated. Inhibition of LOX attenuated VO-induced decreases in LV stiffness and cardiac function. Overall, our data indicate that LOX inhibition was cardioprotective in the volume overloaded heart.

[PMID: 28668305]
A key feature of heart failure is adverse extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, which is associated with increases in the collagen cross-linking enzyme, lysyl oxidase (LOX). In this study, we assess the progression of cardiovascular remodeling from the compensatory to decompensatory phase, with a focus on the change in LOX expression and activity as it relates to alterations in ECM composition and changes in cardiac function. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were studied after 4, 14, or 21weeks of aortocaval fistula-induced volume overload (VO). Progressive increases in the left and right ventricular mass indicated biventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography revealed significant increases in the posterior wall thickness and internal diameter of the left ventricle as early as 3weeks, which persisted until the 21week endpoint. There were also significant decreases in eccentric index and fractional shortening in VO animals. Hemodynamic measurements showed progressive decreases in contractility, indicative of systolic dysfunction. There were progressive VO-induced increases in LOX expression and activity, collagen, and collagen cross-linking during the course of these experiments. We observed a negative correlation between LOX activity and cardiac function. Additional rats were treated with an inhibitor of LOX activity starting at 2weeks post-surgery and continued to 14weeks. LOX inhibition prevented the cardiac dysfunction and collagen accumulation caused by VO. Overall these data suggest a detrimental role for the chronic increase of cardiac LOX expression and activity in the transition from compensated remodeling to decompensated failure.

[PMID: 26024311]
Lysyl oxidases (LOX) are copper-dependent enzymes that oxidize primary amine substrates to reactive aldehydes. The best-studied role of LOX enzymes is the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in animals by cross-linking collagens and elastin, although intracellular functions have been reported as well. Five different LOX enzymes have been identified in mammals, LOX and LOX-like (LOXL) 1 to 4, showing a highly conserved catalytic carboxy terminal domain and more divergence in the rest of the sequence. Here we have surveyed a wide selection of genomes in order to infer the evolutionary history of LOX. We identified LOX proteins not only in animals, but also in many other eukaryotes, as well as in bacteria and archaea - which reveals a pre-metazoan origin for this gene family. LOX genes expanded during metazoan evolution resulting in two superfamilies, LOXL2/L3/L4 and LOX/L1/L5. Considering the current knowledge on the function of mammalian LOX isoforms in ECM remodeling, we propose that LOXL2/L3/L4 members might have preferentially been involved in making cross-linked collagen IV-based basement membrane, whereas the diversification of LOX/L1/L5 forms contributed to chordate/vertebrate-specific ECM innovations, such as elastin and fibronectin. Our work provides a novel view on the evolution of this family of enzymes.

[PMID: 28273952]
Extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and stiffness are major driving forces for the development and persistence of fibrotic diseases. Lysyl oxidase (LOX) and LOX-like (LOXL) proteins play crucial roles in ECM remodeling due to their collagen crosslinking and intracellular functions. Here, we systematically investigated LOX/L expression in primary fibroblasts and epithelial cells under fibrotic conditions, Bleomycin (BLM) induced lung fibrosis and in human IPF tissue. Basal expression of all LOX/L family members was detected in epithelial cells and at higher levels in fibroblasts. Various pro-fibrotic stimuli broadly induced LOX/L expression in fibroblasts, whereas specific induction of LOXL2 and partially LOX was observed in epithelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of lung tissue from 14 IPF patients and healthy donors revealed strong induction of LOX and LOXL2 in bronchial and alveolar epithelium as well as fibroblastic foci. Using siRNA experiments we observed that LOXL2 and LOXL3 were crucial for fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT). As FMT could only be reconstituted with an enzymatically active LOXL2 variant, we conclude that LOXL2 enzymatic function is crucial for fibroblast transdifferentiation. In summary, our study provides a comprehensive analysis of the LOX/L family in fibrotic lung disease and indicates prominent roles for LOXL2/3 in fibroblast activation and LOX/LOXL2 in IPF.