[PMID: 16540652]
Metastatic tumor cells that actively migrate and invade surrounding tissues rely on invadopodia to degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) barriers. Invadopodia are membrane protrusions that localize enzymes required for ECM degradation. Little is known about the formation, function, and regulation of invadopodia. Here, we show that invadopodia have two distinct aspects: (a) structural for organizing the cellular actin cytoskeleton to form membrane protrusions and (b) functional for using proteolytic enzyme(s) for ECM degradation. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibition established that organization of invadopodia structure requires cortactin, whereas protease inhibitor studies identified membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) as the key invadopodial enzyme responsible for gelatin matrix degradation in the breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB-231. The inhibition of invadopodial structure assembly by cortactin depletion resulted in a block of matrix degradation due to failure of invadopodia formation. Either protease inhibition or MT1-MMP siRNA depletion moderately decreased the formation of invadopodial structures that were identified as actin-cortactin accumulations at the ventral cell membrane adherent to matrix. The invadopodia that were able to form upon MT1-MMP inhibition or depletion retained actin-cortactin accumulations but were unable to degrade matrix. Examination of cells at different time points as well as live-cell imaging revealed four distinct invadopodial stages: membrane cortactin aggregation at membranes adherent to matrix, MT1-MMP accumulation at the region of cortactin accumulation, matrix degradation at the invadopodia region, and subsequent cortactin dissociation from the area of continued MT1-MMP accumulation associated with foci of degraded matrix. Based on these results, we propose a stepwise model of invadopodia formation and function.

[PMID: 22039045]
Tumor cell invasion is vital for cancer progression and metastasis. Adhesion, migration, and degradation of the extracellular matrix are important events involved in the establishment of cancer cells at a new site, and therefore molecular targets are sought to inhibit such processes. The effect of a plant proteinase inhibitor, Enterolobium contortisiliquum trypsin inhibitor (EcTI), on the adhesion, migration, and invasion of gastric cancer cells was the focus of this study. EcTI showed no effect on the proliferation of gastric cancer cells or fibroblasts but inhibited the adhesion, migration, and cell invasion of gastric cancer cells; however, EcTI had no effect upon the adhesion of fibroblasts. EcTI was shown to decrease the expression and disrupt the cellular organization of molecules involved in the formation and maturation of invadopodia, such as integrin β1, cortactin, neuronal Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein, membrane type 1 metalloprotease, and metalloproteinase-2. Moreover, gastric cancer cells treated with EcTI presented a significant decrease in intracellular phosphorylated Src and focal adhesion kinase, integrin-dependent cell signaling components. Together, these results indicate that EcTI inhibits the invasion of gastric cancer cells through alterations in integrin-dependent cell signaling pathways.

[PMID: 20937825]
The Abl tyrosine kinases, Abl and Arg, play a role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by modulating cell-cell adhesion and cell motility. Deregulation of both the actin cytoskeleton and Abl kinases have been implicated in cancers. Abl kinase activity is elevated in a number of metastatic cancers and these kinases are activated downstream of several oncogenic growth factor receptor signaling pathways. However, the role of Abl kinases in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton during tumor progression and invasion remains elusive. Here we identify the Abl kinases as essential regulators of invadopodia assembly and function. We show that Abl kinases are activated downstream of the chemokine receptor, CXCR4, and are required for cancer cell invasion and matrix degradation induced by SDF1α, serum growth factors, and activated Src kinase. Moreover, Abl kinases are readily detected at invadopodia assembly sites and their inhibition prevents the assembly of actin and cortactin into organized invadopodia structures. We show that active Abl kinases form complexes with membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), a critical invadopodia component required for matrix degradation. Further, loss of Abl kinase signaling induces internalization of MT1-MMP from the cell surface, promotes its accumulation in the perinuclear compartment and inhibits MT1-MMP tyrosine phosphorylation. Our findings reveal that Abl kinase signaling plays a critical role in invadopodia formation and function, and have far-reaching implications for the treatment of metastatic carcinomas.

[PMID: 23417847]
Invadopodia are actin-rich membrane protrusions of tumor cells that are thought to initiate the local migration and invasion during cancer metastasis. The blockade of invadopodia-associated proteins has been reported as a promising approach for prevention of tumor metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the modulatory effects of 6-shogaol and pterostilbene on invadopodia in aggressive breast cancer cells. By wound-healing, transwell, and gelatin zymography assays, we found that 6-shogaol and pterostilbene effectively attenuated the motility and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells, and suppressed the activities of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9). Further investigation into the underlying molecular mechanisms revealed that the levels of key modulators of invadopodium maturation, including c-Src kinase, cortactin, and membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) decreased when cells were treated with 6-shogaol or pterostilbene. These data suggest that the repression of these factors might affect the maturation of invadopodia, inhibiting the metastasis of MDA-MB-231 cells. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates for the first time that 6-shogaol and pterostilbene can inhibit invadopodium formation and MMP activity in highly invasive breast cancer cells. We suggest that these compounds may be clinically useful in chemopreventive treatments for metastatic breast cancer.

[PMID: 17446433]
Invasion of the subendothelial space by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) contributes to the development and progression of diverse cardiovascular diseases. In this report we show that the expression of activated versions of Src, Cdc42 and Rac1, or a kinase-dead but open form of the p21-activated kinase (PAK1), induces primary rat aorta VSMCs to form extracellular matrix-degrading actin-rich protrusions that are morphologically similar to the invadopodia formed by highly invasive tumor cells. The matrix-degrading structures are enriched in known markers for invadopodia, including cortactin and tyrosine-phosphorylated cortactin and contain the matrix metalloproteinases MMP-9 and MT1-MMP and the urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR). In contrast to other cell types, invadopodia formation in VSMCs is only weakly supported by the phorbol ester PBDu. Invadopodia formation by Src was dependent on Cdc42, Rac, and ERK, but not on p38 MAPK. Invadopodia formation induced by kinase-dead PAK1 required Src and ERK activity and a direct interaction with the exchange factor PIX. VSMCs embedded in a three-dimensional collagen matrix formed actin- and cortactin-rich extensions that penetrated through holes in the matrix, suggesting that invadopodia-like structures are formed in a three-dimensional environment.

[PMID: 19704022]
Invadopodia are matrix-degrading membrane protrusions in invasive carcinoma cells. The mechanisms regulating invadopodium assembly and maturation are not understood. We have dissected the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation and show that invadopodia use cortactin phosphorylation as a master switch during these processes. In particular, cortactin phosphorylation was found to regulate cofilin and Arp2/3 complex-dependent actin polymerization. Cortactin directly binds cofilin and inhibits its severing activity. Cortactin phosphorylation is required to release this inhibition so cofilin can sever actin filaments to create barbed ends at invadopodia to support Arp2/3-dependent actin polymerization. After barbed end formation, cortactin is dephosphorylated, which blocks cofilin severing activity thereby stabilizing invadopodia. These findings identify novel mechanisms for actin polymerization in the invadopodia of metastatic carcinoma cells and define four distinct stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation consisting of invadopodium precursor formation, actin polymerization, stabilization, and matrix degradation.