[PMID: 25662217]
Base J (β-D-glucosyl-hydroxymethyluracil) replaces 1% of T in the Leishmania genome and is only found in telomeric repeats (99%) and in regions where transcription starts and stops. This highly restricted distribution must be co-determined by the thymidine hydroxylases (JBP1 and JBP2) that catalyze the initial step in J synthesis. To determine the DNA sequences recognized by JBP1/2, we used SMRT sequencing of DNA segments inserted into plasmids grown in Leishmania tarentolae. We show that SMRT sequencing recognizes base J in DNA. Leishmania DNA segments that normally contain J also picked up J when present in the plasmid, whereas control sequences did not. Even a segment of only 10 telomeric (GGGTTA) repeats was modified in the plasmid. We show that J modification usually occurs at pairs of Ts on opposite DNA strands, separated by 12 nucleotides. Modifications occur near G-rich sequences capable of forming G-quadruplexes and JBP2 is needed, as it does not occur in JBP2-null cells. We propose a model whereby de novo J insertion is mediated by JBP2. JBP1 then binds to J and hydroxylates another T 13 bp downstream (but not upstream) on the complementary strand, allowing JBP1 to maintain existing J following DNA replication.

[PMID: 17329373]
Base J or beta-d-glucosylhydroxymethyluracil is a DNA modification replacing a fraction of thymine in the nuclear DNA of kinetoplastid parasites and of Euglena. J is located in the telomeric sequences of Trypanosoma brucei and in other simple repeat DNA sequences. In addition, J was found in the inactive variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) expression sites, but not in the active expression site of T. brucei, suggesting that J could play a role in transcription silencing in T. brucei. We have now looked at the distribution of J in the genomes of other kinetoplastid parasites. First, we analyzed the DNA sequences immunoprecipitated with a J-antiserum in Leishmania major Friedlin. Second, we investigated the co-migration of J- and telomeric repeat-containing DNA sequences of various kinetoplastids using J-immunoblots and Southern blots of fragmented DNA. We find only approximately 1% of J outside the telomeric repeat sequences of Leishmania sp. and Crithidia fasciculata, in contrast to the substantial fraction of non-telomeric J found in T. brucei, Trypanosoma equiperdum and Trypanoplasma borreli. Our results suggest that J is a telomeric base modification, recruited for other (unknown) functions in some kinetoplastids and Euglena.

[PMID: 19114062]
The genomic DNA of kinetoplastid parasites contains a unique modified base, beta-d-glucosyl-hydroxymethyluracil or base J. We recently reported that two proteins, called J-binding protein (JBP) 1 and 2, which regulate the levels of J in the genome, display features of the family of Fe(II)-2-oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenases and are likely to be the enzymes catalyzing the first step in J biosynthesis. In this study, we examine the effects of replacing the four conserved residues critical for the activity of this class of enzymes on the function of Leishmania tarentolae JBP2. The results show that each of these four residues is indispensable for the ability of JBP2 to stimulate J synthesis, while mutating non-conserved residues has no consequences. We conclude that JBP2, like JBP1, is in all probability a thymidine hydroxylase involved in the biosynthesis of base J.

[PMID: 10562569]
DNA from Kinetoplastida contains the unusual modified base beta-D-glucosyl(hydroxymethyl)uracil, called J. Base J is found predominantly in repetitive DNA and correlates with epigenetic silencing of telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes in Trypanosoma brucei. We have now identified a protein in nuclear extracts of bloodstream stage T.brucei that binds specifically to J-containing duplex DNA. J-specific DNA binding was also observed with extracts from the kinetoplastids Crithidia fasciculata and Leishmania tarentolae. We purified the 90 kDa C.fasciculata J-binding protein 50 000-fold and cloned the corresponding gene from C.fasciculata, T.brucei and L.tarentolae. Recombinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli demonstrated J-specific DNA binding. The J-binding proteins show 43-63% identity and are unlike any known protein. The discovery of a J-binding protein suggests that J, like methylated cytosine in higher eukaryotes, functions via a protein intermediate.

[PMID: 25104019]
Base J, β-d-glucosyl-hydroxymethyluracil, is an epigenetic modification of thymine in the nuclear DNA of flagellated protozoa of the order Kinetoplastida. J is enriched at sites involved in RNA polymerase (RNAP) II initiation and termination. Reduction of J in Leishmania tarentolae via growth in BrdU resulted in cell death and indicated a role of J in the regulation of RNAP II termination. To further explore J function in RNAP II termination among kinetoplastids and avoid indirect effects associated with BrdU toxicity and genetic deletions, we inhibited J synthesis in Leishmania major and Trypanosoma brucei using DMOG. Reduction of J in L. major resulted in genome-wide defects in transcription termination at the end of polycistronic gene clusters and the generation of antisense RNAs, without cell death. In contrast, loss of J in T. brucei did not lead to genome-wide termination defects; however, the loss of J at specific sites within polycistronic gene clusters led to altered transcription termination and increased expression of downstream genes. Thus, J regulation of RNAP II transcription termination genome-wide is restricted to Leishmania spp., while in T. brucei it regulates termination and gene expression at specific sites within polycistronic gene clusters.

[PMID: 20215442]
Base J is a hypermodified DNA base localized primarily to telomeric regions of the genome of Trypanosoma brucei. We have previously characterized two thymidine-hydroxylases (TH), JBP1 and JBP2, which regulate J-biosynthesis. JBP2 is a chromatin re-modeling protein that induces de novo J-synthesis, allowing JBP1, a J-DNA binding protein, to stimulate additional J-synthesis. Here, we show that both JBP2 and JBP1 are capable of stimulating de novo J-synthesis. We localized the JBP1- and JBP2-stimulated J by anti-J immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing. This genome-wide analysis revealed an enrichment of base J at regions flanking polymerase II polycistronic transcription units (Pol II PTUs) throughout the T. brucei genome. Chromosome-internal J deposition is primarily mediated by JBP1, whereas JBP2-stimulated J deposition at the telomeric regions. However, the maintenance of J at JBP1-specific regions is dependent on JBP2 SWI/SNF and TH activity. That similar regions of Leishmania major also contain base J highlights the functional importance of the modified base at Pol II PTUs within members of the kinetoplastid family. The regulation of J synthesis/localization by two THs and potential biological function of J in regulating kinetoplastid gene expression is discussed.