[PMID: 15259379]
The derangement of neuro-endocrine control of circulation influences both disease evolution and response to treatment in patients with heart failure, but little data are available about the complex relationships between the degree of neuro-hormonal activation and clinical severity. We studied the relationships between cardiac natriuretic hormones (CNHs) and several neuro-hormones and immunological markers in a prospective cohort of 105 consecutive patients with cardiomyopathy (77 men and 28 women, mean age 66.7+/-12.4 years, range 33-89 years). We assayed the circulating levels of CNHs (atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)), plasma renin activity (PRA), aldosterone, cortisol, adrenaline, noradrenaline, thyroid hormones and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). The concentrations of all CNHs and neurohormones were higher in patients with heart failure compared to normal subjects, except for free triiodothyronine (FT3), which was below normal values. ANP was positively related to NYHA class, IL-6, adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol, while negatively with ejection fraction and FT3. BNP was positively related to age, NYHA class, IL-6, TNF-alpha, adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol, while negatively with ejection fraction and FT3. A stepwise multiple linear regression indicated that plasma ANP depended only on ejection fraction, adrenaline and noradrenaline values, while for plasma BNP variation NYHA class contributed too. Our data confirm a progressive activation of hormonal and immunological systems in patients with heart failure. Furthermore, CNH circulating levels in heart failure are affected not only by cardiac function and disease severity, but also by activation of neuro-hormonal and stress-related cytokine systems, as well as by the thyroid hormones, even on usual medical treatment.

[PMID: 12165115]
Thyroid hormone has multiple effects on the cardiovascular system, ranging from molecular and cellular effects to the consequent hemodynamic alterations. Consequently, thyroid function has been evaluated in small cohorts of patients with advanced heart failure that indicate a significant prevalence of morphologic or functional thyroid disorders. We sought to determine the prevalence of altered thyroid hormone metabolism in a broad spectrum of ambulatory heart failure patients. Thyroid function tests were evaluated in 132 ambulatory patients (98 males, 32 females, mean age, 67 years) with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (EF < 35%) and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class I-IV symptoms. Hypothyroidism was defined as serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) > 4.25 U/mL and low triiodothyronine (T3) state was defined as T3 levels < 80 ng/dL, with normal thyroxine (T4) and TSH level. Seven percent of patients were found to have primary hypothyroidism and 34% have a low T3 state. Of patients receiving amiodarone, 21% had elevated TSH levels and 76% had low T3 levels. The prevalence of abnormal thyroid function correlated with NYHA class. There is an unexpectedly high risk of hypothyroidism and low T3 syndrome in patients regardless of treatment with amiodarone, which appears to correlate with disease severity that requires further investigation.

[PMID: 11021766]
To investigate relationships between thyroid states and the cardiac endocrine system, we analyzed thyrotropin (TSH), thyroid hormone, plasma levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) in 50 patients with chronic heart failure (CHF), in 30 patients with heart failure from acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and in 15 controls. Plasma levels of IL-6 and BNP in both CHF and AMI were significantly elevated, while free triiodothyronine (FT3) was significantly decreased compared to controls. FT3/free thyroxine (FT4) ratio was significantly decreased in CHF but not in AMI compared to controls. In CHF, diuretic treatment diminished circulating BNP but not IL-6, while diuretic treatment increased FT3/FT4 ratio. In AMI, FT3/FT4 ratio was significantly decreased 72 h compared to 12 h after the onset of AMI, while BNP and IL-6 were significantly increased 72 h compared to 12 h after the onset of AMI. In both CHF and AMI, BNP significantly correlated with FT4. On the other hand, significant correlations between IL-6 and FT3, and between IL-6 and FT3/FT4 ratio were detected in AMI but not in CHF. This preliminary study suggests that IL-6, BNP and thyroid hormone reflect ventricular dysfunction in both acute and chronic heart failure, and that IL-6 significantly relates to circulating thyroid hormone in AMI but not in CHF.

[PMID: 15521205]
Effects of thyroid gland hormones on cardiovascular system have been known for many years. Thyroid gland hormones deficiency is connected with a range of metabolic and hemodynamic changes which can contribute to a genesis of heart failure. Recent works refer to an importance of connection of thyroid gland hormones metabolism with heart insufficiency pathophysiology. That is especially a syndrome of a low trijodthyronin level marked as euthyroid sick syndrome which is significantly more frequent in patients with chronic heart failure compared to a population of healthy individuals. Recent clinical works proved that treatment administration of thyroid gland hormones to patients with heart failure is connected with favourable hemodynamic changes and increased working capacity if the treatment is well tolerated.

[PMID: 19926244]
Cytokines and thyroid hormones are involved in the biochemical changes associated to heart failure (HF). Aims of the study were to investigate: plasma circulating levels of the cytokines Interleukine-6 (IL-6) TNF alpha and C reactive protein (CRP) in patients with stable HF in relation to the severity of left ventricular dysfunction; the relationship between these inflammatory markers and thyroid hormones. One-hundred and sixty-six patients (121 males, age 64+/-12), with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, were admitted to the Institute of Clinical Physiology for progressive deterioration of symptoms. Forty-eight healthy subjects (30 males, age range 26-75 years) were also enrolled as control group (Group N). High sensitivity (hs)-IL-6 and hs-TNFalpha were quantified using solid phase sandwich ELISA kits. Hs-CRP was measured by Immulite System. In the whole population (HF and N), the association between inflammatory markers and age resulted statistically significant only for IL-6 serum concentration (p<0.001) but not for TNFalpha and CRP. IL-6 and TNFalpha were strongly higher in the HF in comparison with N (p<0.001) while CRP showed a less significant difference (p<0.05). Whole population showed a negative association between IL-6 and EF% and between CRP and EF% (respectively p<0.01, r=-0.23; p<0.05, r=0.19). Comparing normal subjects with two classes of patients, respectively with EF>35% and EF<35%, we clearly observed the progressive enhancement of the inflammatory markers. Considering normal subjects, patients without and with low T3 syndrome, IL-6 and TNFalpha increased progressively from normal to patients with fT3<2 pg/ml (p<0.01 and p<0.01) while CRP only respect to the group with low T3 syndrome (p<0.01). The inflammatory markers were all inversely correlated with FT3 levels. Because low FT3 serum concentration represents a negative prognostic index, it is likely that impairment of T3 production and enhanced inflammation represent pathogenic mechanisms linked to HF progression.

[PMID: 16524802]
Heart failure is a leading cause of cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. It has been shown that inflammatory markers may play a role in the pathogenesis of heart failure. Therefore, inflammatory markers and anticytokine therapy in heart failure have become the attractive subjects in the literature. There are new studies regarding this issue in the literature. In this article, we reviewed inflammatory markers in heart failure and their prognostic significance based on the literature data.