[PMID: 32161024]
Coffin-Siris Syndrome (CSS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, coarse facial features, hypoplastic digits/nails, and hypertrichosis. The genes causative of CSS mainly encode the SWI/SNF complex, which contributes to chromatin remodeling and regulates the access of transcriptional factors to specific gene sites. While <i>ARID1B</i> mutations account for a third of all CSS cases, the condition's phenotypic features vary widely. We document the case of a girl with CSS who presented with a variant facial appearance, global developmental delay with speech impairment, agenesis of the corpus callosum, funnel chest, and bilateral renal stones without hypertrichosis or hypoplasia of the fifth fingernail. Genetic analysis revealed that the patient had a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation c.2201dupG (p.Ser736Ilefs*27) on the <i>ARID1B</i> gene.

[PMID: 31706665]
Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by somatic dysmorphic features, developmental and speech delay. It is due to mutations in many different genes, belonging to BAF chromatin-remodelling complex. The last gene involved in this complex, recently individuated and related to CSS, was DPF2, although only nine patients have been reported until now. Here we report on a boy with a history of developmental delay, especially regarding speech and language, and dysmorphic features resembling a syndromic condition. Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) and a custom Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel including developmental delay related genes were executed. Array-CGH was negative while NGS panel revealed a novel mutation in DPF2 gene. We add the clinical description of another patient with a novel mutation in DPF2, with a mild phenotype, thus trying to contribute to enlarge CSS phenotypic variability. Moreover, we briefly discuss about cohesinopathies and major differential diagnosis among syndromes with phenotypes overlapping to CSS.

[PMID: 29907796]
SMARCB1 encodes a subunit of the SWI/SNF complex involved in chromatin remodeling. Pathogenic variants (PV) in this gene can give rise to three conditions. Heterozygous loss-of-function germline PV cause rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome and schwannomatosis. Missense PV and small in-frame deletions in exons 8 and 9 result in Coffin-Siris syndrome, which is characterized by intellectual disability (ID), coarse facial features, and fifth digit anomalies. By a gene matching approach, individuals with a similar SMARCB1 PV were identified. Informed consent was obtained and patient data were collected to further establish genotype-phenotype relationship. A recurrent de novo missense PV (c.110G>A;p.Arg37His) in exon 2 of SMARCB1, encoding the DNA-binding domain, was identified in four individuals from different genetic centers. They shared a distinct phenotype consisting of profound ID and hydrocephalus due to choroid plexus hyperplasia. Other shared features include severe neonatal feeding difficulties; congenital heart, kidney, and eye anomalies; obstructive sleep apnea; and anemia. The p.Arg37His PV in the DNA-binding domain of SMARCB1 causes a distinctive syndrome, likely through a gain-of-function or dominant-negative effect, which is characterized by severe ID and hydrocephalus resulting from choroid plexus hyperplasia. This report broadens the phenotypic spectrum associated with PV in SMARCB1.

[PMID: 30879640]
Mutations in several genes encoding components of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex cause neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Here, we report on five individuals with mutations in SMARCD1; the individuals present with developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and small hands and feet. Trio exome sequencing proved the mutations to be de novo in four of the five individuals. Mutations in other SWI/SNF components cause Coffin-Siris syndrome, Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome, or other syndromic and non-syndromic NDDs. Although the individuals presented here have dysmorphisms and some clinical overlap with these syndromes, they lack their typical facial dysmorphisms. To gain insight into the function of SMARCD1 in neurons, we investigated the Drosophila ortholog Bap60 in postmitotic memory-forming neurons of the adult Drosophila mushroom body (MB). Targeted knockdown of Bap60 in the MB of adult flies causes defects in long-term memory. Mushroom-body-specific transcriptome analysis revealed that Bap60 is required for context-dependent expression of genes involved in neuron function and development in juvenile flies when synaptic connections are actively being formed in response to experience. Taken together, we identify an NDD caused by SMARCD1 mutations and establish a role for the SMARCD1 ortholog Bap60 in the regulation of neurodevelopmental genes during a critical time window of juvenile adult brain development when neuronal circuits that are required for learning and memory are formed.

[PMID: 29698805]
In the last 3 years de novo sequence variants in the ARID2 (AT-rich interaction domain 2) gene, a subunit of the SWI/SNF complex, have been linked to intellectual disabilities in 3 case reports including one which describes frameshift mutations in ARID2 in 2 patients with features resembling Coffin-Siris syndrome. Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by intellectual deficit, coarse facial features and hypoplastic or absent fifth fingernails and/or toenails among other features. Mutations in a number of different genes encoding SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex proteins have been described but the underlying molecular cause remains unknown in approximately 40% of patients with CSS. Here we describe 7 unrelated individuals, 2 with deletions of the ARID2 region and 5 with de novo truncating mutations in the ARID2 gene. Similarities to CSS are evident. Although hypertrichosis and hypoplasia of the fifth finger nail and distal phalanx do not appear to be common in these patients, toenail hypoplasia and the presence of Wormian bones might support the involvement of ARID2.

[PMID: 30838730]
ARID2 loss-of-function is associated with a rare genetic disorder characterized in 14 reported patients to date. ARID2 encodes a member of the SWItch/sucrose non-fermentable chromatin remodeling complex. Other genes encoding subunits of this complex, such as ARID1A, ARID1B, and SMARCA2, are mutated in association with Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) and Nicolaides Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) phenotypes. Previously reported ARID2 mutations manifested clinically with a CSS-like phenotype including intellectual disability, coarsened facial features, fifth toenail hypoplasia, and other recognizable dysmorphisms. However, heterogeneity exists between previously reported patients with some patients showing more overlapping features with NCBRS. Herein, we present a patient with a novel disease-causing ARID2 loss-of-function mutation. His clinical features included intellectual disability, coarse and dysmorphic facial features, toenail hypoplasia, ADHD, short stature, and delayed development consistent with prior reports. Our patient also presented with previously unreported clinical findings including ophthalmologic involvement, persistent fetal fingertip and toetip pads, and diffuse hyperpigmentary and hypopigmentary changes sparing his face, palms, and soles. The anomalous skin findings are particularly of interest given prior literature outlining the role of ARID2 in melanocyte homeostasis and melanoma. This clinical report and review of the literature is further affirming of the characteristic symptoms and expands the phenotype of this newly described and rare syndrome.