[PMID: 23170914]
Dapagliflozin (Forxiga®) is the first in a novel class of glucose-lowering agents known as sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and is used in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes. By inhibiting the transporter protein SGLT2 in the kidneys, dapagliflozin reduces renal glucose reabsorption, leading to urinary glucose excretion and a reduction in blood glucose levels. Unlike oral antidiabetic drugs from several other classes, the efficacy of dapagliflozin is independent of insulin secretion and action. Therefore, when used in combination with other antidiabetic drugs, dapagliflozin provides complementary therapy via its unique mechanism of action. A consistent finding across phase III, randomized, double-blind trials in patients with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes was that dapagliflozin 5 or 10 mg/day for 24 weeks as monotherapy in previously untreated patients, or as add-on combination therapy with metformin, glimepiride, pioglitazone or insulin-based therapy, significantly reduced both glycosylated haemoglobin values (primary endpoint) and fasting plasma glucose levels compared with placebo. Various randomized trials have also shown improvements in postprandial blood glucose with dapagliflozin monotherapy and combination therapy compared with placebo. In addition, dapagliflozin was noninferior to glipizide, in terms of glycaemic control after 52 weeks, when used as add-on therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes that was inadequately controlled with metformin. In most clinical trials, dapagliflozin was associated with reductions in body weight that were statistically superior to placebo or active comparators. Longer-term extension studies indicate that the efficacy of dapagliflozin is maintained for up to ≈2 years. Dapagliflozin was generally well tolerated in clinical trials of 24 or 52 weeks duration and in extension studies of up to ≈2 years. Events suggestive of genital infections and urinary tract infections occurred more frequently among dapagliflozin than placebo recipients. These adverse events are of special interest because they appear to be related to the mechanism of action of dapagliflozin. Dapagliflozin has a low propensity to cause hypoglycaemia, especially when used alone or in combination with metformin, although the incidence of hypoglycaemic events reported with dapagliflozin in clinical trials varied depending on the background therapy. Longer-term tolerability/safety data with dapagliflozin are awaited with interest. In conclusion, dapagliflozin, with its unique and complementary mechanism of action, appears to be an important addition to the therapeutic options for the management of type 2 diabetes, particularly when used as add-on therapy.

[PMID: 28383856]
Dapagliflozin, a specific inhibitor of sodium-glu¬cose cotransporters type 2 (SGLT2, inhibits glucose reabsorp¬tion in renal tubules and thus promotes glucosuria. This effect results in a reduction in fasting and postprandial glycaemia and a decrease of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c), with a minor risk of hypoglycaemia, a weight reduction and a reduction in arterial blood pressure. The efficacy of empagliflozin on HbA1c reduction increases according to the level of hyper¬glycaemia but decreases in patients with renal insufficiency. Mycotic genital infections occur more frequently, especially in women, while a negligible increase in mild urinary tract infections may be observed. Dapagliflozin (Forxiga®), 10 mg once daily, is indicated for the treatment of T2DM and reim¬bursed in Belgium with conditions as add-on to a background glucose-lowering therapy (either metformin or sulfonylurea/ repaglinide or metformin plus sulfonylurea/repaglinide or basal insulin plus at least one of these oral glucose-lowering agents). Preliminary results suggest some cardiovascular and renal protection. These results should be confirmed in an ongoing large prospective controlled trial (DECLARE) in type 2 diabetic patients at high cardiovascular risk.

[PMID: 24030968]
In the UK, diabetes mellitus affects around 3 million people, of whom over 90% have type 2 diabetes. Aims of treatment include minimising long-term complications (e.g. cardiovascular disease, blindness, chronic kidney disease, premature mortality) and avoiding unwanted effects of treatment (e.g. severe hypoglycaemia, weight gain). Management of diabetes includes patient support and education; addressing symptoms; lifestyle modification; targeting associated risk factors for cardiovascular disease; and surveillance for, and management of, complications including treatment-related hypoglycaemia. Dapagliflozin (Forxiga) belongs to a new class of oral glucose-lowering drugs that inhibit renal glucose reabsorption and promote glycosuria. It is licensed in the UK in adults with type 2 diabetes as monotherapy when diet and exercise alone do not provide adequate glycaemic control and who are unable to tolerate metformin; or, as add-on therapy, with other glucose-lowering agents including insulin, when these, with diet and exercise, do not provide adequate glycaemic control. The company's advertising materials claim that dapagliflozin provides a "novel method of controlling excess glucose" with "secondary benefit of weight loss". Here, we review the evidence for the use of dapagliflozin in the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

[PMID: 25389049]
Dapagliflozin (Forxiga(®), Farxiga(®)) is an orally administered sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitor used in the management of patients with type 2 diabetes. Dapagliflozin reduces renal glucose reabsorption by inhibiting the transporter protein SGLT2 in the renal proximal tubule, thereby increasing urinary glucose excretion and reducing blood glucose levels. Its mechanism of action is independent of insulin secretion or action; therefore, dapagliflozin provides complementary therapy when used in combination with other antihyperglycaemic drugs. This article updates an earlier review of dapagliflozin and focuses on longer-term efficacy and tolerability data (e.g. from extensions of earlier clinical trials), as well as data from studies in special patient populations (e.g. history of cardiovascular disease). Numerous well-designed clinical trials with dapagliflozin, primarily as add-on therapy for 24 weeks (but also as monotherapy or initial combination therapy), have consistently demonstrated reductions in glycosylated haemoglobin, fasting plasma glucose levels and bodyweight. Extensions of these trials show the effects are maintained over longer-term follow-up periods of ≈1-4 years and dapagliflozin is generally well tolerated. Dapagliflozin has a low risk of hypoglycaemia, although the incidence varies depending on background therapy, and genital mycotic infections (particularly in women) are the most common adverse events. Dapagliflozin is not recommended in patients with moderate or severe renal impairment. In view of its unique mechanism of action and now well-established efficacy and tolerability profile, dapagliflozin is a useful treatment option in the management of type 2 diabetes, although its effects on diabetic complications remain to be evaluated.

[PMID: 25402624]
Numerous clinical and epidemiological studies have provided direct evidence to strengthen the link between type 2 diabetes (T2D) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The possibility that T2D patients might be at increased risk in developing AD has serious societal implications. Sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) is one of the best targets in the treatment of diabetes, whereas acetylcholinesterase (AChE) has long been regarded as a therapeutic target for AD. This study explores the molecular interactions between AChE and SGLT2 with a new US Food and Drug Administration approved antidiabetic drug Forxiga (dapagliflozin) to explore a possible link between the treatments of AD and diabetes. Docking study was performed using "Autodock4.2." Hydrophobic and cation-π interactions play an important role in the correct positioning of dapagliflozin within the catalytic site (CAS) of SGLT2 and AChE enzymes to permit docking. Free energy of binding (ΔG) of "dapagliflozin-SGLT2" and "dapagliflozin-CAS domain of AChE" interactions was found to be -6.25 and -6.28 kcal/mol, respectively. Hence, dapagliflozin might act as a potent dual inhibitor of SGLT2 and AChE. The results described herein may form the basis of future dual therapy against diabetes-associated neurological disorders.

[PMID: 25418019]
Dapagliflozin (DAPA) (Farxiga or Forxiga) is a sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor approved for type 2 diabetes mellitus(T2DM) treatment. The review focuses on the pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics(PD) and clinical studies published on DAPA. The authors searched PubMed database for English language studies describing DAPA characteristics and use in T2DM subjects published through June 2014. DAPA exhibits favorable PK and PD properties and is effective in reducing glycemic levels. In addition, DAPA shows beneficial/neutral effects on other risk factors contributing to T2DM metabolic control. Increased risk of genital and urinary infections and episodes of volume depletion represent the major concerns for its use. FDA requires additional data to assess imbalances in bladder cancer and drug cardiovascular safety. The mechanism of action and the very low risk of drug-drug interaction make it an ideal drug for rapidly reducing glucotoxicity and restoring clinical response to other antidiabetic drugs.