[PMID: 19700363]
The interaction between the handle and operator's hand affects the comfort and safety of tool and machine operations. In most of the previous studies, the investigators considered only the normal contact forces. The effect of friction on the joint moments in fingers has not been analyzed. Furthermore, the observed contact forces have not been linked to the internal musculoskeletal loading in the previous experimental studies. In the current study, we proposed a universal model of a hand to evaluate the joint moments in the fingers during grasping tasks. The hand model was developed on the platform of the commercial software package AnyBody. Only four fingers (index, long, ring, and little finger) were included in the model. The anatomical structure of each finger is comprised of four phalanges (distal, middle, proximal, and metacarpal phalange). The simulations were performed using an inverse dynamics technique. The joint angles and the normal contact forces on each finger section reported by previous researchers were used as inputs, while the joint moments of each finger were predicted. The predicted trends of the dependence of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint moments on the cylinder diameter agree with those of the contact forces on the fingers observed in the previous experimental study. Our results show that the DIP and PIP joint moments reach their maximums at a cylinder diameter of about 31mm, which is consistent with the trend of the finger contact forces measured in the experiments. The proposed approach will be useful for simulating musculoskeletal loading in the hand for occupational activities, thereby optimizing tool-handle design.

[PMID: 2187446]
The legal systems of the Germanic tribes in the early Middle Ages elaborated detailed catalogs of forfeits in compensation for certain physical injuries. The perpetrator had to pay the forfeit to the injured person, or in case of manslaughter, to the tribe of the dead. By doing so he could avert the feud which otherwise faced him. These catalogs of forfeits exactly reflect the relative value that was appointed to certain parts of the body and to sensory functions. The catalog of the Lex Saxonum (c. 802), in which physical injuries are listed, ranging from loss of single phalanges, differentiated between thumb, forefinger, small finger, and the other fingers, to death, is compared with modern grades of disability. There are surprising parallels and interesting contrasts. Bilateral deafness is put on a level with bilateral blindness, the loss of both hands, both feet, both testicles, and death.

[PMID: 16965880]
Careful examination of foot impressions can provide important evidences and clues in a crime scene investigation. The present study is conducted on a cross-sectional sample of 1040 adult male Gujjars inhabiting the sub-Himalayan region of North India. The study describes the utility of individualizing characteristics of footprints in forensic examinations. Various features of the toes, humps in the toe line, phalange marks, flatfoot condition, pits, cracks, corns, etc., were studied. Frequency of some of these characters has also been recorded. The frequency of the tibialis-type foot is the highest, followed by fibularis-type, then intermediate-type and midularis-type is found to be least frequent among the sample. Three humps have been found most often in footprints, followed by two humps, four humps, and then five humps and one hump are found to be least frequent. Flatfoot condition is found to be present in 1.54% of the sample population and the trait also shows bilateral variation. Phalange marks, crease marks, pits, deformity, etc., are also demonstrated with suitable examples in the present population. These characteristic features can provide useful clues to establish personal identity whenever complete or partial footprints are recovered at the crime scene and can help in including or excluding the possible presence of individual at the scene of crime.

[PMID: 22250842]
A case report of a male 6-day-old male layer chick featuring incomplete polymelia of the hind limbs and hindgut malformations is presented. The chick was submitted to computed tomography (CT) examination and subsequent anatomical dissection. Apart from the two supernumerary hind limbs, the anatomical dissection revealed additional hindgut alterations: three uniform-sized caeca flanked the ileum, and the rectum branched into paired cloacae. The supernumerary hind limbs were localized caudal to the normal hind limbs in an inverted position and were attached to pelvic girdle elements and to a curtate pygostyle. They featured a prominent unpaired femur besides paired tibiotarsi, tarsometatarsi and species-specific phalanges of the toes. Additionally, two separate bones attached to the caudoventral aspect of the regular hip bones were developed. The supernumerary limbs were in part mobile and received nerve and vascular supply. Digital 3D-reconstruction based on the CT datasets revealed the osseous components of the malformed body parts. The possible morphogenesis including an in-depth literature review and the clinical implications of the reported malformations are discussed.

[PMID: 24486016]
Metacarpal and phalangeal fractures of the long fingers are the result of trauma occurring under extremely varied circumstances. As a consequence, the clinical presentation varies greatly, with every bone and joint potentially being involved. Each step of their treatment is crucial, although the benign appearance of these injuries can lead to steps being missed: diagnostic phase with clinical examination and radiographs; therapeutic phase where the most suitable treatment is chosen, which combines mobilization of the digital chains as soon as possible and in every patient; follow-up phase with regular monitoring to detect any complications, especially secondary displacement, and verify that good progress is being made during rehabilitation. The goal of any fracture treatment is to preserve or restore the anatomy, with the emphasis here being on the stability and mobility of the digital chains. The potential progression towards serious functional sequelae (pain, instability or stiffness in hand) and the resulting significant socio-economic repercussions must be at the forefront of a surgeon's mind early on during the initial care of any finger or hand trauma.

[PMID: 7366585]
Cartilage-Hair-Hypoplasia is a rare form of metaphyseal chondrodystrophia. Its clinical picture is characterized by dysproportionate deficient growth shift to length of upper part of the body. The hair diameter is reduced, and the eyebrows are defectly marked. After stimulation by insulin, the levels of somatotropic hormone are found in the acromegalic range. The bone structure is rarefied at the distal metaphyses of the metacarpals and the proximal metaphyses of the finger basal phalanges. The most important roentgenologic symptoms to be found are clowdy, cystic rarefactions at the distal femoral metaphyses. As to the pathophysiology, deficient proliferation of cartilaginous cells is mentioned in literature.