[PMID: 23107651]
Commotio cordis events due to precordial blows triggering ventricular fibrillation are a cause of sudden death (SD) during sports and also daily activities. Despite the absence of structural cardiac abnormalities, these events have been considered predominantly fatal with low survival rates. To determine whether expected mortality rates for commotio cordis have changed over time, associated with greater public visibility. US Commotio Cordis Registry was accessed to tabulate frequency of reported SD or resuscitated cardiac arrest over 4 decades. At their commotio cordis event, 216 study patients were 0.2-51 years old (mean age 15±9 years); 95% were males. Death occurred in 156 individuals (72%), while the other 60 (28%) survived. Proportion of survivors increased steadily with concomitant decrease in fatal events. For the initial years (1970-1993), 6 of 59 cases survived (10%), while during 1994-2012, 54 of 157 (34%) survived (P = .001). The most recent 6 years, survival from commotio cordis was 31 of 53 (58%), with survivor and nonsurvivor curves ultimately crossing. Higher survival rates were associated with more prompt resuscitation (40%<3 minutes vs 5%>3 minutes; P<.001) and participation in competitive sports (39%; P<.001), but with lower rates in African Americans (1 of 24; 4%) than in whites (54 of 166; 33%; P = .004). Independent predictors of mortality were black race (P = .045) and participation in noncompetitive sports (P = .002), with an on-site automated external defibrillator use protective against SD (P = .01). Survival from commotio cordis has increased, likely owing to more rapid response times and access to defibrillation, as well as greater public awareness of this condition.

[PMID: 23015869]
Commotio cordis is blunt, nonpenetrating trauma to the chest resulting in irregular heart rhythm and often leading to sudden death. This article presents the epidemiology, variables leading to commotio cordis, theories on predisposing factors, diagnosis, treatment, treatment outcomes, and return-to-play recommendations. A PubMed (MEDLINE) search for commotio cordis was conducted on July 1, 2008, and it yielded 106 results, of which 26 were used for this review, including experimental models, simulation studies, case analysis studies, case reports, general recommendation, review articles, and editorials. There are more than 190 reported cases of commotio cordis in the United States. Forty-seven percent of reported cases occurred during athletic participation. Commotio cordis is the second-most common cause of sudden cardiac death in athletes. Occurrence of commotio cordis is related to time of impact during the cardiac cycle, direct impact over the heart, the hardness and speed of the projectile, and the ineffectiveness of chest barriers. As a result, the US Consumer Product Safety Commission recommends that softer "safety" baseballs be used for youth baseball. Resuscitation using defibrillation was effective in only 15% of cases. Resuscitation within 3 minutes resulted in a survival rate of 25% (17 of 68 cases). Survival drops to 3% when resuscitation is delayed beyond 3 minutes. Survival of commotio cordis has risen from 10% to 15% since 2001. Reduced ventricular ejection fraction has been identified in some commotio cordis survivors. Preventive measures, such as using soft "safety" balls and making automated external defibrillators available at sporting venues, can reduce commotio cordis morbidity and mortality. Chest protector designs can be improved to enhance protection. Return to play is best left to clinical judgment given that data are lacking with regard to susceptibility for reoccurrence.

[PMID: 11879111]
Although blunt, nonpenetrating chest blows causing sudden cardiac death (commotio cordis) are often associated with competitive sports, dangers implicit in such blows can extend into many other life activities. To describe the comprehensive spectrum of commotio cordis events. Analysis of confirmed cases from the general community assembled in the US Commotio Cordis Registry occurring up to September 1, 2001. Commotio cordis event. Of 128 confirmed cases, 122 (95%) were in males and the mean (SD) age was 13.6 (8.2) years (median, 14 years; range, 3 months to 45 years); only 28 (22%) cases were aged 18 years or older. Commotio cordis events occurred most commonly during organized sporting events (79 [62%]), such as baseball, but 49 (38%) occurred as part of daily routine and recreational activities. Fatal blows were inflicted with a wide range of velocities but often occurred inadvertently and under circumstances not usually associated with risk for sudden death in informal settings near the home or playground. Twenty-two (28%) participants were wearing commercially available chest barriers, including 7 in whom the projectile made direct contact with protective padding (baseball catchers and lacrosse/hockey goalies), and 2 in whom the projectile was a baseball specifically designed to reduce risk. Only 21 (16%) individuals survived their event, with particularly prompt cardiopulmonary resuscitation/defibrillation (most commonly reversing ventricular fibrillation) the only identifiable factor associated with a favorable outcome. The expanded spectrum of commotio cordis illustrates the potential dangers implicit in striking the chest, regardless of the intent or force of the blow. These findings also suggest that the safety of young athletes will be enhanced by developing more effective preventive strategies (such as chest wall barriers) to achieve protection from ventricular fibrillation following precordial blows.

[PMID: 11555799]
Commotio cordis is the condition of sudden cardiac death or near sudden cardiac death after blunt, low-impact chest wall trauma in the absence of structural cardiac abnormality. Ventricular fibrillation is the most commonly reported induced arrhythmia in commotio cordis. Blunt impact injury to the chest with a baseball is the most common mechanism. Survival rates for commotio cordis are low, even with prompt CPR and defibrillation.

[PMID: 21763255]
The commotio cordis literature has largely focused on events occurring in the United States. However, with enhanced public awareness, commotio cordis has been increasingly recognized internationally as a cause of cardiac arrest and sudden death due to blunt nonpenetrating chest blows. This study sought to characterize the demographics of commotio cordis globally in comparison to the U.S. experience. This study used interrogation of the Commotio Cordis Registry (Minneapolis, Minnesota). We report 60 cases of commotio cordis occurring outside the United States from 19 countries (most commonly the United Kingdom and Canada) on 5 continents and compared these events to 2:3 occuring in the U.S. In the 2 groups, events were largely similar demographically, including frequency of survival (26% in U.S. vs 25%; P = .84), and the striking male predominance evident in both groups (i.e., 95%), although non-U.S. victims were somewhat older (19 ± 13 vs 15 ± 9; P = .002). Not unexpectedly, the groups differed with baseball/softball and football predominant in the United States (55% of events) and soccer, cricket, and hockey most common internationally (47% of events). Notably, the frequency with which soccer participation caused commotio cordis was much more common than expected, particularly in non-U.S. athletes (20% vs 3% U.S.; P < .001). Commotio cordis demonstrates a global occurrence, very similar demographically in the United States and internationally. However, the frequency with which chest blows from soccer balls caused commotio cordis events (particularly during sports played internationally) seems to contradict the prevailing notion that air-filled projectiles convey less risk for ventricular fibrillation than do those with solid cores (e.g., baseball or lacrosse balls).

[PMID: 20086611]
Commotio cordis is arrhythmia or sudden death from low-impact, blunt trauma to the chest without apparent heart injury. Ventricular fibrillation is the most common associated arrhythmia, and heart block, bundle branch block, and ST-segment elevation are also seen. Commotio cordis occurs most commonly in baseball but has also been reported in hockey, softball, and several other sports. Approximately two to four cases are reported each year, but the true incidence is uncertain. Survival is low, even when resuscitation is performed. Preventive measures include education of participants and coaches, chest protection, and softer baseballs. Other considerations include having external automatic defibrillators and trained personnel at youth sporting events.