[PMID: 19565362]
Microtubules are hollow tubes some 25 nm in diameter participating in the eukaryotic cytoskeleton. They are built from alphabeta-tubulin heterodimers that associate to form protofilaments running lengthwise along the microtubule wall with the beta-tubulin subunit facing the microtubule plus end conferring a structural polarity. The alpha- and beta-tubulins are highly conserved. A third member of the tubulin family, gamma-tubulin, plays a role in microtubule nucleation and assembly. Other members of the tubulin family appear to be involved in microtubule nucleation. Microtubule assembly is accompanied by hydrolysis of GTP associated with beta-tubulin so that microtubules consist principally of 'GDP-tubulin' stabilized at the plus end by a short 'cap'. An important property of microtubules is dynamic instability characterized by growth randomly interrupted by pauses and shrinkage. Many proteins interact with microtubules within the cell and are involved in essential functions such as microtubule growth, stabilization, destabilization, and interactions with chromosomes during cell division. The motor proteins kinesin and dynein use microtubules as pathways for transport and are also involved in cell division. Crystallography and electron microscopy are providing a structural basis for understanding the interactions of microtubules with antimitotic drugs, with motor proteins and with plus end tracking proteins.

[PMID: 23145817]
Near-field optical techniques have enabled the trapping, transport, and handling of nanoscopic materials much smaller than what can be manipulated with traditional optical tweezers. Here we extend the scope of what is possible by demonstrating angular orientation and rotational control of both biological and nonbiological nanoscale rods using photonic crystal nanotweezers. In our experiments, single microtubules (diameter 25 nm, length 8 μm) and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (outer diameter 110-170 nm, length 5 μm) are rotated by the optical torque resulting from their interaction with the evanescent field emanating from these devices. An angular trap stiffness of κ = 92.8 pN·nm/rad(2)·mW is demonstrated for the microtubules, and a torsional spring constant of 22.8 pN·nm/rad(2)·mW is measured for the nanotubes. We expect that this new capability will facilitate the development of high precision nanoassembly schemes and biophysical studies of bending strains of biomolecules.

[PMID: 9549038]
Although it is generally accepted that tubulin plays an important role in G-protein-mediated signal transduction in a variety of systems, the mechanism of this phenomenon is not completely understood. G-protein-tubulin interaction at the cell membrane and the cytosol, and the influence of such an interaction on cellular signaling are discussed in this review article. Because the diameter of a microtubule is 25 nm and the plasma membrane is 9-11 nm thick, it is not possible for membrane-associated tubulin to assemble into a complete microtubule in the membrane environment. However, tubulin heterodimers may be able to function in the membrane environment as individual heterodimers or as polymers arranged into short protofilaments. At the cell membrane, membrane-associated tubulin may influence hormone-receptor interaction, receptor-G-protein coupling, and G-protein-effector coupling. Structural proteins, such as tubulin, can participate in cellular signaling by communicating through physical forces. By virtue of its interaction with the submembranous network of cytoskeletal proteins, tubulin, when perturbed in one locus, can transmit large changes in conformations to other points. Thus, GTP binding to membrane-associated tubulin might lead to a conformational change in either receptors or G proteins. This may, in turn, influence the binding of an agonist to its receptor. On the other hand, in the cell cytosol, subsequent to agonist-induced translocation of G-proteins from the membrane compartment to the cytosol, G-proteins may affect microtubule formation. In GH3 and AtT-20 cells (stably expressing TRH receptor), transiently transfected with Gq alpha cDNA, soluble tubulin levels decreased in Gq alpha-transfected GH3 and AtT-20 cells, by 33% and 52%, respectively. These results suggest that G-proteins may have a direct effect on the microtubule function in vivo. Because tubulin and G-protein families are ubiquitous and highly conserved, an interaction between these two protein families may occur in vivo, and this, in turn, can have an impact on signal transduction. However, the physiological significance of this interaction remains to be demonstrated.

[PMID: 23729907]
Revealing vibration characteristics of sub-cellular structural components such as membranes and microtubules has a principal role in obtaining a deeper understanding of their biological functions. Nevertheless, limitations and challenges in biological experiments at this scale necessitates the use of mathematical and computational models as an alternative solution. As one of the three major cytoskeletal filaments, microtubules are highly anisotropic structures built from tubulin heterodimers. They are hollow cylindrical shells with a ∼ 25 nm outer diameter and are tens of microns long. In this study, a mechanical model including the effects of the viscous cytosol and surrounding filaments is developed for predicting the coupled oscillations of a single microtubule immersed in cytoplasm. The first-order shear deformation shell theory for orthotropic materials is used to model the microtubule, whereas the motion of the cytosol is analyzed by considering the Stokes flow. The viscous cytosol and the microtubule are coupled through the continuity condition across the microtubule-cytosol interface. The stress and velocity fields in the cytosol induced by vibrating microtubule are analytically determined. Finally, the influences of the dynamic viscosity of the cytosol, filament network elasticity, microtubule shear modulus, and circumferential wave-number on longitudinal, radial, and torsional modes of microtubule vibration are elucidated.

[PMID: 7161484]
Partial spinal cord ischaemia was induced in dogs, ranging from 1 to 3 years of age, by ligature of the abdominal aorta just below the arteria coeliaca. The changes of the lumbal sensitive ganglia neurons were studied. In addition to the most often occurring changes, e.g., the vacuolization of the mitochondria, the disaggregation of ribosomes, the dilatation of the Golgi complex, the microtubular formations in the dilated cisterns of the endoplasmic reticulum were observed. Modified cisterns of the granulated endoplasmic reticulum (GER) occurred focally in relatively well preserved neurons. The individual microtubules measured about 24 nm in outer diameter, and their walls were formed by some subunits.

[PMID: 18085218]
Microtubules are found in all eukaryotes and are built from alphabeta-tubulin heterodimers. The alpha-tubulins and beta-tubulins are among the most highly conserved eukaryotic proteins. Other members of the tubulin family have come to light recently and, like gamma-tubulin, appear to play roles in microtubule nucleation and assembly. Microtubule assembly is accompanied by hydrolysis of GTP associated with beta-tubulin so that microtubules consist principally of "GDP-tubulin" stabilized by a short "GTP cap." Microtubules are polar, cylindrical structures some 25 nm in diameter. Protofilaments made from tubulin heterodimers run lengthwise along the microtubule wall with the beta-tubulin subunit at the microtubule plus end. The crystallographic structures of tubulins are essential to understand in detail microtubule architecture and interactions with stabilizing and destabilizing drugs and proteins.