[PMID: 32733014]
Calreticulin (CALR) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein involved in a spectrum of cellular processes. In healthy cells, CALR operates as a chaperone and Ca<sup>2+</sup> buffer to assist correct protein folding within the ER. Besides favoring the maintenance of cellular proteostasis, these cell-intrinsic CALR functions support Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent processes, such as adhesion and integrin signaling, and ensure normal antigen presentation on MHC Class I molecules. Moreover, cancer cells succumbing to immunogenic cell death (ICD) expose CALR on their surface, which promotes the uptake of cell corpses by professional phagocytes and ultimately supports the initiation of anticancer immunity. Thus, loss-of-function CALR mutations promote oncogenesis not only as they impair cellular homeostasis in healthy cells, but also as they compromise natural and therapy-driven immunosurveillance. However, the prognostic impact of total or membrane-exposed CALR levels appears to vary considerably with cancer type. For instance, while genetic CALR defects promote pre-neoplastic myeloproliferation, patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms bearing CALR mutations often experience improved overall survival as compared to patients bearing wild-type CALR. Here, we discuss the context-dependent impact of CALR on malignant transformation, tumor progression and response to cancer therapy.

[PMID: 33202418]
Somatic mutations of calreticulin (CALR) have been identified as a main disease driver of myeloproliferative neoplasms, suggesting that development of drugs targeting mutant CALR is of great significance. Site-directed mutagenesis in the N-glycan binding domain (GBD) abolishes the ability of mutant CALR to oncogenically activate the thrombopoietin receptor (MPL). We therefore hypothesized that a small molecule targeting the GBD might inhibit the oncogenicity of the mutant CALR. Using an in silico molecular docking study, we identified candidate binders to the GBD of CALR. Further experimental validation of the hits identified a group of catechols inducing a selective growth inhibitory effect on cells that depend on oncogenic CALR for survival and proliferation. Apoptosis-inducing effects by the compound were significantly higher in the CALR-mutated cells than in CALR wild-type cells. Additionally, knockout or C-terminal truncation of CALR eliminated drug hypersensitivity in CALR-mutated cells. We experimentally confirmed the direct binding of the selected compound to CALR, disruption of the mutant CALR-MPL interaction, inhibition of the JAK2-STAT5 pathway, and reduction at the intracellular level of mutant CALR upon drug treatment. Our data indicate that small molecules targeting the GBD of CALR can selectively kill CALR-mutated cells by disrupting the CALR-MPL interaction and inhibiting oncogenic signaling.

[PMID: 34571965]
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN) are acquired clonal disorders of the hematopoietic stem cells and include Essential Thrombocythemia, Polycythemia Vera and Myelofibrosis. MPN are characterized by mutations in three driver genes (<i>JAK2, CALR</i> and <i>MPL</i>) and by a state of chronic inflammation. Notably, MPN patients experience increased risk of thrombosis, disease progression, second neoplasia and evolution to acute leukemia. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a heterogeneous population of microparticles with a role in cell-cell communication. The EV-mediated cross-talk occurs via the trafficking of bioactive molecules such as nucleic acids, proteins, metabolites and lipids. Growing interest is focused on EVs and their potential impact on the regulation of blood cancers. Overall, EVs have been suggested to orchestrate the complex interplay between tumor cells and the microenvironment with a pivotal role in "education" and "crafting" of the microenvironment by regulating angiogenesis, coagulation, immune escape and drug resistance of tumors. This review is focused on the role of EVs in MPN. Specifically, we will provide an overview of recent findings on the involvement of EVs in MPN pathogenesis and discuss opportunities for their potential application as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.

[PMID: 33202112]
JAK2V617F (JAK2), calreticulin (CALR) and MPL515L/K (MPL) mutations are important in essential thrombocythemia (ET) and may be associated with various clinical consequences of the disease. This study aimed to compare the clinical and haematological parameters of ET patients regarding the mentioned mutations and the role of plateletcrit (PCT). Seventy patients who were diagnosed with ET between 2005 and 2017 in a single centre were included in this descriptive study. The initial symptoms and clinical findings were retrieved from the electronic database. JAK2 gene V617F mutations, MPL gene exon 10 mutations and CALR gene exon 9 DNA sequence analyses were performed. Forty-one healthy volunteers were included to perform ROC curve analysis for interpreting PCT value. The distributions of patients according to the mutations were as follows: Thirty-seven (52.9%) patients were JAK2-positive, 15 (21.4%) were CALR-positive, 2 (2.8%) patients were positive for both CALR and JAK2, and 1 (1.4%) was only MPL-positive. Fifteen (21.4%) patients were triple-negative. The ET patients with JAK2 mutation showed a higher level of haemoglobin at the time of diagnosis. The ET patients with CALR mutation presented with higher platelet and LDH levels (P = .002 and P = .001, respectively). The PCT level was higher in the CALR-positive group when compared to the others (P = .026). A sensitivity value of 97.6% and specificity value of 98.6% were determined regarding PCT% at a cut-off value of 0.37 in ET patients. In CALR-positive patients, the sensitivity and specificity values were 100% for the PCT at a cut-off value of 0.42%. We determined that the platelet count and blood LDH level was high in the ET patient group with CALR mutation. Besides, we found that the blood haemoglobin level was higher in the ET patient group with JAK2 mutation. Additionally, the PCT level was higher in the CALR group when compared to the other patient groups.

[PMID: 34804436]
Classification of myeloproliferative neoplasms is based on hematologic, histopathologic, and molecular characteristics, including the BCR-ABL1 and JAK2 V617F or MPL and CALR. Although the different gene mutations ought to be mutually exclusive, several cases with co-occurring BCR-ABL1 and JAK2 V617F or CALR have been identified with a frequency of 0.2-2.5% in the European population. The tyrosine kinase abnormalities appeared to affect independent subclones because imatinib mesylate (IM) treatment induced Ph+-CML remission, whereas the JAK2V617F clone either persisted or clinically expanded after a major response of Ph+-clone. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is at present the only potentially curative therapy for these patients after therapy with ruxolitinib and TKI inhibitor. We describe the case of 3 young people treated in our institution for the coexistence of BCR/ABL chronic myeloid leukemia and another Philadelphia chromosome-negative (Ph-) Chronic myeloproliferative disease. They received ruxolitinib, imatinib/nilotinib, and allogeneic transplantation with safe and efficient results.

[PMID: 32694616]
JAK2, CALR, and MPL are myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN)-driver mutations, whereas SF3B1 is strongly associated with ring sideroblasts (RS) in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Concomitant mutations of SF3B1 and MPN-driver mutations out of the context of MDS/MPN with RS and thrombocytosis (MDS/MPN-RS-T) are not well-studied. From the cases (<5% blasts) tested by NGS panels interrogating at least 42 myeloid neoplasm-related genes, we identified 18 MDS/MPN-RS-T, 42 MPN, 10 MDS, and 6 MDS/MPN-U cases with an SF3B1 and an MPN-driver mutation. Using a 10% VAF difference to define "SF3B1-dominant," "MPN-mutation dominant," and "no dominance," the majority of MDS/MPN-RS-T clustered in "SF3B1-dominant" and "no dominance" regions. Aside from parameters as thrombocytosis and ≥15% RS required for RS-T, MDS also differed in frequent neutropenia, multilineage dysplasia, and notably more cases with <10% VAF of MPN-driver mutations (60%, p = 0.0346); MPN differed in more frequent splenomegaly, myelofibrosis, and higher VAF of "MPN-driver mutations." "Gray zone" cases with features overlapping MDS/MPN-RS-T were observed in over one-thirds of non-RS-T cases. This study shows that concomitant SF3B1 and MPN-driver mutations can be observed in MDS, MPN, and MDS/MPN-U, each showing overlapping but also distinctively different clinicopathological features. Clonal hierarchy, cytogenetic abnormalities, and additional somatic mutations may in part contribute to different disease phenotypes, which may help in the classification of "gray zone" cases.