[PMID: 10777687]
Adipocyte amino acid transporter (AAAT) is induced during the 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation process. In the -1819-bp 5'-upstream flanking region of the AAAT genomic gene, six DNase I protected sites were identified by using the 3T3-L1 adipocyte nuclear extract. Results of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) expression from the chimeric AAAT promoter-driven CAT reporter gene indicated that one protein binding site, from -68 to -26, was essential for the promoter activity. However, this protein binding site does not contain recognition sites of the transcription factors important for adipocyte differentiation, i.e., the C/EBP or PPAR family. Further analysis revealed that the DNA sequence, TTCAAGTCCCGCCCTCCGCT from -65 to -46, was the cis-element essential and partially sufficient for inducible activity of the AAAT gene promoter.

[PMID: 8063775]
We have previously shown that mutations in the GGAA core motif of the Ets1 binding site, EBSI, or deletion of EBSI, reduced basal and Tax1 transactivation of the PTHrP P2 promoter. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to EBSI, a CACCC-like motif located between -53 and -58 is required for full basal activity of this promoter in Jurkat T-cells. Site-specific mutations in the CACCC motif decreased promoter activity approximately 5-fold. In an effort to identify transcription factors that bind to the CACCC element, we found that purified human Sp1, as well as Sp1 in HeLa nuclear extract, can specifically bind to a DNA probe that corresponds to the PTHrP-specific sequence between -94 and -34. Gel shift competition studies and DNase I footprinting analyses revealed that Sp1 specifically interacts with the CACCC motif. In the presence of Ets1, the mobility of the Sp1-specific gel shift complex with the PTHrP DNA decreased. DNase I footprint analysis of this gel shift complex showed an extended footprint over both the Sp1 and the Ets1 binding site, demonstrating that Sp1 and Ets1 form a ternary complex with the PTHrP DNA. Cotransfection of an Ets1 and Sp1 expression vector into Drosophila Schneider cells demonstrated that Sp1 can functionally cooperate with Ets1 to transactivate the PTHrP promoter. We conclude from these data that Ets1 and Sp1 can cooperatively regulate PTHrP P2 promoter activity.

[PMID: 8702907]
We have previously shown that the proximal 2-kb sequence of the fatty acid synthase (FAS) promoter transfected into rat adipocytes was highly sensitive to the cellular context, displaying an overactivity in obese (fa/fa) versus lean Zucker rat adipocytes. Using deletional analysis, we show here that FAS promoter activity mainly depends on a region from -200 to -126. This sequence exerts a strong negative effect on FAS promoter in adipocytes from lean rats but not in those from obese rats, resulting in a marked overtranscriptional activity in the latter cells. This region, fused to a heterologous promoter, the E1b TATA box, induced differential levels of gene reporter activity in lean and obese rat adipocytes, indicating it harbors fa-responsive element(s). Whatever the rat genotype, adipocyte nuclear proteins were shown to footprint the same protected sequence within the fa-responsive region, and supershift analysis demonstrated that Sp1 or Sp1-like proteins were bound to this DNA subregion. Compelling evidence that the Sp1 binding site contained in this sequence was implicated in the differential promoter activity in lean versus obese rats, was provided by the observation that mutations at this Sp1 site induced a 2.5-fold increase in FAS promoter activity in adipocytes from lean rats, whereas they had no effect in adipocytes from obese rats.

[PMID: 9261349]
The polycythemic strain of the spleen focus-forming virus (SFFVp) contains the most potent murine retroviral enhancer configuration known so far for gene expression in myeloerythroid hematopoietic cells. In the present study, we mapped two crucial elements responsible for the high activity of the SFFVp enhancer to an altered upstream control region (UCR) containing a GC-rich motif (5'-GGGCGGG-3') and to a unique enhancer core (5'-TGCGGTC-3'). Acquisition of these motifs accounts for half of the activity of the complete retroviral enhancer in hematopoietic cells, irrespective of the developmental stage or lineage. Furthermore, the UCR motif contains the major determinant for the enhancer activity of SFFVp in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show that the UCR of SFFVp, but not of Friend murine leukemia virus, is targeted by the ubiquitous transcriptional activator, Sp1. The core motif of SFFVp creates a specific and high-affinity target for polyomavirus enhancer binding protein/core binding factor (PEBP/CBF) and excludes access of CAAT/enhancer binding protein. Cotransfection experiments with ES cells imply that PEBP/CBF cooperates with the neighboring element, LVb (the only conserved Ets consensus in the SFFVp enhancer), and that the Sp1 motif in the UCR stimulates transactivation through the Ets-PEBP interaction. Putative secondary structures of the retroviral enhancers are proposed based on these data.

[PMID: 12684058]
The amiloride-sensitive Na(+) channel ENaC is expressed in lung epithelium and plays a pivotal role in lung fluid clearance in the newborn. Multiple splice variants of the ENaC alpha-subunit have been reported. Among them, alpha-ENaC2 accounts for a considerable portion of alpha-ENaC transcripts in human lung and kidney, possesses channel functions similar to alpha-ENaC1, and is driven by a downstream promoter. In the current study, we examine the regulation of alpha-ENaC2 transcription in lung epithelial cells. We found that transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 activate alpha-ENaC2 transcription through a GC-rich element (Sp1-binding site) in the promoter. Because alpha-ENaC expression and Sp1 phosphorylation are both significantly up-regulated in the perinatal lung, we then examined the possible connection between Sp1/Sp3 phosphorylation and alpha-ENaC2 expression. We found that protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) dephosphorylates Sp1 and Sp3 in lung epithelial cells, reduces their binding to the alpha-ENaC2 promoter, and decreases Sp1/Sp3-mediated promoter activity. Our results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 are essential for alpha-ENaC2 transcription in lung epithelial cells and that dephosphorylation of the Sp transcription factors by PP1 suppresses alpha-ENaC2 expression. The significance of these findings in the regulation of gene expression in perinatal lung is discussed.

[PMID: 22021377]
SP1 is a ubiquitous transcription factor that is involved in the regulation of various house-keeping genes. It is known that it acts by binding to a double-stranded consensus motif. Here, we have discovered that SP1 binds also to a non-canonical DNA structure, a G-quadruplex, with high affinity. In particular, we have studied the SP1 binding site within the promoter region of the c-KIT oncogene and found that this site can fold into an anti-parallel two-tetrad G-quadruplex. SP1 pull-down experiments from cellular extracts, together with biophysical binding assays revealed that SP1 has a comparable binding affinity for this G-quadruplex structure and the canonical SP1 duplex sequence. Using SP1 ChIP-on-chip data sets, we have also found that 87% of SP1 binding sites overlap with G-quadruplex forming sequences. Furthermore, while many of these immuoprecipitated sequences (36%) even lack the minimal SP1 consensus motif, 5'-GGGCGG-3', we have shown that 77% of them are putative G-quadruplexes. Collectively, these data suggest that SP1 is able to bind both, canonical SP1 duplex DNA as well as G-quadruplex structures in vitro and we hypothesize that both types of interactions may occur in cells.