[PMID: 34342696]
Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) encompass a broad spectrum of diseases with variable type of cardiac involvement and there is lack of clinical data on Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (CMR) phenotypes or even prognostic value of CMR in NMD. We explored the diagnostic and prognostic value of CMR in NMD-related cardiomyopathies. The study included retrospective analysis of a cohort of 111 patients with various forms of NMD; mitochondrial: n = 14, Friedreich's ataxia (FA): n = 27, myotonic dystrophy: n = 27, Becker/Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (BMD/DMD): n = 15, Duchenne's carriers: n = 6, other: n = 22. Biventricular volumes and function and myocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) pattern and extent were assessed by CMR. Patients were followed-up for the composite clinical endpoint of death, heart failure development or need for permanent pacemaker/intracardiac defibrillator. The major NMD subtypes, i.e. FA, mitochondrial, BMD/DMD, and myotonic dystrophy had significant differences in the incidence of LGE (56%, 21%, 62% & 30% respectively, chi<sup>2</sup> = 9.86, p = 0.042) and type of cardiomyopathy phenotype (chi<sup>2</sup> = 13.8, p = 0.008), extent/pattern (p = 0.006) and progression rate of LGE (p = 0.006). In survival analysis the composite clinical endpoint differed significantly between NMD subtypes (p = 0.031), while the subgroup with LGE + and LVEF < 50% had the worst prognosis (Log-rank p = 0.0034). We present data from a unique cohort of NMD patients and provide evidence on the incidence, patterns, and the prognostic value of LGE in NMD-related cardiomyopathy. LGE is variably present in NMD subtypes and correlates with LV remodelling, dysfunction, and clinical outcomes in patients with NMD.

[PMID: 1865568]
The clinical course and prognosis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) was compared in patients with deletions of the gene for dystrophin (cDMD) and those without such deletions. A total of 24 patients was followed for at least 2 yrs. At age 12 the rating of the activities of daily life (ADL) and disease stage were less favorable in those patients with deletions of the gene for cDMD. At age 14, no difference in ADL and disease stage was observed between the two groups. The percent vital capacity was lower in those patients with the cDMD deficit. When the prognosis was evaluated by multivariate analysis of the data obtained at age 12, the percent of patients predicted as dying before the age of 20 was 40% for those without the cDMD deficit but 76% for those who were cDMD defective. None of the cDMD defective patients lived longer than 20 yrs, whereas 5 of 14 patients without the cDND deficit survived longer than 20 yrs. Disorders such as cardiac and respiratory failure were also seen more frequently in the cDND defective patients. These results suggest that patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy with defective cDMD have more severe disease than those without cDMD deficit.

[PMID: 15637982]
About 60% of both Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker's muscular dystrophy (BMD) is due to deletions of dystrophin gene. For cases with deletion mutations the "reading frame" hypothesis predicts that deletions which result in disruption of the translation reading frame prevent production of stable protein and are associated with DMD. In contrast, intragenic deletions that involve exons encoding an integral number of triplet codons maintain proper reading frame. The resulting abnormal proteins are stable and partially functional, resulting in a milder and more variable BMD phenotype. To test the validity of this theory,we analyzed 40 patients-19 independent deletions at the DMD/BMD locus. Clinical/molecular correlations based on the altera-tions of the reading frame were valid in 69.2% of cases. After exclusion of: --2 patients with del 3-6 (with no consistent clinical expression); --1 DMD patient with large in-frame deletion; --2 patients that were too young to be classified; --4 patients in whom it was impossible to identify the extent of deletion (del 47 and del 44-45), the correlation between deletion and clinical severity was as predicted in 92.4% of cases. The present data should be useful in establishing the prognosis in individual patients even in sporadic cases with no affected relatives.

[PMID: 21178099]
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the most common single-gene lethal disorder. Substantial patient-patient variability in disease onset and progression and response to glucocorticoids is seen, suggesting genetic or environmental modifiers. Two DMD cohorts were used as test and validation groups to define genetic modifiers: a Padova longitudinal cohort (n = 106) and the Cooperative International Neuromuscular Research Group (CINRG) cross-sectional natural history cohort (n = 156). Single nucleotide polymorphisms to be genotyped were selected from mRNA profiling in patients with severe vs mild DMD, and genome-wide association studies in metabolism and polymorphisms influencing muscle phenotypes in normal volunteers were studied. Effects on both disease progression and response to glucocorticoids were observed with polymorphism rs28357094 in the gene promoter of SPP1 (osteopontin). The G allele (dominant model; 35% of subjects) was associated with more rapid progression (Padova cohort log rank p = 0.003), and 12%-19% less grip strength (CINRG cohort p = 0.0003). Osteopontin genotype is a genetic modifier of disease severity in Duchenne dystrophy. Inclusion of genotype data as a covariate or in inclusion criteria in DMD clinical trials would reduce intersubject variance, and increase sensitivity of the trials, particularly in older subjects.

[PMID: 32791185]
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a fatal progressive muscle-wasting disease caused by mutations in the DMD gene. Dilated cardiomyopathy is the leading cause of death in DMD; therefore, further understanding of this complication is essential to reduce morbidity and mortality. A common null variant (R577X) in the ACTN3 gene, which encodes α-actinin-3, has been studied in association with muscle function in healthy individuals; however it has not yet been examined in relationship to the cardiac phenotype in DMD. In this study, we determined the ACTN3 genotype in 163 patients with DMD and examined the correlation between ACTN3 genotypes and echocardiographic findings in 77 of the 163 patients. The genotypes 577RR(RR), 577RX(RX) and 577XX(XX) were identified in 13 (17%), 44 (57%) and 20 (26%) of 77 patients, respectively. We estimated cardiac involvement-free survival rate analyses using Kaplan-Meier curves. Remarkably, the left ventricular dilation (> 55 mm)-free survival rate was significantly lower in patients with the XX null genotype (P < 0.01). The XX null genotype showed a higher risk for LV dilation (hazard ratio 9.04). This study revealed that the ACTN3 XX null genotype was associated with a lower left ventricular dilation-free survival rate in patients with DMD. These results suggest that the ACTN3 genotype should be determined at the time of diagnosis of DMD to improve patients' cardiac outcomes.

[PMID: 20098710]
A significant component of the variation in cognitive disability that is observed in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is known to be under genetic regulation. In this study we report correlations between standardised measures of intelligence and mutational class, mutation size, mutation location and the involvement of dystrophin isoforms. Sixty two male subjects were recruited as part of a study of the cognitive spectrum in boys with DMD conducted at the Sydney Children's Hospital (SCH). All 62 children received neuropsychological testing from a single clinical psychologist and had a defined dystrophin gene (DMD) mutation; including DMD gene deletions, duplications and DNA point mutations. Full Scale Intelligence Quotients (FSIQ) in unrelated subjects with the same mutation were found to be highly correlated (r = 0.83, p = 0.0008), in contrast to results in previous publications. In 58 cases (94%) it was possible to definitively assign a mutation as affecting one or more dystrophin isoforms. A strong association between the risk of cognitive disability and the involvement of groups of DMD isoforms was found. In particular, improvements in the correlation of FSIQ with mutation location were identified when a new classification system for mutations affecting the Dp140 isoform was implemented. These data represent one of the largest studies of FSIQ and mutational data in DMD patients and is among the first to report on a DMD cohort which has had both comprehensive mutational analysis and FSIQ testing through a single referral centre. The correlation between FSIQ results with the location of the dystrophin gene mutation suggests that the risk of cognitive deficit is a result of the cumulative loss of central nervous system (CNS) expressed dystrophin isoforms, and that correct classification of isoform involvement results in improved estimates of risk.