[PMID: 16783378]
Neurodegenerative disorders with high brain iron include Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease and several childhood genetic disorders categorized as neuroaxonal dystrophies. We mapped a locus for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) to chromosome 22q12-q13 and identified mutations in PLA2G6, encoding a calcium-independent group VI phospholipase A2, in NBIA, INAD and the related Karak syndrome. This discovery implicates phospholipases in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders with iron dyshomeostasis.

[PMID: 26001724]
The PLA2G6 gene encodes a group VIA calcium-independent phospholipase A2 beta enzyme that selectively hydrolyses glycerophospholipids to release free fatty acids. Mutations in PLA2G6 have been associated with disorders such as infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation type II and Karak syndrome. More recently, PLA2G6 was identified as the causative gene in a subgroup of patients with autosomal recessive early-onset dystonia-parkinsonism. Neuropathological examination revealed widespread Lewy body pathology and the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau, supporting a link between PLA2G6 mutations and parkinsonian disorders. Here we show that knockout of the Drosophila homologue of the PLA2G6 gene, iPLA2-VIA, results in reduced survival, locomotor deficits and organismal hypersensitivity to oxidative stress. Furthermore, we demonstrate that loss of iPLA2-VIA function leads to a number of mitochondrial abnormalities, including mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction, reduced ATP synthesis and abnormal mitochondrial morphology. Moreover, we show that loss of iPLA2-VIA is strongly associated with increased lipid peroxidation levels. We confirmed our findings using cultured fibroblasts taken from two patients with mutations in the PLA2G6 gene. Similar abnormalities were seen including elevated mitochondrial lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial membrane defects, as well as raised levels of cytoplasmic and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Finally, we demonstrated that deuterated polyunsaturated fatty acids, which inhibit lipid peroxidation, were able to partially rescue the locomotor abnormalities seen in aged flies lacking iPLA2-VIA gene function, and restore mitochondrial membrane potential in fibroblasts from patients with PLA2G6 mutations. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that loss of normal PLA2G6 gene activity leads to lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent mitochondrial membrane abnormalities. Furthermore we show that the iPLA2-VIA knockout fly model provides a useful platform for the further study of PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration.

[PMID: 20938027]
PLA2G6 is the causative gene for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation, and Karak syndrome. Based on previous reports, patients with PLA2G6 mutations could show axonal dystrophy, dystonia, dementia, and cerebellar signs. Recently, PLA2G6 was also reported as the causative gene for early-onset PARK14-linked dystonia-parkinsonism. To clarify the role of PLA2G6 mutation in parkinsonism, we conducted mutation analysis in 29 selected patients with very early-onset (≤ 30, mean 21.2 ± 8.4 years, ± SD) parkinsonism. These patients had other clinical features (e.g., mental retardation/dementia [14/29], psychosis [15/29], dystonia [11/29], and hyperreflexia [11/29]). Two novel compound heterozygous PLA2G6 mutations were detected (patient A: p.F72L/p.R635Q; patients B1 and B2: p.Q452X/p.R635Q). All 3 patients had early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism with dementia and frontotemporal lobar atrophy. Disease progression was relatively rapid. SPECT in patient B1 showed frontotemporal lobar hypoperfusion. MRI in patient A showed iron accumulation in the substantia nigra and striatum. Although the clinical presentation of PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration was reported to be homogeneous, our findings suggest patients with PLA2G6 mutation could show heterogeneous phenotype such as dystonia-parkinsonism, dementia, frontotemporal atrophy/hypoperfusion, with or without brain iron accumulation. Based on the clinical heterogeneity, the functional roles of PLA2G6 and the roles of PLA2G6 variants including single heterozygous mutations should be further elucidated in patients with atypical parkinsonism, dementia, or Parkinson disease. PLA2G6 mutations should be considered in patients with early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism and dementia with frontotemporal lobar atrophy.

[PMID: 27884548]
Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy is a rare neurodegenerative disorder characterized by infantile onset of rapid motor and cognitive regression and hypotonia evolving into spasticity. Recessively inherited mutations of the PLA2G6 gene are causative of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy and other PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration, which includes conditions known as atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy, Karak syndrome and early-onset dystonia-parkinsonism with cognitive impairment. Phenotypic spectrum continues to evolve and genotype-phenotype correlations are currently limited. Due to the overlapping phenotypes and heterogeneity of clinical findings characterization of the syndrome is not always achievable. We reviewed the most recent clinical and neuroradiological information in the way to make easier differential diagnosis with other degenerative disorders in the paediatric age. Recognizing subtle signs and symptoms is a fascinating challenge to drive towards better diagnostic and genetic investigations.

[PMID: 18443314]
Neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) comprises a heterogeneous group of disorders in which disruption of cellular mechanisms leads to accumulation of iron in the basal ganglia. This group includes patients with recently discovered mutations in the PLA2G6 gene encoding a calcium-independent phospholipase A2 enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of glycerophospholipids. Previously, children with PLA2G6 mutations have been diagnosed with several different disorders and we wished to better define the phenotype of PLA2G6- associated neurodegeneration. Detailed review of the clinical and genetic features of 14 and radiologic features of 13 of these patients with PLA2G6 mutations was undertaken. Median age of symptom presentation was 14 months. One third of the cohort presented following an intercurrent illness. The children had progressive cognitive and motor skill regression, with evidence of axial hypotonia, four limb spasticity, bulbar dysfunction, and strabismus. All patients developed cerebellar ataxia and dystonia. Most patients had optic atrophy. Brain imaging demonstrated cerebellar cortical atrophy and gliosis in all patients. Changes consistent with increased iron deposition were identified in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra. Novel corpus callosum changes are also reported. We describe a cohort of patients with PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN). Although patients with PLAN have previously been diagnosed with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation, and Karak syndrome, they display a characteristic clinical and radiologic phenotype. PLA2G6 mutational analysis will negate the need for more invasive diagnostic procedures such as tissue biopsy.

[PMID: 24130795]
Mutations in PLA2G6 gene have variable phenotypic outcome including infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy, idiopathic neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and Karak syndrome. The cause of this phenotypic variation is so far unknown which impairs both genetic diagnosis and appropriate family counseling. We report detailed clinical, electrophysiological, neuroimaging, histologic, biochemical and genetic characterization of 11 patients, from 6 consanguineous families, who were followed for a period of up to 17 years. Cerebellar atrophy was constant and the earliest feature of the disease preceding brain iron accumulation, leading to the provisional diagnosis of a recessive progressive ataxia in these patients. Ultrastructural characterization of patients' muscle biopsies revealed focal accumulation of granular and membranous material possibly resulting from defective membrane homeostasis caused by disrupted PLA2G6 function. Enzyme studies in one of these muscle biopsies provided evidence for a relatively low mitochondrial content, which is compatible with the structural mitochondrial alterations seen by electron microscopy. Genetic characterization of 11 patients led to the identification of six underlying PLA2G6 gene mutations, five of which are novel. Importantly, by combining clinical and genetic data we have observed that while the phenotype of neurodegeneration associated with PLA2G6 mutations is variable in this cohort of patients belonging to the same ethnic background, it is partially influenced by the genotype, considering the age at onset and the functional disability criteria. Molecular testing for PLA2G6 mutations is, therefore, indicated in childhood-onset ataxia syndromes, if neuroimaging shows cerebellar atrophy with or without evidence of iron accumulation.