[PMID: 16757427]
Imatinib was developed as the first molecularly targeted therapy to specifically inhibit the BCR-ABL kinase in Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Because of the excellent hematologic and cytogenetic responses, imatinib has moved toward first-line treatment for newly diagnosed CML. However, the emergence of resistance to imatinib remains a major problem in the treatment of Ph-positive leukemia. Several mechanisms of imatinib resistance have been identified, including BCR-ABL gene amplification that leads to overexpression of the BCR-ABL protein, point mutations in the BCR-ABL kinase domain that interfere with imatinib binding, and point mutations outside of the kinase domain that allosterically inhibit imatinib binding to BCR-ABL. The need for alternative or additional treatment for imatinib-resistant BCR-ABL-positive leukemia has guided the way to the design of a second generation of targeted therapies, which has resulted mainly in the development of novel small-molecule inhibitors such as AMN107, dasatinib, NS-187, and ON012380. The major goal of these efforts is to create new compounds that are more potent than imatinib and/or more effective against imatinib-resistant BCR-ABL clones. In this review, we discuss the next generation of BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors for overcoming imatinib resistance.

[PMID: 22037271]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by the BCR-ABL oncogene. The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) from a reciprocal translocation, t(9;22) (q34;q11) causes a fusion gene, BCR-ABL, that encodes a constitutively active tyrosine kinase. Treatment of CML by imatinib is effective to control the tyrosyl phosphorylation of the protein related to the cell signaling. BCR-ABL mRNA is overexpressed in the minimal residual disease (MRD), known as an early sign of relapse. Between December 2005 and June 2008, we measured BCR-ABL mRNA levels in the bone marrow (BM) from patients by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) in Aomori Prefectural Central Hospital. Eighty-six samples from 26 patients were collected. Among the 26 CML patients, 11 patients (42%) were in the pretreatment group. Seven (64%) of the 11 patients achieved complete molecular response (CMR). In the post-treatment group consisting of the remaining 15 patients, 9 (60%) patients achieved CMR. The patients receiving imatinib at a dose over 300 mg per day required 13 (6-77) months [median (range)] to achieve CMR. On the other hand, the patients receiving a dose below 300 mg per day required 29.5 (11-84) months [median (range)]. When BCR-ABL mRNA was detected during the treatment course of patients with CMR, careful observation of BCR-ABL mRNA was useful for tracking the clinical course of patients. In conclusion, the BCR-ABL mRNA level was useful for monitoring the clinical course in 26 patients with CML.

[PMID: 22461032]
We conducted a review of patient medical records to assess treatment response patterns and prognostic indicators of response among chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan. All 1,063 patients selected met the following inclusion criteria: aged 18 or older and in chronic phase at the time of diagnosis, Philadelphia chromosome and/or BCR-ABL positive, received first-line treatment with imatinib, and not enrolled in a randomized clinical trial during the period of retrospective review. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to evaluate prognostic indicators of complete hematological response (CHR), complete cytogenetic response (CCyR), and complete or major molecular response (C/MMR). Among patients treated with first-line imatinib, CHR at three months, CCyR at 12 months, and C/MMR at 18 months were observed in 53, 53.1, and 57.8 % of patients, respectively. Among patients treated with second-line dasatinib or nilotinib, CHR was achieved at three months in 49 and 42 %, CCyR at 12 months in 32 and 23 %, and MMR at 18 months in 30.5 and 26.1 % of patients, respectively. Prognostic indicators of first-line response included age, race, and Sokal score. For second-line treatment, duration of first-line hematological response and choice of drug used were also significant.

[PMID: 23090888]
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm with an incidence of one-two cases per 100,000 adults and accounts for ∼15% of newly diagnosed cases of leukemia in adults. CML is characterized by a balanced genetic translocation, t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), involving a fusion of the Abelson oncogene (ABL) from chromosome 9q34 with the breakpoint cluster region (BCR) gene on chromosome 22q11.2. This rearrangement is known as the Philadelphia chromosome. The molecular consequence of this translocation is the generation of a BCR-ABL fusion oncogene, which in turn translates into a Bcr-Abl oncoprotein. Three tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib, have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the first-line treatment of patients with newly diagnosed CML in chronic phase (CML-CP). Clinical trials with 2nd generation TKIs reported significantly deeper and faster responses; their impact on long-term survival remains to be determined. For patients who fail standard-dose imatinib therapy, imatinib dose escalation is a second-line option. Alternative second-line options include 2nd generation TKIs. Although both are potent and specific BCR-ABL TKIs, dasatinib and nilotinib exhibit unique pharmacological profiles and response patterns relative to different patient characteristics, such as disease stage and BCR-ABL mutational status. Patients who develop the T315I "gatekeeper" mutation display resistance to all currently available TKIs and are candidate for clinical trials. Allogeneic transplantation remains an important therapeutic option for CML-CP harboring the T315I mutation, patients who fail 2nd generation TKIs, and for all patients in advanced phase disease.

[PMID: 21903771]
Imatinib induces a durable response in most patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia, but it is currently unclear whether imatinib reduces the leukemic stem cell (LSC) burden, which may be an important step toward enabling safe discontinuation of therapy. In this article, we use mathematical models of BCR-ABL levels to make inferences on the dynamics of LSCs. Patients with at least 1 BCR-ABL transcript measurement on imatinib were included (N = 477). Maximum likelihood methods were used to test 3 potential hypotheses of the dynamics of BCR-ABL transcripts on imatinib therapy: (i) monoexponential, in which there is little, if any, decline in BCR-ABL transcripts; (ii) biexponential, in which patients have a rapid initial decrease in BCR-ABL transcripts followed by a more gradual response; and (iii) triexponential, in which patients first exhibit a biphasic decline but then have a third phase when BCR-ABL transcripts increase rapidly. We found that most patients treated with imatinib exhibit a biphasic decrease in BCR-ABL transcript levels, with a rapid decrease during the first few months of treatment, followed by a more gradual decrease that often continues over many years. We show that the only hypothesis consistent with current data on progenitor cell turnover and with the long-term, gradual decrease in the BCR-ABL levels seen in most patients is that these patients exhibit a continual, gradual reduction of the LSCs. This observation may explain the ability to discontinue imatinib therapy without relapse in some cases.

[PMID: 21279819]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized by Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome with a chimeric gene BCR-ABL created by reciprocal t(9:22) (q34;q11) translocation. Variant Ph chromosome translocations involving chromosomes other than 9 and 22 are found in 5-10% of CML cases. We here report a CML patient who carries a four-way Ph chromosome translocation, t(9;22;15;19) (q34;q11;q15;q13). The patient was diagnosed in 1997 and initially treated with hydroxyurea. In 2002, treatment with imatinib, a selective BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), was started but Ph-positive chromosomes remained at the levels of 42-65%, indicating imatinib failure. In 2006, the point mutations of F359I and L387M were detected in BCR/ABL gene, which may be related to imatinib failure. Treatment with nilotinib, a TKI with high target specificity, was then started which resulted in durable major molecular response. Administration of nilotinib offered an effective treatment in a CML patient with variant Ph chromosome translocations and BCR-ABL point mutations after imatinib failure.

[PMID: 22761178]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a pluripotent hematopoietic disorder that is currently considered incurable. The tyrosine kinase product of the Philadelphia chromosome, P210 BCR-ABL, provided a pathogenetic explanation for the initiation of the CML chronic phase and is the molecular therapeutic target for the disease. Imatinib mesylate, an orally available BCR-ABL kinase inhibitor, can induce haematologic and cytogenetic remission of CML. However, imatinib resistance occurs frequently, resulting in relapse. New treatment strategies are focusing on resistant CML stem cells and the bone marrow stroma. The identification of novel pathways and mechanisms in the bone marrow microenvironment could significantly contribute to the development of such strategies. In this work, we used a high-resolution label-free MS(E) proteomic approach to identify differential protein expression in the CML bone marrow plasma of responsive and resistant patients. Oxidative lipid metabolism and regulation of the switch from canonical to noncanonical WNT signaling may contribute to CML resistance in the bone marrow compartment.

[PMID: 17379100]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by Bcr-Abl, a constitutively active tyrosine kinase that is the result of a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 and cytogenetically evident as the Philadelphia chromosome. Imatinib (Glivec, Gleevec), a specific small molecule inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, has become the standard drug therapy for CML, and has dramatically diminished the use of allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Despite unprecedented rates of complete cytogenetic response, residual disease remains detectable in the majority of patients, suggesting that imatinib fails to eradicate leukemic stem cells. In this publication, the current perspectives for CML patients treated with imatinib are reviewed, focusing on the results of both standard and high-dose therapy. Monitoring of time-dependent prognostic factors is reviewed. The reasons imatinib may not be able to eradicate the disease are discussed, and potential strategies to achieve disease elimination are presented. Lastly, resistance to imatinib and the potential of second-generation Abl kinase inhibitors in the setting of clinical resistance are considered.

[PMID: 11808344]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorder characterized by Philadelphia chromosome and resultant production of the constitutively activated BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. Imatinib (STI571), selective inhibitor of the ABL-tyrosine kinase, inhibits the activity of BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. A phase I and II study of STI571 showed remarkable cytogenetic effect in patients with interferon-refractory CML, offering new hope for therapy for CML. It will, however, require long-term follow-up data from phase II and III clinical studies to validate the effect of STI571 on survival. As therapy for CML improves, monitoring minimal residual disease will be important.

[PMID: 19641300]
The BCR-ABL fusion gene represents the hallmark of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and is derived from a translocation between chromosome 9 and 22. The majority of CML patients have a breakpoint in the major BCR region of the BCR gene giving rise to e13a2 or e14a2 BCR-ABL transcripts. Occasionally, other BCR breakpoints occur. The current report describes two e6a2 CML patients with imatinib treatment failure and unusual disease progression. One patient was Philadelphia chromosome positive and one was Philadelphia chromosome negative with an atypical BCR-ABL rearrangement, ins (22;9).

[PMID: 14744784]
Imatinib mesylate (IM) binds to the BCR-ABL protein, inhibiting its kinase activity and effectively controlling diseases driven by this kinase. IM resistance has been associated with kinase mutations or increased BCR-ABL expression. However, disease progression may be mediated by other mechanisms that render tumor cells independent of BCR-ABL. To demonstrate this potential, IM-resistant cells were found in chronic myelogenous leukemia patients with continuous BCR-ABL gene expression but undetectable BCR-ABL protein expression. These cells were unresponsive to IM and acquired BCR-ABL-independent signaling characteristics. IM resistance in some patients may be mediated through loss of kinase target dependence.

[PMID: 18205699]
BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib (Gleevec) are highly effective in treating human Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) in chronic phase but not in terminal acute phase; acquired drug resistance caused mainly by the development of BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations prevents cure of the leukaemia. In addition, imatinib is ineffective in treating Ph+ B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (B-ALL) and CML blast crisis, even in the absence of the kinase domain mutations. This type of drug resistance that is unrelated to BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations is caused by the insensitivity of leukaemic stem cells to kinase inhibitors such as imatinib and dasatinib, and by activation of a newly-identified signalling pathway involving SRC kinases that are independent of BCR-ABL kinase activity for activation. This SRC pathway is essential for leukaemic cells to survive imatinib treatment and for CML transition to lymphoid blast crisis. Apart from BCR-ABL and SRC kinases, stem cell pathways must also be targeted for curative therapy of Ph+ leukaemia.

[PMID: 14639002]
The Philadelphia chromosome found in leukemia cells of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients is produced by translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, resulting in expression of a chimera protein of Bcr and Abl kinase in the cytoplasm. Bcr-Abl kinase attracted oncology researchers as a molecular target for CML therapy, and a variety of small Abl kinase inhibitors were synthesized. STI571 (imatinib mesylate) was produced by modification of 2-phenylaminopyrimidine, a core structure of protein kinase C inhibitor, to improve selectivity, stability, solubility, and bioavailability. STI571 competitively binds to the ATP binding site of Bcr-Abl kinase and inhibits Abl tyrosine kinase activity. STI571 showed significant efficacy in the clinical study with CML patients at all stages: chronic phase, accelerated phase, and blast crisis. More than 90% of the patients showed good hematologic response to STI571. STI571 is also a potent inhibitor of a receptor-type c-Kit tyrosine kinase. Therefore, STI571 was examined for therapeutic efficacy against malignant Gastro-Intestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST), which are mainly caused by aberrant expression of a mutated c-Kit that is constitutively active without binding of a ligand, stem cell factor (SCF). More than a half of the metastatic GIST patients enrolled in the clinical study responded to STI571. Thus, STI571 is now used as a therapeutic drug for both CML and GIST in more than 80 countries worldwide. Certain point mutations in the ATP binding site were found to be a cause of resistance to STI571 in both Bcr-Abl and c-Kit kinases. Therefore, it would be better to make a precise therapeutic strategy with STI571 based on the gene analysis data. It is also expected that it will be possible to design an inhibitor to overcome such resistance by using the structural information on the mutants.

[PMID: 12755554]
The Philadelphia chromosome translocation (t(9;22)) results in the molecular juxtaposition of two genes, BCR and ABL, to form an aberrant BCR-ABL gene on chromosome 22. BCR-ABL is critical to the pathogenesis of chronic myelogenous leukemia and a subset of acute leukemias. The chimeric Bcr-Abl protein has constitutively elevated tyrosine phosphokinase activity. This abnormal enzymatic activation is critical to the oncogenic potential of Bcr-Abl. Initially, protein kinases were thought to be poor therapeutic targets because of their ubiquitous nature and crucial role in many normal physiologic processes. However, the advent of imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland), formerly known as STI571 and CGP57148B, demonstrated that designer kinase inhibitors could be specific. This agent has shown striking activity in chronic myelogenous leukemia. It also inhibits phosphorylation of Kit (stem-cell factor receptor) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor. In addition, it has shown similar impressive responses, with little host toxicity, in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, which harbor activating Kit mutations, and in tumors with activated platelet-derived growth factor receptor. The studies of imatinib mesylate provide proof-of-principle for using aberrant kinases as a therapeutic target and are a model for the promise of molecular therapeutics. This paper reviews the current knowledge on the function of Bcr-Abl and its normal counterparts (Bcr and Abl), as well as the impact of this knowledge on the development of a remarkably successful targeted therapy approach.

[PMID: 12783369]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is arguably the best understood of all human malignancies. Its origins in the hematopoietic stem cell can be traced to a reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 9 and 22, dubbed the Philadelphia chromosome, which is observed in essentially all patients. The resulting fusion gene, BCR/ABL, encodes an activated tyrosine kinase that can act alone to induce a CML-like syndrome in mouse models. These animal models have validated BCR/ABL as a target for the development of specific pharmaceutical inhibitors. The kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) is highly specific, effective, and minimally toxic, but may not effect cures as a single agent, particularly in patients with accelerated and blast-phase disease. Resistance to imatinib can confound therapy. Surprisingly, a high percentage of resistant cases manifest intact or augmented BCR/ABL signaling, suggesting that this oncoprotein, or signaling pathways emanating from it, remain viable targets. Combination chemotherapy is under active investigation, and among the most compelling strategies is dual treatment with agents that both target BCR/ABL signal transduction. BCR/ABL activates Ras, and compounds designed to antagonize Ras function called farnesyl transferase inhibitors (FTIs) have shown potent activity in vitro and in animal models of BCR/ABL-induced leukemia. Initial clinical trials in patients with refractory acute myeloid leukemia and CML in blast crisis have shown significant activity, suggesting that trials combining imatinib and FTIs are warranted.

[PMID: 22160058]
Until recently, pediatric Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph(+)) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) was associated with an extremely poor outcome when treated with chemotherapy alone, and only modest survival benefits were obtained with the widespread use of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The development of first-generation (imatinib) and second-generation (dasatinib and nilotinib) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that target the BCR-ABL1 fusion protein produced by the Ph chromosome revolutionized the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). The Children's Oncology Group (COG) AALL0031 trial showed that the addition of imatinib to intensive chemotherapy did not cause increased toxicity and resulted in 3-year event-free survival rates that were more than double those of historical control data from the pre-imatinib era. These findings create a new paradigm for integrating molecularly targeted agents with conventional chemotherapy and call for a reassessment of the routine use of HSCT for children and adolescents with Ph(+) ALL. Second-generation TKIs have theoretical advantages over imatinib, and are now being tested in Ph(+) ALL. The focus of contemporary trials is to define the optimal use of chemotherapy, HSCT, and TKI in Ph(+) ALL. In the coming years, it is anticipated that additional agents will become available to potentiate TKI therapy and/or circumvent TKI resistance in Ph(+) ALL. Recent genomic studies have identified a subtype of high-risk pediatric B-cell-precursor ALL with a gene-expression profile similar to that of Ph(+) ALL, suggestive of active kinase signaling. Many of these Ph-like ALL cases harbor chromosome rearrangements and mutations that dysregulate cytokine receptor and kinase signaling, and these leukemias may also be candidates for TKI therapy.

[PMID: 16850123]
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome is the cytogenetic hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The translocation forms a chimeric gene, bcr-abl, which generates BCR-ABL. This fusion protein constitutively activate ABL tyrosine kinase and causes CML. Imatinib mesylate is a selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor on ABL, c-Kit and PGDF-receptor, and functions through competitive inhibition at the ATP-binding site of the enzyme, which leads to growth arrest or apoptosis in cells that express BCR-ABL. Imatinib has revolutionized the management of patients with CML, and at a dose of 400 mg daily has become the current standard therapy for newly diagnosed patients with CML even when they have HLA-matched family donors. Although imatinib therapy has only a 5-year history, it is hoped that CML will be cured with this drug and with forthcoming second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors as well as by allogeneic stem cell transplantation in patients who have become resistant to these drugs.

[PMID: 20425400]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) arises as a consequence of a chromosomal translocation giving rise to the Philadelphia chromosome and Bcr-Abl oncogene. CML is a clonal disease of stem cell origin and an excellent example of a malignancy in which tumor-initiating cells may hold the key to disease eradication. The known molecular basis of CML has enabled the development of Abl-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib mesylate. However, the success of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, as rationally designed first-line therapies, has been tempered by problems of disease persistence and resistance. Residual disease has been shown to be enriched within the stem cell compartment and to persist at stable levels for up to 5 years of complete cytogenetic response. This finding has led to further searches for novel strategies aimed at eliminating these cells; such strategies may be essential in achieving cure. The most significant recent findings are discussed in this review.

[PMID: 22460758]
Imatinib mesylate is the sole BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved as first-line treatment of accelerated-phase (AP) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Indication was based on the STI571 0109 study, in which imatinib favorably compared to historical treatments in patients failing prior therapies. The relevance of these results to currently newly diagnosed AP-CML patients remains unknown. We evaluated the benefit of imatinib in 42 newly diagnosed AP-CML patients. In all, 16 patients had hematological acceleration without chromosomal abnormalities in addition to the Philadelphia chromosome (ACAs; HEM-AP), 16 solely had ACAs (ACA-AP) and 10 had hematological acceleration plus ACAs (HEM-AP + ACA). Major cytogenetic responses were achieved in 93.7% of HEM-AP patients, 75% of patients with ACA-AP (P=NS) and 40% of patients with HEM-AP + ACA (P=0.0053). The 24-month failure-free survival rate was 87.5% in HEM-AP patients, 43.8% in ACA-AP patients and 15% in HEM-AP + ACA patients (P=0.022). The 24-month estimate of progression-free survival was 100% in HEM-AP patients, 92.8% in ACA-AP patients and 58.3% in HEM-AP + ACA patients (P=0.0052). In conclusion, frontline imatinib allows favorable outcomes in HEM-AP and ACA-AP patients but appears insufficient for patients with HEM-AP + ACA. Broader-target and/or more potent BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitors alone or in combination may be considered in this setting.

[PMID: 21672900]
To summarize the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for treatment of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and provide practical information for patient management. Literature was retrieved from PubMed (2000-January 2011), using the search terms chronic myeloid leukemia and tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Abstracts presented at the 2008-2010 annual meetings of the American Society of Hematology and the American Society of Clinical Oncology, reference citations from identified publications, as well as the manufacturers' full prescribing information for cited drugs, also were reviewed. Articles evaluating the efficacy and safety of the TKIs imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib were evaluated. Focus was placed on publications supporting management of patients with CML in the chronic phase. Reports presenting clinical trial information of TKIs in development also were included. The discovery of targeted tyrosine kinase inhibition of BCR-ABL kinase dramatically changed the treatment of CML. Imatinib, the first TKI approved for treatment of patients with Philadelphia chromosome--positive CML, demonstrated significant superiority over the previous standard of care: interferon plus cytarabine. The newer, more potent TKIs, nilotinib and dasatinib, have demonstrated improved efficacy over imatinib as first-line therapy and provide an effective option for patients with resistance or intolerance to imatinib. To maximize efficacy of TKI therapy, close patient management, involving frequent monitoring of patient response, is essential. Given the importance of continuing TKI therapy, early recognition and management of adverse events are critical to optimizing outcomes in patients with CML. In addition to the safety profile and considerations of comorbidities, additional factors can affect therapeutic selection, including drug-drug and drug-food interactions. Research investigating new therapies, particularly for patients harboring the T315I mutation-which remains refractory to current TKIs-continues in the quest to improve outcomes in patients with CML.

[PMID: 11986206]
Molecular abnormalities caused by the hybrid Bcr-Abl gene are causally associated with the development and progression of Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph(+)) chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Imatinib mesylate (STI571), a specific Bcr-Abl tyrosine-kinase signal-transduction inhibitor, has shown encouraging activity in phase I and II studies of CML. Here, we describe the use of imatinib mesylate to treat 75 patients in blast-phase CML (median age, 53 years; 65 with nonlymphoid and 10 with lymphoid blasts), and compare the results with those of a historical control group treated with standard cytarabine-based therapy. Imatinib mesylate was given as oral doses at 300 to 1000 mg per day and was the first salvage therapy for 47 patients. The objective response rate was 52% (39 of 75 patients: 16 had complete and 3 had partial hematologic response; 12 had hematologic improvement; 7 returned to second chronic phase; and 1 had a complete response in extramedullary blastic disease). Response rates were not different between nonlymphoid and lymphoid groups. The cytogenetic response rate was 16% (12 patients: 5 complete, 3 partial [Ph(+) below 35%], and 4 minor [Ph(+), 34% to 90%]). The estimated median overall survival was 6.5 months; the estimated 1-year survival was 22%. Response to therapy (landmark analysis at 8 weeks) was associated with survival prolongation. Compared with standard cytarabine combinations, imatinib mesylate therapy was less toxic and produced a higher response rate (55% versus 29%, P =.001), longer median survival (7 versus 4 months, P =.04), and lower 4-week induction mortality (4% versus 15%, P =.07). Imatinib mesylate is currently being tested in combination with other drugs to improve the prognosis for blast-phase CML.

[PMID: 22895079]
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL) is triggered by constitutively activated BCR-ABL and SRC family tyrosine kinases.They account for the activations of multiple growth-signaling pathways, including Raf/MEK/ERK, Akt/mTOR and STAT5 pathways. The BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib is the standard treatment for Ph+ leukemia and plays efficacious role in CML. However, imatinib has few inhibitory effects on SRC tyrosine kinase with response rate of Ph+ ALL lower and relapse more frequent and quicker compared with CML. Previous studies showed that oridonin inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in many tumor cells. However, the anticancer activity and mechanism of oridonin in Ph+ ALL is unknown. To investigate the anticancer activity of oridonin, we examined its role in constitutively activated Akt/mTOR, Raf/MEK/ERK, STAT5 and SRC pathway, mRNA level of bcr/abl gene, cell viability and apoptosis in Ph+ ALL SUP-B15 cells. Furthermore, we detected synergetic effect of oridonin plus imatinib. Our results showed that oridonin inhibiting activations of LYN (one of SRC family kinases) and ABL and their downstream Akt/mTOR, Raf/MEK/ERK and STAT5 pathways, downregulated Bcl-2 but upregulated Bax protein and then induced apoptosis in Ph+ ALL cells. Oridonin plus imatinib exerted synergetic effects by overcoming imatinib defect of upregulating Akt/mTOR and LYN signaling. Additionally, we examined the effect of oridonin on the signaling pathways in the primary specimens from Ph+ ALL patients. Our data showed that oridonin remarkably suppressed activations of Akt/mTOR, Raf/MEK and STAT5 pathway in these primary specimens and oridonin with imatinib exerted synergetic suppressive effects on mTOR, STAT5 and LYN signaling in one imatinib resistant patient specimen. Additional evaluation of oridonin as a potential therapeutic agent for Ph+ ALL seems warranted.

[PMID: 12082821]
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is characterised by the occurrence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome (9/22 translocation) and the formation of a fusion protein--the BCR-ABL transcript with constitutive activation of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase and consequent changes in the intracellular signal transduction, which is responsible for the deregulated myeloid cell proliferation. STI571 (signal transduction inhibition number 571) is a potent and selective inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. In the chronic phase of the disease, normal peripheral blood values are achieved within the first month of treatment in the large majority of patients and in many patients also a cytogenic response within the following months. The results in the advanced phase are far less favourable, which is explained by the development of resistance owing to reactivation of the BCR-ABL signal transduction. Side effects are primarily nausea, vomiting, various rashes, oedema, most often in the periorbital region, and musculoskeletal symptoms, including muscle cramps. Perspectives for treatment with STI571 are described, as are combinations with alpha-interferon and other cytostatics with a synergistic profile.

[PMID: 21892537]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) accounts for 15-20% of adult leukemias but is very rare in children (2%). Fewer than 10% of CML patients are younger than 20 years. CML is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome or the BCR-ABL fusion oncogene. The objective of this paper is to present the monitoring of imatinib therapy in two children with CML by the BCR-ABL fusion gene expression assessment from peripheral blood with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. The 18 and six months follow-up of the patients included clinical examination, routine laboratory tests, bone marrow aspirate investigation including cytogenetic tests and the major BCR-ABL fusion gene expression measurement with qRT-PCR method from the peripheral blood. Patient No. 1 diagnosed with chronic phase CML showed excellent adherence to daily 400 mg imatinib treatment and achieved complete hematologic (CHR) and cytogenetic response (CCR) by three months and major molecular response (MMR) by 12 months, with lack of side effects due to imatinib. Patient No. 2 experienced severe hematologic toxicity, which necessitated temporary withdrawal of the drug. Transient non-compliance together with imatinib dose reduction has driven to treatment failure. In this case, mutational analysis is warranted. BCR-ABL fusion gene expression level measurement from peripheral blood with qRT-PCR method is an excellent tool in the follow-up of CML patients.

[PMID: 20875546]
Patients with splenomegaly and abnormally high leukocyte counts were first recognized in France, Germany, and Scotland in the 1840s. The only well-documented therapy in the 19th century was use of arsenic in one or other form, which did undoubtedly reduce the leukocyte count but probably did little or nothing to prolong life. These early cases were probably examples of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) (then called chronic granulocytic leukemia). In the 20th century important steps in unraveling the pathogenesis of CML were the discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome in 1960, and of the (9;22) translocation in 1973. There followed definition of the breakpoint cluster region on chromosome 22 in 1984 and the demonstration of the BCR-ABL transcript in CML in 1985. In the first half of the 20th century patients were treated predominantly with radiotherapy, and later on with busulfan, hydroxycarbamide, or interferon-alfa (IFN-α). From 1980 onwards allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT) became the treatment of choice for eligible patients. The era of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) began in 1998 and today the use of the original TKI, imatinib, has replaced SCT as initial therapy for patients who present with CML in chronic phase.

[PMID: 18974832]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of a constitutively active Abl kinase, which is the product of a chimeric BCR-ABL gene, caused by the genetic translocation known as the Philadelphia chromosome. Imatinib, a selective inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, has significantly improved the clinical outcome of patients with CML. However, subsets of patients lose their response to treatment through the emergence of imatinib-resistant cells, and imatinib treatment is less durable for patients with late stage CML. Although alternative Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been developed to overcome drug resistance, a cocktail therapy of different kinase inhibitors and additional chemotherapeutics may be needed for complete remission of CML in some cases. Chlorambucil has been used for treatment of B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin's and Hodgkin's disease. Here we report that a DNA sequence-specific pyrrole-imidazole polyamide-chlorambucil conjugate, 1R-Chl, causes growth arrest of cells harboring both unmutated BCR-ABL and three imatinib resistant strains. 1R-Chl also displays selective toxicities against activated lymphocytes and a high dose tolerance in a murine model.

[PMID: 23174189]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal malignant myeloproliferative disorder characterized by the expansion of hematopoietic cells carrying the Philadelphia chromosome (t 9.22). Our main objective was to assess the efficacy of imatinib in CML patients, measured by their survival. Over a six-year period (June 2003 through May 2009), 25 patients were seen regularly for CML at the Lomé Campus teaching hospital. Patients received imatinib after diagnosis and underwent regular laboratory monitoring (quantification of BCR-ABL ratio by RT-PCR). Patients' survival and treatment response were evaluated. Patients' mean age at diagnosis was 40 years (range: 9 to 72 years). Men predominated (17 compared with 7 women). Splenomegaly was found in 80% of cases. The mean leukocyte level was 188.71 g/L (24.4-350). Six patients (24%) had thrombocytosis with a mean platelet count of 491.15 g/L (108-2000). Six patients (24%) died after developing accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis. Estimated overall survival of patients at 6 years was 60%. Molecular biology monitoring detected a secondary G250E mutation with resistance to imatinib in one patient. Standard hematological side effects led to reduction in imatinib doses. The principal nonhematological side effects were weight gain and transient digestible disorders. At six years after diagnosis, imatinib was effective in treating patients with CML, even in sub-Saharan Africa. Mutation-induced resistance required regular molecular biological monitoring to determine the need to switch to later-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

[PMID: 22087818]
In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), BCR-ABL-mediated oncogenic signaling can be successfully targeted with the BCRABL- inhibitors imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib leading to complete cytogenetic (Philadelphia chromosome not detectable upon cytogenetic testing of bone marrow) and even complete molecular (BCR-ABL not detectable by PCR in peripheral blood) responses. However, CML apparently can not be cured by BCR-ABL inhibitors alone, likely due to treatment-resistance of CML stem/progenitor cells, which provokes a relapse of disease after cessation of therapy. Evidence from patients treated with allogenic stem cell transplantation or IFN-α points to an important role of anti-tumor immunity for durable control of CML disease. Data from multiple in vitro and ex vivo studies indicate that BCR-ABL inhibitors may also influence anti-tumor immunity. Varying effects on different immune effector cell subsets and of the different compounds have been reported, the latter being due to their particular and diverse potency and spectrum of target kinases. As multiple approaches presently aim to combine BCR-ABL inhibition with immunotherapeutic strategies to improve disease control in CML, immunomodulatory effects of the available BCR-ABL inhibitors may be of direct clinical relevance. Here we review the available data regarding the effects of imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib on dendritic cells, T cells and natural killer cells as important cellular components of anti-tumor immunity.

[PMID: 22052279]
Imatinib mesylate (STI 571; Gleevec; Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland) is an orally available tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets a constitutively activated BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase with additional inhibitory effects on platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) receptors alpha and beta, and KIT. It has revolutionized the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with Philadelphia chromosome positive chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and is also FDA-approved for KIT-positive advanced gastrointestinal tumor (GIST) and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. A wide spectrum of dermatologic toxicities has been associated with this agent, among which a maculopapular rash is the most common event. In addition, a variety of pigmentary abnormalities of the skin and mucosal surfaces have been reported. Hypopigmentation is a well-recognized adverse effect. In contrast, paradoxical hyperpigmentation has only rarely been documented. In this case report we describe imatinib-induced cutaneous hyperpigmentation and graying of hair occurring in the same patient with dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans treated with imatinib.

[PMID: 17382020]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome, which is associated with a balanced translocation involving chromosomes 9 and 22 to produce a fusion gene (bcr-abl) that gives rise to a constitutively activated Abl tyrosine kinase. This kinase led to the discovery of several small-molecule inhibitors, imatinib being the first and most successful of these. Resistance to imatinib results in some patients from Abl kinase point mutations. Overcoming imatinib resistance represents one of the biggest challenges facing clinicians in the modern management of CML. In this review, we discuss the current understanding of CML pathophysiology and mechanisms of imatinib resistance and how advancing this knowledge has led to the design of novel therapies in the area of blastic phase CML and Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia with previous imatinib failure.

[PMID: 12750692]
Imatinib mesylate (Glivec) is a selective inhibitor of bcr-abl tyrosine kinase, the product of the Philadelphia chromosome, which is the hallmark of chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). With imatinib, complete cytogenetic response (CCR) can be achieved in over 70% of newly diagnosed patients with CML. However, the optimal long-term management of patients who achieve CCR after imatinib is unknown. With longer follow-up, it is anticipated that some patients are likely to progress and become candidates for autologous transplantation. We studied filgrastim (r-metHuG-CSF) mobilisation of peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) in 32 patients who have achieved CCR with imatinib. Our data demonstrate that (1) the target CD34(+) cell yields of >/=2.0 x 10(6)/kg were attained with filgrastim 10 microg/kg/day, in 9/18 (50%) of patients during uninterrupted imatinib therapy, and in 10/14 (70%) when imatinib was temporarily withheld. The median CD34(+) cell yield per aphaeresis was 0.70 x 10(6)/kg (range 0.14-2.18) and 2.90 x 10(6)/kg (range 0.15-8.71) in the two groups, respectively (P&<0.005). (2) The cell yields did not correlate with the duration of imatinib administration. (3) There was no impact of the mobilisation procedure on the level of leukaemia as measured by serial blood bcr-abl levels using real-time quantitative PCR with either protocol. (4) bcr-abl remained detectable at low levels in the harvests in most but not all patients. In conclusion, filgrastim can safely be used to mobilise PBSC in patients who have achieved CCR with imatinib, but CD34(+) cell yields are significantly improved when imatinib is temporarily withheld.

[PMID: 22191306]
Imatinib mesylate, a selective Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has revolutionized the treatment of Bcr-Abl positive chronic myeloid leukemia and become the standard of care for this disease. The aim of this study was evaluation and analysis of cytogenetic response in different intervals and risk groups as well as finding association between pre-treatment characteristics and later probability of achievement of major cytogenetic response. We analyzed a total of 22 adult patients with newly diagnosed Philadelphia positive early chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia treated at our institution from June 2006 to December 2009. The median follow-up time for patients during treatment with imatinib was 25.7 months (range, 12-42 months). A complete hematologic response was achieved in all of the analyzed patients within 6 months from the start of the treatment. The major cytogenetic response rate was 81.8%, and the complete cytogenetic response rate was 72.7%. The patients with low or moderate relative risk had the rate of complementary achieving major and complete cytogenetic response of 75-90%. A multivariate analysis identified the following independent prognostic factors for achieving major cytogenetic response: the absence of splenomegaly, white blood cell count less than 10 x 10(9)/L, the platelet count less than 450 x 10(9)/L, the presence of less than 5% of bone marrow blasts and basophils, the absence of blasts in peripheral blood, the presence of less than 7% of basophils in peripheral blood. Patients who early achieve complete and major cytogenetic response as well as those with low and moderate relative risk have a higher rate of achieving and maintaining complete cytogenetic response. There are also characteristics of patients before treatment that may indicate the treatment outcome.

[PMID: 23942795]
Dasatinib is a dual Abl/Src tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) designed as a prototypic short-acting BCR-ABL-targeted TKI that inhibits BCR-ABL with greater potency compared with imatinib, nilotinib, bosutinib, and ponatinib and has been shown to have potential immunomodulatory effects. Dasatinib is approved for the treatment of all phases of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia resistant or intolerant to prior imatinib treatment and first-line treatment for CML in chronic phase. In this article, the development of dasatinib as a treatment for patients with CML is reviewed. This is a review of the relevant literature regarding dasatinib development in CML (2003-2013). Dasatinib demonstrates efficacy against most BCR-ABL mutations arising during imatinib therapy and is effective in treating patients with imatinib resistance due to other mechanisms. Randomized trial data show that first-line dasatinib provides superior responses compared with imatinib and enables patients to achieve early, deep responses correlated with improved longer-term outcomes. Dasatinib has a generally acceptable safety profile, with most adverse events (AEs) proving manageable and reversible. Cytopenias are commonly observed with dasatinib, and some nonhematologic AEs including pleural effusion have been consistently reported. Dasatinib is an effective treatment option for patients with CML.

[PMID: 19075651]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome, which results from a reciprocal translocation between the long arms of the chromosomes 9 and 22 t(9;22)(q34;q11). This translocation creates two new genes, BCR-ABL on the 22q- (Ph chromosome) and the reciprocal ABL-BCR on 9q-. The BCR-ABL gene encodes for a 210-kD protein with deregulated tyrosine kinase (TK) activity, which is crucial for malignant transformation in CML. The recognition of the BCR-ABL gene and corresponding protein led to the synthesis of small-molecule drugs, designed to interfere with BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase activation by competitive binding at the ATP-binding site. The first tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), introduced into clinical practice in 1998, was imatinib mesylate. Imatinib became the first choice drug in chronic phase CML, because of its high efficacy, low toxicity and ability to maintain durable hematological and cytogenetic responses. However, approximately 20-25% of patients initially treated with imatinib will need alternative therapy, due to drug resistance, which is often caused by the appearance of clones expressing mutant forms of BCR-ABL. Second-generation TKIs have provided new therapeutic option for the patients resistant to imatinib. Dasatinib is the first, second-generation TKI, approved in the US and European Union for the treatment of CML patients with imatinib resistance or intolerance. This drug is a dual SRC-ABL kinase inhibitor, active in most clinically relevant BCR-ABL mutations, except highly resistant T315I. Other second-generation TKIs include nilotinib, bosutinib and INNO 406. Apart from TKIs, the promising group of molecules is inhibitors of Aurora family of serine-threonine kinases. One of these molecules, MK0457, has entered clinical trials, and initial reports indicate that this compound could be active in disease associated with T315I mutation. Thus, wide spectrum of new agents, with different mode of action, is currently in clinical development for CML. It is likely that combination therapy will be the best therapeutic strategy in the future.

[PMID: 23666688]
The reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 [t(9;22)(q34;q11), Philadelphia chromosome] creates a BCR-ABL1 fusion protein that occurs in approximately 95% of cases of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), 15% of cases of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and 5% of adult cases of acute myeloid leukemia. The BCR-ABL1 protein is a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase that induces and maintains the neoplastic phenotype in these leukemias. PCR-based methods to identify and quantitate the tumor-specific BCR-ABL1 RNA have been shown to be an ultrasensitive diagnostic, prognostic, and monitoring tool for Philadelphia-positive leukemias. A novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), imatinib, has been confirmed as an effective targeted treatment in most CML patients. However, a significant minority of patients being treated with imatinib develop resistance to the drug as evidenced by rising BCR-ABL1 levels. The most common mechanism of resistance in these patients is the development of mutations in the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain (KD) that abrogate binding of imatinib. Although KD mutations are quite heterogeneous, the identification of the exact mutation site is clinically important, as some mutations, but not others, can be effectively treated with second-generation TKIs. One mutation, T315I, for example, renders the leukemia resistant to all first- and second-line TKIs. Thus, DNA sequencing of the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain in resistant patients helps identify those who may benefit from a change in TKI agents, or those who should be considered for other therapeutic measures, such as stem cell transplantation. We describe here a method for sequencing the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain in peripheral blood or bone marrow of CML patients.

[PMID: 16146726]
Chronic myeloid leukemia cells contain a BCR-ABL oncoprotein with an enhanced tyrosine kinase activity, which is considered to be the principal 'cause' of the leukemia. Though the precise mechanisms underlying the leukemogenesis remains enigmatic, the use of imatinib to inhibit the dysregulated kinase activity has proved remarkably successful in clinical practice. Imatinib was the first small molecule developed to inhibit BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase activity and its success introduced the current era of molecularly targeted therapies for a number of other malignancies. In patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia who develop resistance to imatinib, the Bcr-Abl signaling pathway is often re-established. This has led to the emergence of a number of alternative treatment strategies designed to target the leukemic cell which are resistant to imatinib.

[PMID: 17956348]
CML (chronic myeloid leukaemia) is a myeloproliferative disease that originates in an HSC (haemopoietic stem cell) as a result of the t(9;22) translocation, giving rise to the Ph (Philadelphia chromosome) and bcr-abl oncoprotein. The disease starts in CP (chronic phase), but as a result of genomic instability, it progresses over time to accelerated phase and then to BC (blast crisis), becoming increasingly resistant to therapy. bcr-abl is a constitutively active tyrosine kinase that has been targeted by TKIs (tyrosine kinase inhibitors), including IM (imatinib mesylate), nilotinib and dasatinib. We have developed various flow cytometry techniques to enable us to isolate candidate CML stem cells from CP patients at diagnosis that efflux Hoechst dye, express CD34, lack CD38 and are cytokine-non-responsive in culture over periods of up to 12 days in growth factors. These stem cells have been shown to regenerate bcr-abl-positive haemopoiesis in immunocompromised mice upon transplantation. We previously demonstrated that IM was antiproliferative for CML stem cells but did not induce apoptosis. Clinical experience now confirms that IM may not target CML stem cells in vivo with few patients achieving complete molecular remission and relapse occurring rapidly upon drug withdrawal. Our recent efforts have focused on understanding why CML stem cells are resistant to IM and on trying to find novel ways to induce apoptosis of this population. We have shown that CML stem cells express very high levels of functional wild-type bcr-abl; no kinase domain mutations have been detected in the stem cell population. Dasatinib, a more potent multitargeted TKI than IM, inhibits bcr-abl activity more efficiently than IM but still does not induce apoptosis of the stem cell population. Most recently, we have tested a number of novel drug combinations and found that FTIs (farnesyl transferase inhibitors) have activity against CML. BMS-214662 is the most effective of these and induces apoptosis of phenotypically and functionally defined CML stem cells in vitro, as a single agent and in combination with IM or dasatinib. The effect against CML stem cells is selective with little effect on normal stem cells. The drug is also effective against BC CML stem cells and equally effective against wild-type and mutant bcr-abl, including the most resistant mutant T315I. In association with apoptosis, there is activation of caspase 8 and caspase 3, inhibition of the MAPK pathway, IAP-1 (inhibitor of apoptosis protein-1), NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB) and iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase). Furthermore, BMS-214662 synergizes with MEK1/2 [MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)/ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) kinase 1/2] inhibitors, suggesting a second mechanism other that RAS inhibition for induction of apoptosis. Our intentions are now to explore the activity of BMS-214662 in other cancer stem cell disorders and to move this preclinical work to a clinical trial combining dasatinib with BMS-214662 in CML.

[PMID: 11870241]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is caused by the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase, the product of the Philadelphia chromosome. Imatinib mesylate, formerly STI571, is a selective inhibitor of this kinase. A total of 532 patients with late--chronic-phase CML in whom previous therapy with interferon alfa had failed were treated with 400 mg of oral imatinib daily. Patients were evaluated for cytogenetic and hematologic responses. Time to progression, survival, and toxic effects were also evaluated. Imatinib induced major cytogenetic responses in 60 percent of the 454 patients with confirmed chronic-phase CML and complete hematologic responses in 95 percent. After a median follow-up of 18 months, CML had not progressed to the accelerated or blast phases in an estimated 89 percent of patients, and 95 percent of the patients were alive. Grade 3 or 4 nonhematologic toxic effects were infrequent, and hematologic toxic effects were manageable. Only 2 percent of patients discontinued treatment because of drug-related adverse events, and no treatment-related deaths occurred. Imatinib induced high rates of cytogenetic and hematologic responses in patients with chronic-phase CML in whom previous interferon therapy had failed.

[PMID: 17292736]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) results from the neoplastic transformation of primitive hematopoietic stem cells, and has been classified as a myeloproliferative disorder. The hallmark of CML is the presence of a balanced translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), which is known as the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. This translocation results in the formation of the bcr-abl fusion gene, which, in turn, is translated into a chimeric Bcr-Abl protein with deregulated tyrosine kinase activity. Constitutive Bcr-Abl expression has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for the transformed phenotype of CML cells. CML is unique among human cancers in that a single genetic defect, the Ph chromosome, is responsible for the transformed phenotype. Since this discovery more than 40 years ago, our understanding of the clinical course, therapy, and prognosis of patients with CML has changed significantly. These changes have culminated in the emergence of imatinib, the first rationally designed, molecularly targeted therapy for human malignancy. In this review, the authors describe the molecular biology of CML and the development of imatinib as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of CML.

[PMID: 15739279]
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) has always been an ideal model to understand the molecular pathogenesis of human leukaemias and the way to cure them. This can be ascribed to the fact that CML was the first human cancer demonstrated to be strongly associated to the presence of a recurrent chromosomal translocation (the t(9;22)(q34;q11) that creates the Philadelphia (Ph)-chromosome) and to a specific molecular defect, the formation of a hybrid BCR-ABL gene that generates new fusion proteins endowed with a constitutive tyrosine-kinase (TK) activity, strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. The introduction into clinical practice of imatinib, (Glivec, Gleevec, Novartis), a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl protein as well as of a restricted number of other TKs, has not only produced a substantial improvement in the treatment of CML, but represents a major break-through in the perspective of opening a new era, that of molecularly targeted therapy, in the management of other types of leukemia, lymphoma and cancer in general.

[PMID: 12869662]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the Philadelphia translocation that fuses BCR sequences from chromosome 22 upstream of the ABL gene on chromosome 9. The chimerical Bcr-Abl protein expressed by CML cells has constitutive tyrosine kinase activity, which is essential for the pathogenesis of the disease. Imatinib, an ATP-competitive selective inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, has unprecedented efficacy for the treatment of CML. Most patients with early stage disease achieve durable complete hematological and complete cytogenetic remissions, with minimal toxicity. In contrast, responses are less stable in patients with advanced CML. This review highlights the pathogenesis of CML, its clinical features, and the development of imatinib as a specific molecularly targeted therapy. Aspects of disease monitoring and side effects are covered as well as resistance to imatinib and strategies to overcome resistance, such as alternative signal transduction inhibitors and drug combinations. Perspectives for further development are also discussed.

[PMID: 21672337]
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is a genetically associated malignancy of haematopoietic stem cells, characterized by a t(9;22) translocation that forms the Philadelphia chromosome and creates a novel fusion gene, BCR-ABL. Treatment with molecular-targeted therapy is usually initiated with imatinib, an inhibitor of BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. Imatinib resistance is, however, observed in some CML patients, especially in those with advanced disease. Through computerized literature searches, a systematic analysis was conducted to examine the efficacy and benefits of dasatinib therapy for imatinib resistant or intolerant CML patients in the chronic phase (CP), accelerated phase (AP) and fatal blast crisis phase (BC). In terms of major haematological and cytogenetic responses, this meta-analysis showed no significant differences in dasatinib treatment between myeloid BC-CML and lymphoid BC-CML patients with imatinib resistance or intolerance. Dasatinib therapy was, however, significantly more effective in improving major haematological and cytogenetic responses for CP-CML patients than for AP-CML patients with imatinib resistance or intolerance.

[PMID: 16988930]
Imatinib mesylate, binding to the inactive conformation of Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase and suppressing the Ph chromosome positive clone, has revolutionized the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients. Given the high rates of clinical and cytogenetic remission achieved, the molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL transcript levels by RT-qPCR has become always more important to assess minimal residual disease. Recently, recommendations for harmonizing current methodologies for detecting and measuring BCR-ABL transcripts in CML patients have been suggested. Studies of imatinib-treated patients have determined that the BCR-ABL levels measured early in therapy may predict durable cytogenetic remission and in turn prolonged progression free-survival or acquisition of resistance. The major mechanism of imatinib resistance is clonal expansion of leukaemia cells with mutations in the Bcr-Abl fusion tyrosine kinase. The early reduction of such mutations may allow timely treatment intervention to prevent or overcome resistance. We review current trends in the management of chronic myeloid leukaemia patients undergoing treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

[PMID: 12411298]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of a Bcr-Abl fusion protein with deregulated tyrosine kinase activity that is required for maintaining the malignant phenotype. Imatinib, a selective inhibitor of Bcr-Abl, induces major cytogenetic remission (MCR) or complete cytogenetic remission (CCR) in the majority of patients with CML in first chronic phase. However, thorough re-evaluation of cytogenetics in a cohort of patients in MCR or CCR demonstrated clonal karyotypic abnormalities in more than 10% of cases, some of which were clinically associated with a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Further analysis identified previous exposure to cytarabine and idarubicin as significant risk factors for the subsequent occurrence of abnormalities in Philadelphia chromosome-negative (Ph-) cells. To investigate if cytogenetically normal but clonal hematopoiesis might be present in other patients in cytogenetic remission, we studied X-chromosome inactivation as a marker of clonality by polymerase chain reaction analysis of the human androgen receptor (HUMARA). We find that imatinib restores a polyclonal pattern in most patients in CCR and MCR. Nonetheless, our results are consistent with the notion that targeted therapy of CML with imatinib favors the manifestation of Ph- clonal disorders in some patients. They indicate that patients on imatinib should be followed with conventional cytogenetics, even after induction of CCR.

[PMID: 23032801]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is an uncommon malignancy, the treatment and prognosis of which have dramatically shifted over the last decade. Characterized by a translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, known as the Philadelphia chromosome, small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeted against the oncogenic BCR-ABL fusion protein have changed this once fatal disease into the model of targeted therapy. This article will review the pharmacological and clinical data supporting the use of imatinib and the second-generation TKIs dasatinib and nilotinib, and the novel TKIs bosutinib and ponatinib.

[PMID: 21203982]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disease characterized by the overproduction of granulocytes, which leads to high white blood cell counts and splenomegaly in patients. Based on clinical symptoms and laboratory findings, CML is classified into three clinical phases, often starting with a chronic phase, progressing to an accelerated phase and ultimately ending in a terminal phase called blast crisis. Blast crisis phase of CML is clinically similar to an acute leukemia; in particular, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is a severe form of acute leukemia in blast crisis, and there is no effective therapy for it yet. CML is induced by the BCR-ABL oncogene, whose gene product is a BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. Currently, inhibition of BCR-ABL kinase activity by its kinase inhibitor such as imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) is a major therapeutic strategy for CML. However, the inability of BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors to completely kill leukemia stem cells (LSCs) indicates that these kinase inhibitors are unlikely to cure CML. In addition, drug resistance due to the development of BCRABL mutations occurs before and during treatment of CML with kinase inhibitors. A critical issue to resolve this problem is to fully understand the biology of LSCs, and to identify key genes that play significant roles in survival and self-renewal of LSCs. In this review, we will focus on LSCs in CML by summarizing and discussing available experimental results, including the original studies from our own laboratory.

[PMID: 23233201]
PECAM-1 (CD31) is an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM)-containing surface glycoprotein expressed on various hematopoietic cells as well as on endothelial cells. PECAM-1 has been shown to play roles in regulation of adhesion, migration and apoptosis. The BCR/ABL fusion tyrosine kinase is expressed in chronic myeloid leukemia and Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells, and its inhibition by the clinically used tyrosine kinase inhibitors imatinib or dasatinib induces apoptosis of these cells. In the present study, we demonstrate that PECAM-1 is tyrosine phospho-rylated in its ITIM motifs in various BCR/ABL-expressing cells including primary leukemia cells. Studies using imatinib and dasatinib as well as transient expression experiments in 293T cells revealed that PECAM-1 was phosphorylated directly by BCR/ABL, which was enhanced by the imatinib-resistant E255K and T315I mutations, or partly by the Src family tyrosine kinases, including Lyn, which were activated dependently or independently on BCR/ABL. We also demonstrate by using a substrate trapping mutant of SHP2 that tyrosine phosphorylated PECAM-1 binds SHP2 and is a major substrate for this tyrosine phosphatase in BCR/ABL-expressing cells. Overexpression of PECAM-1 in BCR/ABL-expressing cells, including K562 human leukemia cells, enhanced cell adhesion and partially inhibited imatinib-induced apoptosis involving mitochondria depolarization and caspase-3 cleavage, at least partly, in an ITIM-independent manner. These data suggest that PECAM-1 may play a role in regulation of apoptosis as well as adhesion of BCR/ABL-expressing cells to modulate their imatinib sensitivity and would be a possible candidate for therapeutic target in Ph+ leukemias.

[PMID: 12173333]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized by a molecular aberration, a fusion BCR-ABL gene encoding for aberrant tyrosine kinase activity, which is crucial in the pathogenesis of CML. In vitro, inhibition of BCR-ABL protein tyrosine kinase activity by a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Imatinib mesylate (STI571; formerly CGP57148B), successfully suppressed proliferation/survival of the BCR-ABL positive clones. In clinical studies, hematologic and cytogenetic remissions have been achieved in most patients with chronic phase CML; in accelerated and blastic phases of CML, STI571 appeared less effective. In the current study, the authors tested combinations of STI571 and cytarabine and homoharringtonine (HHT), drugs with documented activity in CML. The single agents and their combinations were studied for in vitro effect on proliferation of BCR-ABL positive cell lines KBM5 and KBM7 by 3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5 diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide assay and on primary patient-derived BCR-ABL cells by clonogenic assays. The in vitro additive, synergistic, or antagonistic effects of cytarabine and HHT with STI571 were then investigated by computer-assisted analysis using the CalcuSyn software. STI571 consistently suppressed BCR-ABL positive cell proliferation with a dose-effect correlation. In the model system used, STI571/cytarabine and STI571/HHT combinations were more effective in inhibiting KBM5 and KBM7 cell growth than each drug as single agent. These results were also verified in primary CML-derived clonogenic cells in semisolid cultures. In this experimental system, our studies documented additive or synergistic effects with STI571 plus cytarabine or HHT, supporting the future use of STI571 combinations in clinical trials in patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias.

[PMID: 17970609]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a hematopoietic stem cell cancer driven by the BCR-ABL fusion protein that arises from the translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22. The disease begins with an indolent chronic phase (CP) that can last for 3 to 5 years. If untreated, it progresses into accelerated phase (AP) and within a year, blast phase (BP). Survival at this point is less than 1 year. during disease progression, mutations and the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) appear (a process called clonal evolution). The only known curative therapy for CML is allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT). However, toxicity is formidable, with treatment- related mortality reported in the 30% range. Thus, effective therapy that maintains the patient with CML in CP with minimal toxicity is the goal for treatment of modern therapies. Because the preeminent mutation driving CML is BCr-ABL, therapies targeting BCR-ABL are the logical choice for disease-specific therapy. BCR-ABL inhibitors, such as imatinib, are proof that targeting specific genetic mutations associated with cancer yields a high degree of efficacy with minimal toxicity. This review will outline the evolution of therapy in CML. Preimatinib and imatinib-based treatment strategies, clinical efficacy, and the mechanism of imatinib resistance will be discussed. The discovery of the Ph and, subsequently, the identification of BCr-ABL revolutionized the treatment of CML. Cytoreductive chemotherapy, such as busulfan and hydroxyurea, was a mainstay of therapy to control white blood cell (WBC) counts; however, it did not modify the progression of the disease to AP and BP. The overall survival with CML ranges from 45 to 58 months in patients treated with cytoreductive therapy only. Treatment was advanced with the introduction of interferon (IFn ) immunotherapy in the 1980s. In some studies, IFn produced a complete hematologic response (CHR) in more than 50% of patients; however, its nonspecific immunostimulatory mechanism also produced severe flulike symptoms that limited tolerability. despite the significant toxicity, cost, and inconvenience of injecting IFN thrice weekly, median survival ranged from 60 to 89 months. Allogeneic BMT is the only known curative therapy for CML; however, treatment-related mortality from infection, bleeding, and graft versus host disease, age, and the availability of suitable donors limits its widespread use. Imatinib functions by competing with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for binding to the BCr-ABL tyrosine kinase. In the absence of ATP, BCR-ABL is not able to activate downstream effector tyrosine kinase molecules that drive wBC proliferation. The International randomized Interferon versus STI571 clinical trial was the first to document the efficacy of imatinib as a first-line therapy for patients in CP. More than 90% of these patients had a CHr. Toxicities associated with this therapy are low. response in patients with advanced CML is less pronounced than in CP and is shorter lived, with less than 30% of patients achieving a CHR. For patients with CML in BP, the only viable therapy is to attempt a temporary reduction in disease burden with a salvage chemotherapy regimen, such as VAC (etoposide, cytarabine, and carboplatin). The goal of this induction chemotherapy is to induce a second remission; then the patient may be considered for allogeneic BMT. The main toxicities seen with imatinib therapy are myelosuppression, edema, and myalgia/arthralgia. In many cases, imatinib dosage can be briefly halted or lowered while the toxicity is managed. Imatinib resistance may develop at any time and inevitably leads to disease progression. resistance is usually caused by mutations within BCr-ABL, decreasing the affinity of imatinib binding. next-generation kinase inhibitors are focused on the ability to inhibit these mutated forms of BCR-ABL. For the majority of patients with CML in CP, the standard of care is to maintain the patient in CP with imatinib therapy. Clinical trials have been extraordinarily successful, with 5-year survival rates greater than 90%. Allogeneic BMT continues to be an option for those who cannot tolerate imatinib or when CML progresses on imatinib therapy.

[PMID: 15899391]
Imatinib mesylate was designed as an inhibitor targeting the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase, the molecular counterpart of the Philadelphia translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11). We report on a patient with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) undergoing acceleration during imatinib treatment. Cytogenetic analysis revealed four different cell populations: 46,XX,t(9;22)(q34;q11),der(18)t(2;18)(p11;p11)[1]/47,idem,i(17)(q10),-der(18)t(2;18),+der(22)t(9;22)[1]/46,idem,-t(9;22),der(9)t(9;22),ider(22)t(9;22)[12]/ 47,idem,-t(9;22),der(9)t(9;22),+22,ider(22)t(9;22)x2[1]. FISH analysis confirmed the presence of these four clones. Moreover, 49% of the interphase nuclei contained either one or two clustered fusion signals, indicating a low-level amplification of the BCR-ABL fusion gene. With quantitative real-time RT-PCR, a BCR-ABL/G6PDH ratio of 0.8 was determined, which is comparable to that measured in the K562 cell line with a known BCR-ABL amplification and which is increased by more than about 60-fold compared to a CML at diagnosis with >80% Philadelphia-positive cells. We give further evidence that the genomic BCR-ABL amplification results in an increased level of BCR-ABL transcript linking two potent mechanisms of resistance against imatinib treatment.

[PMID: 15027317]
Imatinib mesylate is a new drug that can inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of Bcr-Abl, the receptors for platelet-derived growth factor receptor(PDGF) and stem cell factor, or c-kit. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is distinguished by the presence of a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 that results in a shortened chromosome 22, termed the Philadelphia(Ph) chromosome. As a result of the translocation, a fusion gene called the Bcr-Abl gene is created from two normal cellular genes, encoding a chimeric Bcr-Abl protein with a deregulated tyrosine kinase activity. The expression of Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for the transformed phenotype of CML cells. Imatinib can block the kinase activity of Bcr-Abl, thus inhibiting the proliferation of Ph-positive progenitors, and has shown activity against all phases of CML, though responses are most substantial and durable in patients in the chronic phase. An international phase III study which compared the efficacy of imatinib with that of interferon alpha combined with low-dose cytarabine in newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML showed the rate of major cytogenetic response at 24 months was 90%, including 82% of complete cytogenetic response. These results indicated that imatinib was superior to interferon-containing treatment as a first-line therapy. More than 10,000 patients worldwide, including those in Japan, have been treated with imatinib in clinical trials, and a lot of information has been accumulated on the use of this drug. The aim of this article is to review the use of this drug and the practical management of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia.

[PMID: 17364993]
Imatinib is one of the most recent medications used for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). It is an orally administered protein-tyrosine kinase inhibitor, an enzyme which is produced by BCR-ABL fusion which results from translocation of 9:22 chromosome (Philadelphia chromosome). Imatinib blocks proliferation and induces apoptosis of BCR-ABL-expression in CML. Many side effects produced by imatinib have been documented but its induction of hepatotoxcity has been rarely reported. Only a few cases so far have been reported in the literature and almost all were in females. We describe another case of hepatotoxicity due to imatinib in a 17-year old female with clinical, laboratory and histopathological changes. The case described here suggests that imatinib may also induce immune hepatitis, in some patients.

[PMID: 21061842]
Imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor with specific activity against the breakpoint cluster region--Abelson murine leukemia (BCR-ABL) tyrosine kinase has been developed for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Its hematologic and cytogenetic effects have been evaluated in a series of clinical trials. The aim of this study was to report hematologic and cytogenetic response in CML patients during the treatment with imatinib mesylate. A total of 21 patients were treated and observed from July 2006 to December 2008. The median time from CML diagnosis was no more than 12 months, so all the patients received previous treatment with hydroxyurea for which the median time was 3 months. The patients received imatinib mesylate in an effective oral dose of 400 to 800 mg daily, which was followed with peripheral blood counts, bone marrow examination, and cytogenetic studies at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. Complete hematologic responses were reported for 19 (90.48%) of 21 patients studied. Among 19 patients who had a response, 16 (86%) did so within 3 months. The best cytogenetic response rate at any time during the study treatment with imatinib mesylate, among 14 patients in which cytogenetic response evaluated was: complete cytogenetic response in 7 (50%) patients, partial cytogenetic response in 6 (42.9%) patients and minor cytogenetic response in 1 (7.1%) patient. No patients had progressed to accelerated or blastic phase. The most frequent adverse effects that seemed to be related to treatment with imatinib mesylate were edema and musculoskeletal pain; overall, most were mild. Only one patient discontinued treatment because of hematologic toxic effects. The results obtained in this study confirm that imatinib mesylate induces a complete hematological and cytogenetic response in a high percentage of patients with chronic-phase CML.

[PMID: 19064740]
Throughout its history, chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has set precedents for cancer research and therapy. These range from the identification of the first specific chromosomal abnormality associated with cancer to the development of imatinib as a specific, targeted therapy for the disease. The successful development of imatinib as a therapeutic agent for CML can be attributed directly to decades of scientific discoveries. These discoveries determined that the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase is the critical pathogenetic event in CML and an ideal target for therapy. This was confirmed in clinical trials of imatinib, with imatinib significantly improving the long-term survival of patients with CML. Continuing in this tradition of scientific discoveries leading to improved therapies, the understanding of resistance to imatinib has rapidly led to strategies to circumvent resistance. Continued studies of hematologic malignancies will allow this paradigm of targeting molecular pathogenetic events to be applied to many additional hematologic cancers.

[PMID: 12176881]
In chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), the development of chromosomal abnormalities in addition to the Philadelphia chromosome (clonal evolution) is considered by many to be a feature of accelerated phase (AP). Imatinib mesylate (STI571), a selective inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, has significant activity in AP CML. As clonal evolution could allow Bcr-Abl independent proliferation, we analyzed its impact on the outcome of 71 AP patients treated with 600 mg of imatinib mesylate. Fifteen patients had clonal evolution alone (AP-CE), 32 had AP features but no evidence of clonal evolution (HEM-AP), and 24 had AP features plus clonal evolution (HEM-AP + CE). Of the AP-CE patients, 73% had a major cytogenetic response, compared with 31% of the HEM-AP patients (P =.043) and 12.5% of the HEM-AP + CE patients (P =.007). Complete cytogenetic responses were seen in 60% of AP-CE patients, compared with 31% of HEM-AP patients (P =.19) and 8% of HEM-AP + CE patients (P <.001). With mean follow-up of 11.2 months, 35% of all patients failed treatment. The lowest estimated rate of treatment failure at 1 year, 0%, was seen in AP-CE patients, compared with rates of 31% for HEM-AP patients and 69% for HEM-AP + CE patients (P =.0004). After 1 year, 100% of AP-CE patients were still alive, compared with 85% of HEM-AP patients and 67.5% of HEM-AP + CE patients (P =.01). In conclusion, in patients with clonal evolution as the sole criterion of disease acceleration, good responses to imatinib are still possible. Once patients have other signs of acceleration, clonal evolution predicts lower response rates and a shorter time to treatment failure.

[PMID: 22519766]
Since the initial approval of imatinib much has been learned about its resistance mechanisms, and efforts have continued to improve upon BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy. Targeted therapy with TKIs has continued to be an area of active research and development in the care of acute and chronic leukemia patients. This article reviews current approved and investigational TKI treatments for chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), Philadelphia-chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph + ALL) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). There are now more potent BCR-ABL TKIs approved, which allow for additional options when determining front-line and second-line CML and Ph + ALL treatments. The T315I mutation is an ever-present challenge. Ponatinib, a pan BCR-ABL TKI, while still under investigation, is very hopeful with its ability to overcome T315I mutations in resistant CML and Ph + ALL patients. Because nilotinib and dasatinib have not been directly compared, at present we recommend selecting one or the other based on the side-effect profile, drug interactions, patient comorbidities, and mutational status. FLT-3 inhibition is of particular interest in AML patients with FLT-3 internal tandem duplication mutations; this type of targeted therapy continues to be studied.

[PMID: 20425355]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) was the first human malignancy to be associated with a single genetic abnormality, characterized by a reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 9 and 22 (the Philadelphia chromosome). The fusion gene that results (BCR-ABL) produces a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase that exists in different isoforms depending on BCR break-points. Imatinib mesylate is a highly selective inhibitor of this kinase, producing normal blood-counts in 98% of patients in chronic phase CML and disappearance of the Philadelphia chromosome in 86%. However, 17% of patients in the chronic phase will either relapse or develop resistance resulting mainly from one or more point mutations affecting at least 30 amino acids within the Abl kinase protein. This review focuses on the relevant biology of CML, imatinib mesylate resistance mechanisms, and the current status of the next generation of Bcr-Abl inhibitors.

[PMID: 12796373]
Imatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor with high affinity for the BCR-ABL fusion protein expressed by the hematopoietic cells in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Some patients with chronic-phase or accelerated-phase CML either relapse after an initial response or are refractory to imatinib, prompting us to evaluate the efficacy of dose increase in such patients. Twelve chronic-phase patients initially receiving 400 mg/day and 4 patients with accelerated phase initially receiving either 400 mg/day (two patients) or 600 mg/day (two patients) had their dose increased (14 to 800 mg/day and 2 to 600 mg/day) because of progressive disease (usually clonal evolution) or inadequate cytogenetic response after at least 1 year of therapy. Six patients had major cytogenetic responses after dose increase (3 complete and 3 partial). Two others had minor cytogenetic responses. Two patients with clonal evolution transiently lost the additional clonal aberrations. Almost all of the responses occurred within 6 months, and were typically 3-6 months in duration. However, 3 patients have continuing major cytogenetic responses of >18 months duration. Dose increase was well tolerated, with thrombocytopenia, mild leukopenia, and exacerbation of prior edema being the most common adverse events. Although increasing the dose of imatinib can benefit a subgroup of patients with CML with either an inadequate cytogenetic response or disease progression, our results suggest the majority will not have a sustained meaningful response, and that other options, such as allogeneic stem cell transplant or investigational therapies, also need to be considered at the time of dose increase.

[PMID: 22349810]
Imatinib is an inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase; however, resistance is common. Flavopiridol, a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor, down-regulates short-lived anti-apoptotic proteins via inhibition of transcription. In preclinical studies, flavopiridol synergizes with imatinib to induce apoptosis. We investigated this novel combination regimen in patients with Bcr-Abl(+) malignancies. In a phase I dose-escalation study, imatinib was administered orally daily, and flavopiridol by 1 h intravenous infusion weekly for 3 weeks every 4 weeks. Adults with chronic myelogenous leukemia or Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute leukemia were eligible. Patients were divided into two strata based on peripheral blood and bone marrow blast counts. The primary objective was to identify the recommended phase II doses for the combination. Correlative pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies were also performed. A total of 21 patients received study treatment. Four dose levels were evaluated before the study was closed following the approval of the second-generation Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Five patients responded, including four sustained responses. Four patients had stable disease. All but one responder, and all patients with stable disease had previously been treated with imatinib. One patient had a complete response sustained for 30 months. Changes in expression of phospho-Bcr/Abl, -Stat5, and Mcl-1 were monitored. No major pharmacokinetic interaction was observed. This is the first study to evaluate the combination of a CDK inhibitor and a TKI in humans. The combination of flavopiridol and imatinib is tolerable and produces encouraging responses, including in some patients with imatinib-resistant disease.

[PMID: 18533795]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the first human malignancy for which the promise of targeted therapy has come true. CML is invariably associated with a specific genetic lesion--the t(9;22) chromosomal translocation. As a consequence of this translocation, a BCR-ABL fusion gene is formed on the 22q- derivative (traditionally known as the Philadelphia chromosome) and the deregulated tyrosine kinase activity of the protein encoded by this gene has been shown to be both necessary and sufficient for initiation and maintenance of the disease. Imatinib mesylate, an orally available tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets Bcr-Abl, entered clinical evaluation in 1998. Its efficacy surpassed almost everyone's predictions, and the observation of high response rates and favorable toxicity profile associated with imatinib therapy led to its approval as first-line treatment for all newly diagnosed CML patients over an exceptionally short period of time. The 6-year results of the Phase III trial have recently been reported and confirm durability of responses and declining incidence of adverse events over time, although, at present, occurrence of unexpected side effects in the long term cannot be excluded. Although imatinib does not 'cure' CML and has to be administered chronically to patients, it has revolutionized both outcome and quality of life of CML patients.

[PMID: 17929114]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) was the first human malignant disease to be linked to a single, acquired genetic abnormality. Identification of the Bcr-Abl kinase fusion protein and its pivotal role in the pathogenesis of CML provided new opportunities to develop molecular-targeted therapies. Imatinib mesylate (IM, Gleevec, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland), which specifically inhibits the autophosphorylation of the Abl TK, has improved the treatment of CML. However, resistance is often reported in patients with advanced-stage disease. Several novel TK inhibitors have been developed that override IM resistance mechanisms caused by point mutations within the Abl kinase domain. Inhibitors of Abl TK are divided into two main groups, namely, ATP-competitive and ATP noncompetitive inhibitors. The ATP-competitive inhibitors fall into two subclasses, the Src/Abl inhibitors, and the 2-phenylaminopyrimidine-based compounds. Dasatinib (formerly BMS-354825), AP23464, SKI-606, and PD166326 are classified as Src/Abl inhibitors, while nilotinib (AMN107) and INNO-406 (NS-187) belong to the latter subclass of inhibitors. Of these agents, dasatinib and nilotinib underwent clinical trials earlier than the others and favorable results are now accumulating. Clinical studies of the other compounds, including SKI-606 and INNO-406, have been performed in rapid succession. Because of their strong affinities for the ATP-binding site compared to IM, most ATP-competitive inhibitors may be effective in IM-resistant patients. However, an ATP-competitive inhibitor that can inhibit the phosphorylation of T315I Bcr-Abl has not yet been developed. Instead, ATP noncompetitive inhibitors, such as ON012380, Aurora kinase inhibitor MK0457 (VX-680), and p38 MAP kinase inhibitor BIRB-796, have been developed to address this problem. This review provides an update on the underlying pathophysiologies of disease progression and IM resistance, and discusses the development of new targeted TK inhibitors for managing CML and the importance of future strategies targeting CML stem cells.

[PMID: 19254884]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), a genetic aberration that codes for bcrabl, which plays a key role in disease pathophysiology. The first oral inhibitor of Brc-Abl was imatinib, which also targets KIT and platelet-derived growth factor receptor kinase and has demonstrated improved outcomes when compared with interferon, the previous standard of care. Imatinib resistance and intolerance have been an issue for patients, and as a result, new therapeutic approaches have been evaluated. Dose-escalated imatinib (800 mg daily) has shown some limited activity in patients with imatinib-resistant CML, but the development of second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors has broadened the treatment options. Dasatinib is also an oral kinase inhibitor, but it has increased potency for Brc-Abl compared with imatinib. Dasatinib has demonstrated activity in all phases of CML and Ph+ acute lymphocytic leukemia and is approved for the treatment of adults in this setting. Recent phase III data have demonstrated that, in patients with chronic-phase CML, dasatinib 100 mg once daily is equally effective, with improved tolerability, compared with the previously approved 70-mg twice-daily dose. Nilotinib, which has been recently approved, has increased potency for Brc-Abl compared with imatinib and has demonstrated activity in patients with imatinib-resistant and -intolerant chronic- and accelerated-phase CML. As experience with these agents continues to mature, we might optimize the treatment efficacy and safety profiles by altering dose regimens.

[PMID: 17382013]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a progressive and often fatal hematopoietic neoplasm characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome. This arises from a balanced translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, creating the bcr-abl fusion gene. It is often stated that the only proven curative option is allogeneic stem cell transplantation, which is indicated for only a limited subset of patients. The Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib represented a major advance over conventional CML therapy. After imatinib treatment, > 90% of patients had a complete hematologic response, and 70%-80% had a complete cytogenetic response. With 5 years of follow-up, the data are very encouraging and exhibit a major change in the natural history of the disease. The understanding of some of the mechanisms of resistance to imatinib has led to a rapid development of new agents that might overcome this resistance. The outlook today for patients with CML is much brighter than that of a few years ago.

[PMID: 20945321]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a progressive and often fatal myeloproliferative neoplasm. The hallmark of CML is an acquired chromosomal translocation known as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), which results in the synthesis of the breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia (BCR-ABL) fusion oncoprotein, a constitutively active tyrosine kinase. The introduction of imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) that is specific for BCR-ABL, was a major breakthrough in CML therapy. Although most patients respond to first-line imatinib therapy, some experience loss of response (resistance) or require treatment discontinuation because of toxicity (intolerance). For patients with CML, failure on standard-dose imatinib therapy (400 mg daily), imatinib dose escalation (600-800 mg daily) is a second-line option. However, high-dose imatinib is not an appropriate approach for patients who experience drug toxicity, and there remain questions over the durability of responses achieved with this strategy. Alternative second-line options include the TKIs dasatinib and nilotinib. A substantial amount of long-term data for these agents is available. Although both are potent and specific BCR-ABL TKIs, dasatinib and nilotinib exhibit unique pharmacologic profiles and response patterns relative to different patient characteristics, such as disease stage and BCR-ABL mutation status. To optimize therapeutic benefit, clinicians should select treatment based on each patient's historic response, adverse-event tolerance, and risk factors.

[PMID: 17671641]
The identification of the Philadelphia chromosome in cells from individuals with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) led to the recognition that the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase causes CML. This in turn led to the development of imatinib mesylate, a clinically successful inhibitor of the BCR-ABL kinase. Incorporating the use of markers of BCR-ABL kinase inhibition into clinical trials led to the realization that imatinib-resistant kinase domain mutations are the major cause of relapse during imatinib therapy and the subsequent development of new inhibitors to treat CML patients. The development of imatinib validates an emerging paradigm in cancer, in which a tumor is defined by genetic abnormalities and effective therapies are developed that target events critical to the growth and survival of a specific tumor.

[PMID: 23285088]
The availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has considerably changed the management of Philadelphia chromosome positive leukemia. The BCR-ABL inhibitor imatinib is also known to inhibit the tyrosine kinase of the stem cell factor receptor, c-Kit. Nilotinib is 30 times more potent than imatinib towards BCR-ABL in vitro. Studies in healthy volunteers and patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia or gastrointestinal stromal tumors have shown that therapeutic doses of nilotinib deliver drug levels similar to those of imatinib. The aim of this study was to compare the inhibitory effects of imatinib and nilotinib on proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, migration and engraftment capacities of human cord blood CD34(+) cells. After a 48-hour cell culture with or without TKIs, CFC, LTC-IC, migration, adhesion and cell cycle analysis were performed. In a second time, the impact of these TKIs on engraftment was assessed in a xenotransplantation model using NOD/SCID/IL-2Rγ (null) mice. TKIs did not affect LTC-IC frequencies despite in vitro inhibition of CFC formation due to inhibition of CD34(+) cell cycle entry. Adhesion of CD34(+) cells to retronectin was reduced in the presence of either imatinib or nilotinib but only at high concentrations. Migration through a SDF-1α gradient was not changed by cell culture in the presence of TKIs. Finally, bone marrow cellularity and human chimerism were not affected by daily doses of imatinib and nilotinib in a xenogenic transplantation model. No significant difference was seen between TKIs given the equivalent affinity of imatinib and nilotinib for KIT. These data suggest that combining non-myeloablative conditioning regimen with TKIs starting the day of the transplantation could be safe.

[PMID: 16475128]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) originates from the hematopoietic stem cell and is characterized by the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11), which results in the BCR-ABL fusion gene on chromosome 22q-, also known as the Philadelphia chromosome. This chimeric gene codes for a cytoplasmic protein with constitutive tyrosine-kinase activity, responsible for cellular transformation and leukemogenesis in CML. The aim of this observational cohort study was to discriminate and quantify BCR-ABL transcripts in the peripheral blood of patients with CML who were treated with imatinib mesylate (Glivec, Novartis). Twenty-two patients were followed for six months during treatment. Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction was performed before treatment and after 3 and 6 months from treatment initiation. As compared with the third month, there was a significant decrease in BCR-ABL expression in the sixth month of treatment (P = 0.0002). At the sixth month, there was a significant difference in the levels of the two major transcripts of BCR-ABL, B2A2 and B3A2 (P = 0.0347), indicating that B2A2 may be more sensitive to imatinib. The results of our study indicate that imatinib is able to modify the natural history of CML, and raise the hypothesis that patients who express the B2A2 transcript may have a better prognosis.

[PMID: 12200353]
The translocation (9;22) gives rise to the p190(Bcr-Abl) and p210(Bcr-Abl) tyrosine kinase proteins, considered sufficient for leukemic transformation. Philadelphia-positive (Ph(+)) acute leukemia patients failing to respond to initial induction therapy have a poor prognosis with few effective treatment options. Imatinib is an orally administered, potent inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase. We conducted a clinical trial in 56 patients with relapsed or refractory Ph(+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; 48 patients) or chronic myelogenous leukemia in lymphoid blast crisis (LyBC; 8 patients). Imatinib was given once daily at 400 mg or 600 mg. Imatinib induced complete hematologic responses (CHRs) and complete marrow responses (marrow-CRs) in 29% of ALL patients (CHR, 19%; marrow-CR, 10%), which were sustained for at least 4 weeks in 6% of patients. Median estimated time to progression and overall survival for ALL patients were 2.2 and 4.9 months, respectively. CHRs were reported for 3 (38%) of the patients with LyBC (one sustained CHR). Grade 3 or 4 treatment-related nonhematologic toxicity was reported for 9% of patients; none of the patients discontinued therapy because of nonhematologic adverse reactions. Grade 4 neutropenia and thrombocytopenia occurred in 54% and 27% of patients, respectively. Imatinib therapy resulted in a clinically relevant hematologic response rate in relapsed or refractory Ph(+) acute lymphoid leukemia patients, but development of resistance and subsequent disease progression were rapid. Further studies are warranted to test the effects of imatinib in combination with other agents and to define the mechanisms of resistance to imatinib.

[PMID: 15791812]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematopoietic disorder caused by the reciprocal translocation between chromosome 9 and 22. As a result of this translocation, a novel fusion gene, BCR-ABL, is created on Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome, and the constitutive activity of the BCR-ABL protein tyrosine kinase plays a critical role in the disease pathogenesis. Imatinib mesylate, a selective BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was first given to a patient with CML in June 1998. Since then, it has continued to demonstrate remarkable efficacy in treating patients with CML. Based upon the results of early phase I and II studies, a phase III study (IRIS Study) that was randomized to first-line imatinib (400 mg/day) or to standard treatment with interferon+low-dose Ara-C, was conducted on 1,106 patients newly diagnosed (within 6 months) with chronic-phase CML. After median follow-up of 30 months, imatinib showed significantly superior tolerability, hematologic and cytogenetic responses (major cytogenetic response, 90%; complete cytogenetic response, 82%), and overall survival (95% without censoring allo-HSCT). Although imatinib is the first-line therapy and has changed the paradigm of CML treatment strategy, questions remain as to the meaning of cytogenetic and molecular response, curability, optimal dose, and relation with allo-HSCT.

[PMID: 16689455]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia is characterized by the Philadelphia-chromosome, a shortened chromosome 22 which is the result of a reciprocal translocation between chromosome 9 and 22. The fusion gene is called BCR-ABL. After transcription and translation the constitutively activated p210 BCR-ABL oncoprotein is formed. This leads to uncontrolled activation of the ABL tyrosin kinase. Deregulated cellular proliferation and diminished apoptosis of BCR-ABL transformed cells is the result. Expression of the BCR-ABL oncoprotein is sufficient and necessary for the development of a CML phenotype. Imatinib mesylate (Glivec) is a small molecule that binds to the ATP pocket of ABL and blocks downstream signalling events. Imatinib is very effective in the treatment of CML in all stages of the disease. Patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase CML were randomized to imatinib or to interferon plus cytarabine in the IRIS trial. Imatinib showed significantly superior tolerability, hematologic and cytogenetic resposes and increased time to progression. In patients with advanced phase CML, imatinib is less effective and response duration is short. Median overall survival of blast crisis patients is 6.9 months only. Additional BCR-ABL independent chromosomal abnormalities are common in advanced phase CML and result in resistance to imatinib. BCR-ABL kinase-domaine mutations are frequently found in imatinib resistant patients and confer diminished sensitivity to imatinib. Second generation, more powerful ABL kinase inhibitors, which are effective against most of the known mutations are currently tested in clinical trials.

[PMID: 22506320]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) originates from a hematopoietic stem cell carrying the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome and oncogenic BCR-ABL1 fusion gene. The first tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI) imatinib was introduced to clinical practice 10 years ago, and it radically improved the outcome of CML patients. The rare patients that are imatinib resistant or intolerant can be treated with second generation TKIs such as dasatinib or nilotinib. As second generation TKIs appear to be more effective than imatinib and well tolerated, they may become standard first-line treatment for CML. The major future aim in CML is curative drug therapy.

[PMID: 22985168]
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) acute lymphatic leukemia (Ph + ALL) are caused by the t(9;22), which fuses BCR to ABL resulting in deregulated ABL-tyrosine kinase activity. The constitutively activated BCR/ABL-kinase "escapes" the auto-inhibition mechanisms of c-ABL, such as allosteric inhibition. The ABL-kinase inhibitors (AKIs) Imatinib, Nilotinib or Dasatinib, which target the ATP-binding site, are effective in Ph + leukemia. Another molecular therapy approach targeting BCR/ABL restores allosteric inhibition. Given the fact that all AKIs fail to inhibit BCR/ABL harboring the 'gatekeeper' mutation T315I, we investigated the effects of AKIs in combination with the allosteric inhibitor GNF2 in Ph + leukemia. The efficacy of this approach on the leukemogenic potential of BCR/ABL was studied in Ba/F3 cells, primary murine bone marrow cells, and untransformed Rat-1 fibroblasts expressing BCR/ABL or BCR/ABL-T315I as well as in patient-derived long-term cultures (PDLTC) from Ph + ALL-patients. Here, we show that GNF-2 increased the effects of AKIs on unmutated BCR/ABL. Interestingly, the combination of Dasatinib and GNF-2 overcame resistance of BCR/ABL-T315I in all models used in a synergistic manner. Our observations establish a new approach for the molecular targeting of BCR/ABL and its resistant mutants using a combination of AKIs and allosteric inhibitors.

[PMID: 22893108]
Imatinib was the first BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor to become clinically available. In this study, we retrospectively evaluated the long-term efficacy of low-dose imatinib (final maintenance dose <300 mg per day) due to intolerance, in comparison to optimal-dose imatinib (≥300 mg per day) in patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia in the chronic phase. The Kaplan-Meier estimates of the median time to complete cytogenetic response, major molecular response, and complete molecular response were longer for 31 patients receiving low-dose imatinib (360, 1360, and 1420 days, respectively) than 74 patients receiving optimal-dose imatinib (170, 420, and 720 days, respectively). However, the differences in response shrank over time and progression-free survival were comparable between the two groups. These findings suggest that long-term treatment with low-dose imatinib is an acceptable alternative for patients with intolerance to the optimal dose.

[PMID: 16843101]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of a BCR-ABL fusion gene, which is the result of a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, and is cytogenetically visible as a shortened chromosome 22 (Philadelphia). Research during the past two decades has established that BCR-ABL is probably the pathogenetic pathway leading to CML, and that constitutive tyrosine kinase activity is central to BCR-ABL capacity to transform hematopoietic cells in vitro and in vivo. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate was introduced into the treatment regimen for CML in 1998. During the last few years, reports on chromosomal changes during imatinib treatment have been described. In this study, we evaluated the random aneuploidy rate with chromosomes 9 and 18 in bone marrow from treated and untreated patients. We found higher aneuploidy rates in both treated and untreated patients compared to the control group. In three patients who were treated with imatinib mesylate for more than 1.5 years, triploidy also appeared in some nuclei. To our knowledge, this is the first report on new chromosomal changes such as random aneuploidy and triploidy under imatinib treatment, but more studies are needed to investigate the long-term effect of the imatinib treatment on genetic instability.

[PMID: 19860186]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a paradigm for neoplasias that are defined by a unique genetic aberration, the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene. CML is also the best example for molecular target therapy. The development of protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor, imatinib, has entirely changed the strategy of therapy for CML. Nonetheless, many fields of pathogenesis for CML have not been elucidated, such as the mechanisms of blastic crisis, the causes of genetic instability including the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes, and oncogenic signaling pathways downstreams of the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene product. Herein, we review current knowledge on the molecular pathogenesis of CML.

[PMID: 22151181]
The cytogenetic characteristic of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is the formation of the Philadelphia chromosome gene product, BCR-ABL. Given that BCR-ABL is the specific target of Gleevec in CML treatment, we investigated the regulation of the catalytic component of telomerase, hTERT, by BCR-ABL at multiple levels in K562 cells. Molecular techniques such as over expression, knockdown, real-time PCR, immunoprecipitation, western blotting, reporter assay, confocal microscopy, telomerase assays and microarray were used to suggest that hTERT expression and activity is modulated by BCR-ABL at multiple levels. Our results suggest that BCR-ABL plays an important role in regulating hTERT in K562 (BCR-ABL positive human leukemia) cells. When Gleevec inhibited the tyrosine kinase activity of BCR-ABL, phosphorylation of hTERT was downregulated, therefore suggesting a positive correlation between BCR-ABL and hTERT. Gleevec treatment inhibited hTERT at mRNA level and significantly reduced telomerase activity (TA) in K562 cells, but not in HL60 or Jurkat cells (BCR-ABL negative cells). We also demonstrated that the transcription factor STAT5a plays a critical role in hTERT gene regulation in K562 cells. Knockdown of STAT5a, but not STAT5b, resulted in a marked downregulation of hTERT mRNA level, TA and hTERT protein level in K562 cells. Furthermore, translocation of hTERT from nucleoli to nucleoplasm was observed in K562 cells induced by Gleevec. Our data reveal that BCR-ABL can regulate TA at multiple levels, including transcription, post-translational level, and proper localization. Thus, suppression of cell growth and induction of apoptosis by Gleevec treatment may be partially due to TA inhibition. Additionally, we have identified STAT5a as critical mediator of the hTERT gene expression in BCR-ABL positive CML cells, suggesting that targeting STAT5a may be a promising therapeutic strategy for BCR-ABL positive CML patients.

[PMID: 20529808]
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a progressive and often fatal myeloproliferative disorder. The hallmark of CML is an acquired chromosomal translocation known as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) that results in the synthesis of the BCR-ABL fusion protein, a constitutively active tyrosine kinase (TK). The introduction of imatinib, a TK inhibitor (TKI) specific for BCR-ABL, was a major breakthrough in CML therapy. Although most patients respond to first-line imatinib therapy, some experience a loss of response (resistance) or require treatment discontinuation because of toxicity (intolerance). In patients for whom standard-dose imatinib therapy (400 mg/day) fails, imatinib dose escalation (600-800 mg/day) is a second-line option. However, high-dose imatinib is not an appropriate approach for patients experiencing drug toxicity, and there remain questions over the durability of responses achieved with this strategy. Alternative second-line options include the newer TKIs dasatinib and nilotinib. A substantial amount of long-term data for these agents is available. Although both are potent and specific BCR-ABL TKIs, dasatinib and nilotinib exhibit unique pharmacologic profiles and response patterns relative to different patient characteristics, such as disease stage and BCR-ABL mutational status. To optimize therapeutic benefit, clinicians should select treatment based on each patient's historical response, adverse event tolerance level, and risk factors.

[PMID: 12454739]
Imatinib mesylate (STI571, Glivec, Gleevec) is a powerful inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase activity of Bcr-Abl, the oncoprotein responsible for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The drug shows great efficacy in chronic phase, but is less effective in maintaining hematologic remissions in blast crisis patients. Our group has previously described several cell lines made resistant to imatinib. We now examine the question of cross-resistance to other chemotherapeutic drugs used in CML. Four paired imatinib-sensitive/resistant CML cell lines were assessed by caspase-3 and MTS assays for their proliferative response to cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), daunorubicin (DNR), homoharringtonine (HHT) and hydroxyurea (HU), either alone or in combination with imatinib. Primary blasts from advanced-stage CML patients refractory to imatinib therapy were studied by semi-solid media clonogenic assays. We found that these drugs are generally capable of major inhibition of proliferation of the CML cell lines, although differential responses to DNR and HHT were noted between some sensitive and resistant cell line pairs, implying that resistance to imatinib may confer a growth advantage under such conditions. The four drugs were also effective in preventing the formation of progenitor cell colonies from CML patients both before treatment with imatinib, and after relapse on the drug. Isobolographic analysis implied that these drugs will generally combine well with imatinib, and in some cases will be synergistic. We conclude that Ara-C, DNR or HHT, either alone or in combination with imatinib, are likely to be the best therapeutic alternatives in the management of patients who become resistant to imatinib monotherapy.

[PMID: 20607973]
Imatinib mesylate, a selective Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has proved to be most effective therapy of Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia. Imatinib induces complete haematological and cytogenetic response in high percentage of patients. The aim of this study was to identify potential prognostic factors before beginning treatment with imatinib associated with complete cytogenetic response. We analyzed 20 patients with newly diagnosed Philadelphia positive chronic myelogenous leukemia treated at our institution from June 2006 until May 2009. These patients were treated with imatinib mesylate in oral dose of 400 to 800 mg daily. Complete blood counts were performed every month, while serum chemistry evaluations and bone marrow evaluations including morphology and cytogenetics were performed every 6 months. Of the 20 patients analyzed in this study, 19 (95%) achieved complete haematologic response within three months. In all patients cytogenetic analyses were done and all have achieved absolute cytogenetic response. The best cytogenetic response rate at any time during study treatment among 20 patients was: complete cytogenetic response in 15, partial cytogenetic response in three and minor cytogenetic response in two patients. Among 11 observed base-line patients' characteristics five were independent predictors of a high rate of complete cytogenetic response; the absence of blasts and basophils in peripheral blood, the presence of less than 5 percent of bone marrow blasts, white blood cell count less than 10 x 10(9)/L and the absence of splenomegaly (p < 0.01). Our results showed that some pre-treatment characteristics of patients might be the cause of differences in treatment outcome. On the basis of this analysis, we identified several pre-treatment patients' characteristics to be independent prognostic factors for achievement of complete cytogenetic response.