[PMID: 8989517]
We have isolated cDNAs representing multiple members of murine groucho homologues, designated Grg for groucho-related genes. Among them, Grg3 appears to produce two transcripts. One of the Grg3 transcripts contains coding sequence for a complete Groucho protein homologue. The second transcript contains coding sequence for only the two amino-terminal domains of the Groucho protein, followed by a hydrophobic tail and a stop codon. We analyzed the expression of both transcripts in mouse embryos using RNase protection and in situ hybridization. Expression was detected during cell determination in the nervous system and in somitic mesoderm, overlapping Notch1 expression and adjacent to Mash1, MyoD and Myf5 expression. Thus, the expression pattern of Grg3 suggests a conserved role in the Notch signalling pathway to regulate expression of basic helix-loop-helix proteins and cell determination. Grg3 expression was also consistently detected in epithelial structures undergoing mesenchyme induction.

[PMID: 8955148]
The murine grg (Groucho-related gene) products are believed to interact with transcription factors and repress transcription, thereby regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. Most proteins in the grg family contain all of the domains found in the Drosophila Groucho protein, including the S/P (Ser-Pro-rich) domain required for interaction with transcription factors and the WD40 domain, which is thought to interact with other proteins. However, at least two Grg proteins contain only the amino-terminal Q (glutamine-rich) domain. We examined whether the Q domain is used for dimerization between Grg proteins, using the yeast two-hybrid system and binding assays with glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins. We found that Grg proteins are able to dimerize through the Q domain and that dimerization requires a core of 50 amino acids. Surprisingly, the dimerization does not require the leucine zipper located within the Q domain.

[PMID: 7916324]
The Grg gene encodes a 197-amino-acid protein homologous to the amino-terminal domain of the product of the groucho gene of the Drosophila Enhancer of split complex. We describe here the genomic organization of the mouse Grg gene. It spans approximately 7 kb on chromosome 10 and consists of seven exons. The 3' region of the Grg gene contains two functional polyadenylation sites that give rise to two transcripts that are differentially expressed among adult mouse tissues. The promoter region is very GC rich and lacks TATA box and "initiator" sequences. Primer extension analysis and ribonuclease protection assays show that Grg has a major transcription start site situated down-stream of putative binding motifs for the transcription factors Sp1, E2A, and PuF.

[PMID: 8867791]
The mouse Grg gene encodes a 197 amino acid nuclear protein homologous to the amino-terminal domain of the product of the groucho (gro) gene of the Drosophila Enhancer of split complex. Recent work has suggested that the gro protein functions as a transcriptional corepressor during Drosophila development. We therefore examined possible roles of the mouse Grg protein in DNA binding and in vitro transcription. No sequence-specific DNA binding activity was detected by polymerase chain reaction-DNA binding site selection nor was the glutamine-rich Grg protein capable of acting as an activation domain in an in vivo transactivation assay. However, depletion of Grg protein from HeLa nuclear extracts inhibited the in vitro transcription activity of the extracts. We suggest that Grg protein may interact with components of the basal transcription machinery.

[PMID: 8573724]
The Grg gene encodes a 197 amino acid protein homologous to the amino-terminal domain of the product of the groucho gene of the Drosophila Enhancer of split complex. Analysis with a polyclonal antisera specific for the Grg protein revealed that Grg is a 25 kd nuclear protein that can participate in specific protein-protein interactions. A null mutation of the Grg gene was constructed by gene targeting. Mice homozygous for this mutation completed embryogenesis and were born, but exhibited varying degrees of post-natal growth deficiency. No dosage-sensitive genetic interaction was detected between the Notch1 and Grg genes in mice heterozygous for a Notch1 mutant allele and homozygous for the Grg null mutation.

[PMID: 8892234]
The groucho-related genes (Grg) of the mouse comprise at least four family members. In Drosophila, groucho is one of the neurogenic genes that participates in the Notch signalling pathway. The Groucho protein interacts with Hairy-related transcription factors to regulate segmentation, neurogenesis and sex determination. Thus, by analogy to the Drosophila proteins, murine Grg proteins may interact with mammalian Hairy and E(spl) homologues (Hes proteins) and take part in a signalling pathway downstream of murine Notch. We have isolated murine Grg4 cDNAs and examined Grg4 expression during embryogenesis. Transcripts of Grg4 were detected in proliferating epithelial tissues undergoing mesenchymal induction, overlapping with Grg3, Notch1 and Hes1 expression. Grg4 was also expressed in the central nervous system and somites, but in cells adjacent to Grg3-, Notch1-, and Hes1-expressing cells. This distinct pattern of expression suggests a role for Grg4 in later stages of cell differentiation than for the other mouse neurogenic gene homologues.

[PMID: 20925119]
The human Transducin-like Enhancer of Split (TLE) and mouse homologue, Groucho gene-related protein (GRG), represent a family of conserved non-DNA binding transcriptional modulatory proteins divided into two subgroups based upon size. The long TLE/GRGs consist of four pentadomain proteins that are dedicated co-repressors for multiple transcription factors (TF). The second TLE/GRG subgroup is composed of the Amino-terminal Enhancer of Split (AES) in humans and its mouse homolog GRG5 (AES/GRG5). In contrast to the dedicated co-repressor function of long TLE/GRGs, AES/GRG5 can both positively or negatively modulate various TF as well as non-TF proteins in a long TLE/GRG-dependent or -independent manner. Therefore, AES/GRG5 is a functionally dynamic protein that is not exclusively defined by its role as a long TLE/GRG antagonist. AES/GRG5 may function in various developmental and pathological processes but the functional characteristics of endogenous AES/GRG5 in a physiologically relevant context remains to be determined.