[PMID: 19089249]
The Apert syndrome is a rare disorder of autosomal dominant inheritance caused by mutations in the FGFR2 gene at locus 10q26; patients with this syndrome present severe syndactyly, exophthalmia, ocular hypertelorism and hypoplastic midface with Class III malocclusion, besides systemic alterations. Most investigations available on the Apert syndrome address the genetic aspect or surgical management, with little emphasis on the oral aspects. To investigate the oral findings, including dental anomalies, ectopic eruption of the maxillary permanent first molars and soft tissue alterations, in subjects with Apert syndrome. Clinical and radiographic examination of nine patients with Apert syndrome, aged 6 to 15 years, not previously submitted to orthodontic or orthognathic treatment. Dental anomalies were present in all patients, with one to eight anomalies per individual. The most frequent anomalies were tooth agenesis, mainly affecting maxillary canines, and enamel opacities (44.4% for both). Ectopic eruption of maxillary first molars was found in 33.3% of patients; lateral palatal swellings were observed in 88.8% of patients. The occurrence of typical lateral palatal swellings agrees with the literature. The high prevalence of dental anomalies and ectopic eruption may suggest a possible etiologic relationship with the syndrome.

[PMID: 11057397]
A fourteen years old girl showed the classic signs of acrocephalosyndactyly I: dysostosis craniofacialis with hypertelorism, exophthalmus, strabism, amblyopia and cleft palate as well as syndactyly of the fingers and toes. The feet showed on both side a 6 cm long horny band. Since the twelfth year of life, she had suffered from papulo-pustular acne with many comedomes. Her menstruation started one year later. Intellectual development was normal. At time of her birth, her father was 54 years old, and her mother 36 years old. Two elder siblings are healthy. The inheritance of acrocephalosyndactyly I is usually autosomal dominant, but sporadic cases are frequent.

[PMID: 16354263]
Apert syndrome, or acrocephalosyndactyly, is characterized by craniosynostosis and early epiphyseal closure resulting in various deformities of the skull, hands, and feet. Typically a sporadic condition, autosomal dominant inheritance with complete penetrance has been known to occur. Most adolescents with the disorder are prone to the development of severe pustular facial and truncal acne, with extension to the upper arms and forearm. We report twin brothers with Apert syndrome who, after 2 years of standard management by their pediatrician, were referred for management of complicated acne. In our patients there were a constellation of findings consistent with the disorder and, of importance to this report, significant dermatological manifestations. On presentation, each brother was found to have acne vulgaris of a different stage. Our patients were refractory to conventional treatment for acne but one required and had a significant response to isotretinoin. The risk/benefit ratio in treating acne lesions with isotretinoin in a teenager with Apert syndrome is reviewed.

[PMID: 3359672]
This report presents the first example of male transmission of Apert acrocephalosyndactyly syndrome. Female transmission has been reported in the five previous well-documented cases of dominant inheritance of the syndrome.

[PMID: 16440883]
The Apert syndrome is characterized by craniosynostosis and syndactyly of hands and feet. Although most cases are sporadic, an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance is well documented. Two mutations in the FGFR2 gene (Ser252Trp and Pro253Arg) account for most of the cases. We report a patient with a rare form of Apert syndrome with polydactyly. The proposita has turribrachycephaly. complete syndactyly of 2nd to 5th digits ("mitten hands" and cutaneous fusion of all toes). The X-rays revealed craniosynostosis of the coronal suture and preaxial polydactyly of hands and feet with distal bony fusion. Molecular analysis found a C755G transversion (Ser252Trp) in the FGFR2 gene. Only eight patients with Apert syndrome and preaxial polydactyly have been reported and this is the first case in which molecular diagnosis is available. On the basis of the molecular findings in this patient, polydactyly should be considered part of the spectrum of abnormalities in the Apert syndrome. This assertion would establish the need for a new molecular classification of the acrocephalopolysyndactylies.

[PMID: 2061407]
Of 119 patients with the Apert syndrome, 94 pedigrees are available for study. Selected family histories and recorded events during pregnancy are also reported. The sex ratio is 1:1 (60 males, 59 females). All 94 pedigrees except one (an affected father and daughter) represent sporadic instances. Combining our cases with those available in the literature, only nine familial instances are known to date. The familial cases, the equal number of affected males and females, and the increased paternal age in sporadic cases strongly suggest autosomal dominant inheritance. The rarity of familial instances can be explained by reduced genetic fitness of affected individuals because severe malformations and the presence of mental deficiency, found in many cases, diminish desirability as mates. The variability of the syndrome has been defined mainly on the basis of sporadic cases. High resolution banding was normal in five recently studied cases.

[PMID: 8830082]
We report two observations of antenatal diagnosis of Apert syndrome. This uncommon genetic disorder suggest an autosomal dominant inheritance, but almost all cases described are sporadic; the responsible gene is yet not located. Ultrasonographic detection is difficult, based on the following signs: brachycephalic skull (unusually detected), flat facial profile with a nasal bridge depression, tall appearance of the forehead (inconstant), total bilateral and symmetrical syndactylies of the hands and feet. At last we present our arguments for medical abortion, when this disorder is detected.