[PMID: 20132664]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disease, associated with congenital anomalies and a predisposition to cancers. FA patients exhibit spontaneous chromosome breakage and FA cells are sensitive to DNA interstrand crosslink agents and expresses high frequency of chromosome breakage. Recently 13 genes have been shown to be involved with the FA phenotype. We have carried out a detailed study in clinically diagnosed FA patients in an Indian population. Thirty three patients were clinically diagnosed with FA and had aplastic anemia and bleeding abnormalities. The genetic analysis revealed a significantly (P<0.0001) high frequency (36.4%) of parental consanguinity in FA patients compared to controls (3.33%). Chromosomal analysis revealed spontaneous chromosome breakage in 63.64% FA patients. The mitomycin C and diepoxybutane induced cultures showed a significantly (P<0.001) high frequency of chromosome breakage and radial formation compared to controls. Among 33 patients, nine (27.27%) patients developed malignancies and chromosomal abnormalities were detected in five (55.5%) patients bone marrow cells including monosomy 5 and 7, trisomy 10, der(1q) and inv(7). Cytogenetic investigation is important in aplastic anemia to rule out FA. The clinical presentation and the associated high frequency of consanguinity in FA, and the molecular analysis are complementary in the study of an Indian population.

[PMID: 8876687]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is characterized at the cellular level by a high frequency of spontaneous chromosomal aberrations; crosslinking agents cause an abnormal increase in the frequency of chromosomal damage, and semiconservative DNA synthesis is severely inhibited. Deoxyribonucleotides are needed in both semiconservative and repair DNA synthesis. To investigate the involvement of deoxyribonucleotide pools in the inhibition of DNA synthesis in FA, we evaluated the effect on FA lymphocytes of hydroxyurea (HU), an inhibitor of ribonucleotide reductase which is known to alter the intracellular levels of deoxyribonucleotides. To achieve this goal, lymphocyte cultures of 4 FA patients and 4 normal individuals were used. Cultures were treated with HU and/or mitomycin C and normal human plasma. All cultures were processed to detect the number of DNA synthesizing nuclei by autoradiography. Scoring of 2000 nuclei for each kind of culture every 6 h in the last 24 h of incubation showed that, in long incubation periods, DNA synthesis in FA is largely inhibited by HU and this hypersensitivity may be partially decreased by addition of normal human plasma. It is known that recovery from damage induced by HU involves several enzymes such as flavin oxido-reductase, superoxide dismutase and catalase which are involved in the production or scavenging of O2 radicals; FA cells are deficient in the detoxification of oxygen and this could explain the response of FA cells to HU.

[PMID: 7011307]
Though the roles of some specific DNA lesions in the production of chromosomal aberrations is clearly established, those of others remain unclear. While the study of aberration production in human genetic DNA repair deficiency diseases has been extremely rewarding already, eukaryotic repair systems are obviously complex, and one is tempted to feel that such studies may have raised as many questions as they have provided answers. For example, the "standard" sort of xeroderma pigmentosum is chromosomally sensitive to ultraviolet light and to those chemical agents inducing ultraviolet-type DNA repair. But both it and the variant form have been reported to also be sensitive to the crosslinking agent mitomycin C in one study [18], implying a common step or steps in the repair of pyrimidine cyclobutane dimers and DNA crosslinks. However, just to complicate matters, another study of chromosomal aberration production in xeroderma pigmentosum cells had found them no more sensitive to mitomycin C than normal cells [50]. Similarly, Fanconi's anemia cells, which are chromosomally sensitive to crosslinking agents, and appear to be defective in the "unhooking" of linked polynucleotide strands [15, 16, 49, 51], are reported to be chromosomally sensitive to ethyl methanesulfonate as well [29], and to be sensitive to ionizing radiation [7, 19, ]0], again implying overlapping repair systems. It seems certain that further study of chromosomal aberration production in repair deficient cells by agents inducing various DNA lesions will reveal even greater complexity in eukaryotic DNA repair systems and their role in chromosomal aberration production. Nevertheless, there seems hope, at least, that such studies may also ultimately lead to a complete understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved.

[PMID: 7116934]
Cells from patients wtih Fanconi's anemia are unusually sensitive to agents which are capable of crosslinking DNA. This increased sensitivity can be detected both by cytogenetic and flow cytometric methods. An elevated frequency of chromosome aberrations, which is further exaggerated by exposure of cells to DNA crosslinking agents, is a general feature of Fanconi's anemia. Information about the formation of sister chromatid exchanges in this disease is less consistent. Cytogenetic analysis of cells from patients with Fanconi's anemia can be compromised by a low mitotic index. This is reflected in an accumulation of cells In the G2 phase of the cycle, after exposure to the bifunctional alkylating agent, mitomycin C. New methods for differentiating individuals with Fanconi's anemia from unaffected individuals should be of empirical use and might also facilitate mechanistic studies of this disease.

[PMID: 21568838]
Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal disorder that causes genome instability. FA patients suffer developmental abnormalities, early-onset bone marrow failure, and a predisposition to cancer. The disease is manifested by defects in DNA repair, hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents, and a high degree of chromosomal aberrations. The FA pathway comprises 13 disease-causing genes involved in maintaining genomic stability. The fast pace of study of the novel DNA damage network has led to the constant discovery of new FA-like genes involved in the pathway that when mutated lead to similar disorders. A majority of the FA proteins act as signal transducers and scaffolding proteins to employ other pathways to repair DNA. This review discusses what is known about the FA proteins and other recently linked FA-like proteins. The goal is to clarify how the proteins work together to carry out interstrand crosslink repair and homologous recombination-mediated repair of damaged DNA.

[PMID: 16115458]
Fanconi anemia (FA), a rare inherited disorder, exhibits a complex phenotype including progressive bone marrow failure, congenital malformations and increased risk of cancers, mainly acute myeloid leukaemia. At the cellular level, FA is characterized by hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents and by high frequencies of induced chromosomal aberrations, a property used for diagnosis. FA results from mutations in one of the eleven FANC (FANCA to FANCJ) genes. Nine of them have been identified. In addition, FANCD1 gene has been shown to be identical to BRCA2, one of the two breast cancer susceptibility genes. Seven of the FANC proteins form a complex, which exists in four different forms depending of its subcellular localisation. Four FANC proteins (D1(BRCA2), D2, I and J) are not associated to the complex. The presence of the nuclear form of the FA core complex is necessary for the mono-ubiquitinylation of FANCD2 protein, a modification required for its re-localization to nuclear foci, likely to be sites of DNA repair. A clue towards understanding the molecular function of the FANC genes comes from the recently identified connection of FANC to the BRCA1, ATM, NBS1 and ATR genes. Two of the FANC proteins (A and D2) directly interact with BRCA1, which in turn interacts with the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complex, which is one of the key components in the mechanisms involved in the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks (DSB). Moreover, ATM, a protein kinase that plays a central role in the network of DSB signalling, phosphorylates in vitro and in vivo FANCD2 in response to ionising radiations. Moreover, the NBS1 protein and the monoubiquitinated form of FANCD2 seem to act together in response to DNA crosslinking agents. Taken together with the previously reported impaired DSB and DNA interstrand crosslinks repair in FA cells, the connection of FANC genes to the ATM, ATR, NBS1 and BRCA1 links the FANC genes function to the finely orchestrated network involved in the sensing, signalling and repair of DNA replication-blocking lesions.

[PMID: 8058745]
Features of chromosomal aberrations, hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents, and predisposition to malignancy have suggested a fundamental anomaly of DNA repair in Fanconi anemia. The function of the recently isolated FACC (Fanconi anemia group C complementing) gene for a subset of this disorder is not yet known. The notion that FACC plays a direct role in DNA repair would predict that the polypeptide should reside in the nucleus. In this study, a polyclonal antiserum raised against FACC was used to determine the subcellular location of the polypeptide. Immunofluorescence and subcellular fractionation studies of human cell lines as well as COS-7 cells transiently expressing human FACC showed that the protein was localized primarily to the cytoplasm under steady-state conditions, transit through the cell cycle, and exposure to crosslinking or cytotoxic agents. However, placement of a nuclear localization signal from the simian virus 40 large tumor antigen at the amino terminus of FACC directed the hybrid protein to the nuclei of transfected COS-7 cells. These observations suggest an indirect role for FACC in regulating DNA repair in this group of Fanconi anemia.