[PMID: 25543845]
Given their pivotal role in autoantibody production, B-cells have become an attractive therapeutic target in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Belimumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody against B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), a B-cell survival factor, was licensed in 2011 for the treatment of autoantibody-positive SLE. The BLISS-52 and BLISS-76 Phase III trials successfully demonstrated that belimumab (10 mg/kg) with standard therapy significantly decreased disease activity in SLE patients compared to placebo with standard therapy. Overall, belimumab has been found to be safe and well tolerated. While the BLISS-52 and BLISS-76 studies are the largest clinical trials in SLE to date, they mainly focused on musculoskeletal, mucocutaneous, hematologic and general constitutional features of the disease. Patients with severe lupus nephritis and severe central nervous system disease were excluded from these trials. Studies of belimumab in lupus nephritis are ongoing that may clarify the role of this agent in the clinical management of SLE.

[PMID: 27587201]
There have been few changes over the last 50 years in the treatment of Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), using non-specific anti-inflammatory agents such as: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs along with the immune cell modulating agent hydroxychloroquine for mild disease, and broad spectrum immunosuppressants plus antiinflammatories such as corticosteroids, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, or mycophenolate during flares or severe disease with organ involvement. In some patients, the response is inadequate and side effects appear from mild unpleasant up to severe toxicity. Drug metabolism and clearance may be severely compromised. Therefore, it is a priority to develop better treatments with fewer adverse events that can be used at different stages of disease activity. In recent years, a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family, soluble human B Lymphocyte Stimulator protein (BLyS), also referred to as B-cell activating factor (BAFF) and TNFSF13B has been studied extensively. This protein is synthesized by myeloid cell lines, specifically interacts with B lymphocytes and increases their life-span. BlyS plays a key role in the selection, maturation and survival of B cells and it has a significant role in the pathogenesis of SLE. In this review, we analyzed the role of BLyS as a diagnostic/prognostic marker and/or therapeutic target for lupus patients, and the different clinical studies published using belimumab.

[PMID: 23568179]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex heterogeneous disease, posing challenges to clinical trials. As in other autoimmune diseases, B-lymphocytes play a central role in lupus pathogenesis. The finding that selection and survival of B cells are controlled by a variety of signals, including those provided by the longevity factor BAFF (B-cell activating factor), also called BLyS (B-lymphocyte stimulator), led to preclinical trials that revealed that BAFF represents a promising therapeutic target for human lupus. Belimumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody directed against BAFF. Lessons learned from early clinical trials led to improved methods and success of phase III trials, with recruitment of patients with both clinically and serologically active disease, development and use of a novel SLE Responder Index, and progressive and special restrictions on immunosuppressive and corticosteroid use. These studies offer an attractive blueprint to conduct future clinical trials in SLE. The overall steroid-sparing ability and benefits of belimumab on musculoskeletal and mucocutaneous organ systems suggest that it has an impact on the clinical management of SLE patients. Future directions include studies to determine the role of belimumab in early SLE, as well as in renal or CNS involvement.

[PMID: 23251765]
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic inflammatory disorder that is driven by autoantibodies that target multiple organ systems. B-lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) and its receptors on B-cell subsets play an important role in autoimmune B-cell development and SLE pathogenesis. Targeted therapy with belimumab, the monoclonal antibody against BLyS, has shown clinical benefit in two large-scale, multicenter phase III trials leading to US Food and Drug Administration approval for patients with serologically positive SLE who have active disease despite standard therapy. This review will discuss the challenges in lupus drug development and clinical trials, the basics of B-cell pathogenesis in SLE, the recent lupus clinical trials of B-cell targeted treatments, and other potential targeted therapies under investigation for patients with lupus.

[PMID: 23553779]
B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), a protein discovered in the 1990s that induces B cell proliferation and differentiation, promotes B cell survival, and is important in immunoglobulin class switching, was the target of a drug development program launched by Human Genome Sciences in the early part of the last decade. Belimumab, a human monoclonal antibody specific for soluble BLyS, was ultimately approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in March 2011 for active autoantibody patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) despite standard therapy. This program, whose studies spanned approximately 10 years from phase I through phase III, was founded on sound biology and advanced on logic and perseverance. Pre-clinical experimentation in murine models of SLE as well as observational studies in human SLE provided sufficient evidence to support the use of an inhibitor of BLyS as a novel therapy to reduce SLE disease activity. Progressing from phase I through a robust phase III program was no easy task given the complexities of SLE trial design. These challenges were overcome with the implementation of strict study entry requirements, the development of a novel responder index, and rigorous rules regarding background therapies. The success of two phase III studies and the approval of belimumab by the US Food and Drug Administration represent an unprecedented milestone in the history of SLE drug development. Belimumab was the first drug approved in SLE in over 50 years and was the first drug ever approved in SLE through the conventional route of randomized controlled trials. This article reviews the biology of BLyS, clinical trial results, and some of the emerging data from the robust phase II and III datasets.

[PMID: 21081710]
To review the efficacy, safety, dosing, drug interactions, as well as economic and therapeutic considerations of belimumab, an investigational B-lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) inhibitor. A systematic, English-language MEDLINE search (1966-August 2010) was conducted using the search terms belimumab, Benlysta, B-lymphocyte stimulators, BLyS-specific inhibitors, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Press releases and bibliographies were reviewed for additional information and citations. Belimumab was first identified and studied as a human protein target in 1999. Therefore, all published clinical trials and abstracts evaluating the safety and efficacy of belimumab for treatment of SLE as well as review articles from 1999 to present were evaluated for inclusion. Additional data were extracted from the manufacturer's Web site and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) documents. Current therapies for SLE target nonspecific sites for inflammatory reduction and immune system suppression. Belimumab is a target-specific, human IgG1λ monoclonal B-lymphocyte stimulator inhibitor currently in late stage investigation for the treatment of SLE. Unpublished Phase 3 trials have reported statistically significant results for primary endpoints when belimumab 10 mg/kg plus standard of care was compared to placebo plus standard of care in seropositive patients with SLE. Overall, belimumab has been relatively well tolerated with discontinuation rates and adverse events similar to those of placebo. If belimumab is approved by the FDA, its US market launch would be expected in 2011. Belimumab has shown significant benefits for patients with SLE in the few Phase 3 trials that have been published. However, questions remain regarding optimal patient population, duration of treatment, place in therapy, and long-term adverse effects.

[PMID: 29572471]
BAFF, a member of the TNF superfamily, has been recognized as a good target for autoimmune diseases. Belimumab, an anti-BAFF monoclonal antibody, was approved by the FDA for use in treating systemic lupus erythematosus. However, the molecular basis of BAFF neutralization by belimumab remains unclear. Here our crystal structure of the BAFF-belimumab Fab complex shows the precise epitope and the BAFF-neutralizing mechanism of belimumab, and demonstrates that the therapeutic activity of belimumab involves not only antagonizing the BAFF-receptor interaction, but also disrupting the formation of the more active BAFF 60-mer to favor the induction of the less active BAFF trimer through interaction with the flap region of BAFF. In addition, the belimumab HCDR3 loop mimics the DxL(V/L) motif of BAFF receptors, thereby binding to BAFF in a similar manner as endogenous BAFF receptors. Our data thus provides insights for the design of new drugs targeting BAFF for the treatment of autoimmune diseases.