[PMID: 11025268]
Bacterial vaginosis is the most common cause of vaginitis, affecting over 3 million women in the United States annually. Depopulation of lactobacilli from the normal vaginal flora and overgrowth of Gardnerella vaginalis and other anaerobic species are the presumed etiology. To date, no scientific evidence shows that bacterial vaginosis is a sexually transmitted disease. Malodorous vaginal discharge is the most common symptom. Differential diagnoses include trichomoniasis, moniliasis, and allergic or chemical dermatitis. The diagnosis is confirmed when at least three of the following four findings are present (Amsel's criteria): 1) thin, homogenous discharge, 2) pH greater than 4.5, 3) positive amine test, and 4) presence of clue cells. The sensitivity and positive predictive value are both 90%. Vaginal Gram stain is also reliable and allows for permanent record. Cultures are nonspecific because G. vaginalis resides in normal vaginal flora as well. Papanicolaou smears are not particularly sensitive, but their positive predictive value is very high. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend three treatment regimens in nonpregnant patients: oral metronidazole (500 mg twice daily for 7 days), intravaginal 2% clindamycin cream (one applicatorful at bedtime for 7 days), or intravaginal metronidazole gel (one to two applicatorfuls per day for 5 days). Alternative regimens include a single 2-g oral dose of metronidazole or a 7-day course of oral clindamycin, 300 mg twice daily. The association between bacterial vaginosis and adverse pregnancy outcomes has satisfied many criteria for a causal inference. Treatment of bacterial vaginosis in women with previous history of preterm labor results in fewer preterm deliveries than in untreated women from the same population.

[PMID: 18459549]
To evaluate the presence of infectious agents for vaginitis in patients with ASCUS. 33,388 patients who underwent cervical-vaginal cytology from 08/1993 to 05/2002 were included in the study, and 1,104 (3.4%) presented positive ASCUS. The appraised infectious agents were Coccobacilli, Candida sp, Trichomonas vaginalis, and clue cells (Gardnerella vaginalis). In the group with ASCUS a larger frequency of Coccobacilli (22.37%) and Trichomonas vaginalis (5.25%) was found when compared with the group with negative ASCUS (17.79% and 3.98%, respectively; p < 0.05). Cytolysis occurred more frequently in patients with ASCUS (3.8 vs 6.3%, first phase and 4.5 vs 10%, second phase). We believe that some diagnoses of ASCUS can be induced by the presence of infectious agents for vaginitis, mainly cocci and coccoides. ASCUS occurs more frequently in the first phase of the menstrual cycle, therefore in less acid vaginal pH.

[PMID: 10948822]
The purpose of this study was to determine the isolation rates of Mycoplasma hominis and Ureaplasma urealyticum from three populations of women and also to relate the presence of these microorganisms with some indicators of nonspecific vaginitis. Three hundred vaginal swabs were taken from delivery, pregnant and control (not pregnant) women. Cultures were done in E broth supplemented with arginine or urea. M. hominis was isolated in 5% at delivery, 12% from pregnant and 5% from control women and U. urealyticum was isolated in 21%, 31% and 28% respectively. There was statistical difference in the isolation rate of M. hominis in pregnant women respect to the other groups. Both microorganisms were more frequently isolated in women with acid vaginal pH, amine-like odor in KOH test, clue cells and leucorrhea. M. hominis was isolated in 17% and U. urealyticum in 52% from women with nonspecific vaginitis. M. hominis was isolated in 2% and U. urealyticum in 13% from women without nonspecific vaginitis. Although the presence of clue cells and amine-like odor in KOH test have relationship with Gardnerella vaginalis, these tests could also suggest the presence of these mycoplasmas.

[PMID: 20006195]
The study aimed to determine the diagnostic usefulness of the genital Gram stain in an emergency department (ED) population. A linked-query of an urban, tertiary-care, university- affiliated hospital laboratory database was conducted for all completed Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae DNA probes, Trichomonas vaginalis wet preps, and genital Gram stains performed on ED patient visits between January and December 2004. Positive criteria for a Gram stain included greater than 10 white blood cells per high-power field, gram-negative intracellular/extracellular diplococci (suggesting N gonorrhoeae), clue cells (suggesting T vaginalis), or direct visualization of T vaginalis organisms. DNA probes were used as the gold standard definition for N gonorrhoeae and C trachomatis infection. Of 1511 initially eligible ED visits, 941 were analyzed (genital Gram stain and DNA probe results both present), with a prevalence of either C trachomatis or N gonorrhoeae of 11.4%. A positive genital Gram stain was 75.7% sensitive and 43.3% specific in diagnosing either C trachomatis and/or N gonorrhoeae infection, and 80.4% sensitive and 32.2% specific when the positive cutoff was lowered to more than 5 white blood cells/high-power field. No Gram stains were positive for T vaginalis (with 47 positive wet mounts), and clue cells were noted on 117 Gram stains (11.6%). Gram stains in isolation lack sufficient diagnostic ability to detect either C trachomatis or N gonorrhoeae infection in the ED.

[PMID: 11845812]
To define an entity of abnormal vaginal flora: aerobic vaginitis. Observational study. University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. 631 women attending for routine prenatal care or attending vaginitis clinic. Samples were taken for fresh wet mount microscopy of vaginal fluid, vaginal cultures and measurement of lactate, succinate and cytokine levels in vaginal fluid. Smears deficient in lactobacilli and positive for clue cells were considered to indicate a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis. Aerobic vaginitis was diagnosed if smears were deficient in lactobacilli, positive for cocci or coarse bacilli, positive for parabasal epithelial cells, and/or positive for vaginal leucocytes (plus their granular aspect). Genital complaints include red inflammation, yellow discharge, vaginal dyspareunia. Group B streptococci, escherichia coli, staphylococcus aureus and trichomonas vaginalis are frequently cultured. Vaginal lactate concentration is severely depressed in women with aerobic vaginitis, as in bacterial vaginosis, but vaginal succinate is not produced. Also in contrast to bacterial vaginosis, aerobic vaginitis produces a host immune response that leads to high production of interleukin-6, interleukin-1-beta and leukaemia inhibitory factor in the vaginal fluid. Aerobic vaginitis is associated with aerobic micro-organisms, mainly group B streptococci and E. coli. Its characteristics are different from those of bacterial vaginosis and elicit an important host response. The most severe form of aerobic vaginitis equals desquamative inflammatory vaginitis. In theory, aerobic vaginitis may be a better candidate than bacterial vaginosis as the cause of pregnancy complications, such as ascending chorioamnionitis, preterm rupture of the membranes and preterm delivery.

[PMID: 22555524]
To report the prevalence of Gardnerella, Trichomonas and Candida in the cervical smears of 9 immigrant groups participating in the Dutch national cervical screening program. Cervical smears were taken from 58,904 immigrant participants and 498,405 Dutch participants. As part of the routine screening process, all smears were screened for the overgrowth of Gardnerella (i.e. smears with an abundance of clue cells) and for the presence of Trichomonas and Candida. The smears were screened by 6 laboratories, all of which use the Dutch KOPAC coding system. The odds ratio and confidence interval were calculated for the 9 immigrant groups and compared to Dutch participants. Immigrants from Suriname, Turkey and the Dutch Antilles have a 2-5 times higher prevalence of Gardnerella and Trichomonas when compared to native Dutch women. Interestingly, the prevalence of Trichomonas in cervical smears of Moroccan immigrants is twice as high, yet the prevalence of Gardnerella is 3 times lower than in native Dutch women. Immigrants with a high prevalence of Gardnerella also have a high prevalence of Trichomonas. In the context of the increased risk of squamous abnormalities in smears with Gardnerella, such slides should be screened with extra care.

[PMID: 20949462]
Cervical infections are not uncommon in our population especially in young and sexually active women. One thousand samples of married women, aged between 20 and 70 years, were studied by conventional Papanicolaou smears. These samples were examined in the Department of Pathology, King Edward Medical University, Lahore from January 2007 to June 2009. Only cases without (pre)neoplastic cytology were included. Six types of infections were diagnosed cytologically. The overall frequency of normal, inadequate, neoplastic, and infective smears was 50%, 1.8%, 10.2%, and 38.3%, respectively. Most of the patients (67%) were in the reproductive age group with mean age 34.7 ± 2.6 years. The commonest clinical sign seen in 354/383 (92%) cases and symptom in (349/383; 91%) cases were vaginal discharge and pruritis vulvae. Among the infective smears, 290 cases (75.7%), the cytologic diagnosis was nonspecific inflammation. Most of these 290 smears contained clue cells (indicating Gardnerella infection) and a lack of lactobacilli. Such smears are predominant in patients suffering from bacterial vaginosis (BV). Twenty-eight smears (7.3%) were positive for Trichomonas vaginalis, 27 cases (7%) were smears with koilocytic change pathognomonic of human papilloma virus infection. Twenty-five smears (6.5%) were positive for fungal infection. Seven cases (1.8%) were diagnosed as herpes simplex virus infection. Finally, there were six cases (1.5%) with atrophic vaginitis. We conclude that the cervical smear is well suited for diagnosing cervical infections. It is clear that Gardnerella, known to be associated with bacterial vaginosis, is a major problem in our Pakistani population.