[PMID: 27521725]
Intracranial spread of an adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the parotid gland is rare, and metastatic ACC to the splenium of the corpus callosum mimicking butterfly glioblastoma (GBM) has not been reported previously. We report a rare case of metastasis to the splenium of the corpus callosum from ACC of the parotid gland. The tumor occupied the splenium and mimicked the presentation of a butterfly glioma. The patient had undergone parotidectomy 5 years before presentation with this intracranial lesion. On magnetic resonance imaging, the lesion was separate from the pineal gland and displaced the internal cerebral veins downward. Ventricular obstruction and increased cellularity were also suggested, and multiple fluid-filled cystic spaces were observed. The tumor was partially resected, because the extreme lateral boundary could not be visualized. Histological analysis with anti-c-kit antibody showed strong expression of the epithelial component; immunohistochemistry with anti-p63 antibody revealed nests of positive tumor cells, highlighting the myoepithelial component. The tumor also stained positive for anti-Myb antibody. The treatment for this lesion is surgical debulking followed by radiation therapy; however, the overall prognosis remains grim because of limited chemotherapy options and a propensity for recurrence in both local and distant fashions. When a tumor with adenoid histological features and a "butterfly" phenotype grows in the corpus callosum in a patient with known parotid ACC, both metastasis and adenoid variant GBM should be considered. Careful clinical and radiological correlation is required to diagnose and treat this rare lesion.

[PMID: 17854667]
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common malignant brain tumor of adults, is relatively rare in children. In a GBM affecting a 16-year-old boy, the tumor spread across the corpus callosum (butterfly glioma). This type of bilateral hemispheric growth has previously been thought to result from spread along the white matter tracts. Two samples obtained from opposite sides of the same tumor were analyzed comprehensively for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite instability (MSI). Amplification of EGFR and MDM2 was studied by means of multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Exons 5, 6, 7, and 8 of TP53 were screened for mutations by sequencing. In neither specimen were molecular alterations found in the EGFR, MDM2, or TP53 genes. The specimen obtained from the right hemisphere exhibited a high level of MSI and LOH in chromosome arms 5q, 9p, and 13q. The specimen from the left hemisphere exhibited LOH in chromosome arms 3p, 5q, 9p, 9q, 10p, 10q, and 13q. Here we propose four plausible hypothetical scenarios underlying the tumorigenesis of this GBM.

[PMID: 27458589]
In humans, high-grade gliomas may infiltrate across the corpus callosum resulting in bihemispheric lesions that may have symmetrical, winged-like appearances. This particular tumor manifestation has been coined a "butterfly" glioma (BG). While canine and human gliomas share many neuroradiological and pathological features, the BG morphology has not been previously reported in dogs. Here, we describe the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) characteristics of BG in three dogs and review the potential differential diagnoses based on neuroimaging findings. All dogs presented for generalized seizures and interictal neurological deficits referable to multifocal or diffuse forebrain disease. MRI examinations revealed asymmetrical (2/3) or symmetrical (1/3), bihemispheric intra-axial mass lesions that predominantly affected the frontoparietal lobes that were associated with extensive perilesional edema, and involvement of the corpus callosum. The masses displayed heterogeneous T1, T2, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery signal intensities, variable contrast enhancement (2/3), and mass effect. All tumors demonstrated classical histopathological features of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), including glial cell pseudopalisading, serpentine necrosis, microvascular proliferation as well as invasion of the corpus callosum by neoplastic astrocytes. Although rare, GBM should be considered a differential diagnosis in dogs with an MRI evidence of asymmetric or symmetric bilateral, intra-axial cerebral mass lesions with signal characteristics compatible with glioma.

[PMID: 1656290]
A 45 year-old male with a butterfly glioma received stereotactic biopsy for histologic confirmation of the clinical diagnosis. Microscopically, the results were controversial since some biopsy specimens showed distinct inflammatory changes, while others displayed typical features of a malignant glioma. The patient died four days after the stereotactic approach due to therapy-resistant intracranial pressure rise. In addition to a large butterfly glioblastoma originating from the frontal part of the corpus callosum, neuropathologic examination revealed a mycotic encephalitis with formation of numerous fungi-containing inflammatory foci in all parts of the brain and in the glioma. General autopsy disclosed pulmonary aspergillosis as the source of the inflammatory spread. A previous steroid medication over several weeks for treatment of increased intracranial pressure may be considered as an important factor in the origin of the pulmonary aspergillosis complicating the butterfly glioma.

[PMID: 28361164]
A 54-year-old man presented with change in behaviour, nocturnal enuresis, abnormal limb movement and headache of one week's duration. The diagnosis of butterfly glioma (glioblastoma multiforme) was made based on imaging characteristics and was further confirmed by biopsy findings. As the corpus callosum is usually resistant to infiltration by tumours, a mass that involves and crosses the corpus callosum is suggestive of an aggressive neoplasm. Other neoplastic and non-neoplastic conditions that may involve the corpus callosum and mimic a butterfly glioma, as well as associated imaging features, are discussed.

[PMID: 9452242]
The authors report a case of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Kufs' disease) confirmed by stereotactically obtained brain biopsy findings and initially diagnosed as a butterfly glioma. The presenting symptoms in the 64-year-old patient were mental alterations with progressive dementia, followed by muscular atrophy and myoclonia with distal preponderance. The mild initial disturbances of coordination increased, and the patient developed a markedly ataxic gait. Computerized tomography (CT) scanning and magnetic resonance imaging revealed generalized cerebral atrophy and a bifrontal space-occupying lesion involving the callosum. The original "clearcut" diagnosis of glioblastoma multiforme, based on CT scans, was unexpectedly disproved by examination of stereotactically obtained brain biopsy specimens, which revealed a neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Kufs' disease). To the authors' knowledge, this is the first report of a case presenting with both diffuse brain atrophy and localized accumulation of neuronal lipofuscin, mimicking a mass lesion on radiological studies.

[PMID: 28936073]
The pathologies implicate the bilateral corpus callosum that builds the butterfly pattern on axial view. These tumors have seldom been investigated for both clinical manifestations and outcome. The objective of this study was to describe the clinical characteristics and outcomes of the butterfly tumor and to identify the predictive factors associated with survival outcome. A retrospective study of 50 butterfly tumor was conducted between 2003 and 2016. The clinical characteristics, imaging, and outcome were assessed for the purpose of descriptive analysis. Using the Kaplan-Meier method, the median overall survival of the butterfly tumor was determined. Furthermore, the Cox proportional hazard regression was the estimated hazard ratio for death. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was common of butterfly lesions. The mortality rate was 78% and overall median survival time was 16.03 months (95% confidence interval: 14.0-19.8). Using Cox proportional hazards regression, the independent prognostic factors were Karnofsky Performance Status score ≤70, splenium involvement, and butterfly glioblastoma. The butterfly tumor is a poor prognostic disease compared with each histology subgroup. Further molecular investigation is preferable to explore genetic variations associated with these tumors.