[PMID: 30146479]
Cell competition employs comparisons of fitness to selectively eliminate cells sensed as less healthy. In Drosophila, apoptotic elimination of the weaker "loser" cells from growing wing discs is induced by a signaling module consisting of the Toll ligand Spätzle (Spz), several Toll-related receptors, and NF-κB factors. How this module is activated and restricted to competing disc cells is unknown. Here, we use Myc-induced cell competition to demonstrate that loser cell elimination requires local wing disc synthesis of Spz. We identify Spz processing enzyme (SPE) and modular serine protease (ModSP) as activators of Spz-regulated competitive signaling and show that "winner" cells trigger elimination of nearby WT cells by boosting SPE production. Moreover, Spz requires both Toll and Toll-8 to induce apoptosis of wing disc cells. Thus, during cell competition, Spz-mediated signaling is strictly confined to the imaginal disc, allowing errors in tissue fitness to be corrected without compromising organismal physiology.

[PMID: 8124709]
spätzle is a maternal effect gene required in the signal transduction pathway that establishes the dorsal-ventral pattern of the Drosophila embryo. spätzle acts immediately upstream of the membrane protein Toll in the genetic pathway, suggesting that spätzle could encode the ventrally localized ligand that activates the receptor activity of Toll. The spätzle gene encodes a novel secreted protein that appears to require activation by a proteolytic processing reaction, which is controlled by the genes that act upstream of spätzle in the genetic pathway. We propose that proteolytic processing of the spätzle protein is confined to the ventral side of the embryo and that the localization of processed spätzle determines where the receptor, Toll, is active.

[PMID: 31088910]
The Toll signaling pathway in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> regulates several immune-related functions, including the expression of antimicrobial peptide (AMP) genes. The canonical Toll receptor (Toll-1) is activated by the cytokine Spätzle (Spz-1), but <i>Drosophila</i> encodes eight other Toll genes and five other Spz genes whose interactions with one another and associated functions are less well-understood. Here, we conducted <i>in vitro</i> assays in the <i>Drosophila</i> S2 cell line with the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) homology domains of each Toll family member to determine whether they can activate a known target of Toll-1, the promoter of the antifungal peptide gene drosomycin. All TIR family members activated the drosomycin promoter, with Toll-1 and Toll-7 TIRs producing the highest activation. We found that the Toll-1 and Toll-7 ectodomains bind Spz-1, -2, and -5, and also vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) virions, and that Spz-1, -2, -5, and VSV all activated the promoters of drosomycin and several other AMP genes in S2 cells expressing full-length Toll-1 or Toll-7. <i>In vivo</i> experiments indicated that Toll-1 and Toll-7 mutants could be systemically infected with two bacterial species (<i>Enterococcus faecalis</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>), the opportunistic fungal pathogen <i>Candida albicans</i>, and VSV with different survival times in adult females and males compared with WT fly survival. Our results suggest that all Toll family members can activate several AMP genes. Our results further indicate that Toll-1 and Toll-7 bind multiple Spz proteins and also VSV, but they differentially affect adult survival after systemic infection, potentially because of sex-specific differences in Toll-1 and Toll-7 expression.

[PMID: 7590233]
The basic body plan of Drosophila is specified by four determinant systems that organize pattern along the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes. Two of these systems (anterior and posterior) depend on localized mRNAs. In contrast, the other two (ventral and terminal) require locally generated extracellular ligands that are transduced, respectively, by the transmembrane receptors Toll and torso (tor). The ligand for the Toll receptor is thought to be spätzle (spz), a secreted protein that is activated by proteolytic cleavage. Here we report that trunk (trk), a gene required for activity of the tor receptor, encodes a protein that resembles spz in several respects. In particular, the sequence suggests that trk is a secreted protein and that it contains an internal site for proteolytic cleavage. Furthermore, the carboxy-terminal domain of trk has a similar arrangement of cysteines to that of spz. We propose that trk encodes an extracellular ligand involved in specifying terminal body pattern and suggest by analogy with spz that a cleaved form of trk constitutes the ligand for the tor receptor.

[PMID: 11536362]
The Drosophila gene Spätzle encodes the activating ligand for the Toll receptor. This signaling pathway is required for dorso-ventral patterning in the early embryo and an antifungal immune response in larvae and adults. The genome sequence of Drosophila shows that there are a total of eight Toll-like receptors and these may function in other aspects of embryonic development and innate immunity. Here we describe five Drosophila homologues of Spätzle (Spz2-6) found using an iterative searching method. All five appear to encode proteins containing neurotrophin-like cystine-knot domains. In addition, most retain a characteristic intron-exon structure shared with the prototype Spätzle gene. This provides evidence that the family arose by ancient gene duplication events and indicates that the gene products may represent activating ligands for corresponding Toll receptors. Expression studies show that only Spz4 is expressed strongly in larvae and adults and thus may be involved in an ancillary antifungal response mediated by Toll-5. By contrast, Spz6 shows a complex spatial and temporally regulated expression pattern in the late embryo. Thus the new Toll/Spätzle families of signaling molecules may have important roles in other aspects of development and immunity.

[PMID: 30308293]
Spätzle protein is an extracellular ligand of Toll receptor in Toll signaling pathway involved in the embryonic dorsoventral patterning and in the innate immunity. In this study, a spätzle gene of freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii (MrSpz) was isolated and characterized. The open reading frame of MrSpz consisted of 747 nucleotides encoding 248 amino acid residues containing a signal peptide and C-terminal spätzle activated domain. MrSpz shared high similarity to spätzle of Fenneropenaeus chinensis (FcSpz) at 92% identity and Marsupenaeus japonicus (MjSpz) at 83% identity. Phylogenetic analysis was performed and the results revealed that MrSpz was a member of the clade containing LvSpz3 of Litopenaeus vannamei, FcSpz and Penaeus monodon spätzle protein. The expression distribution at transcriptional level in various tissues of normal prawn revealed that the MrSpz was detected in gills, heart and hepatopancreas while no expression was observed in hemocyte, muscle and stomach. In the Aeromonas caviae challenged prawn, the expression level of MrSpz in hemocyte was increased gradually at 6, 12 and 24 h post-injection. Furthermore, in MrSpz knocked down prawn injected with Aeromonas caviae, the mortality rate were higher than that of non-related dsRNA group and control group. These results suggest that MrSpz protein may play a key role in the innate immunity of M. rosenbergii, especially in response to Gram-negative bacteria A. caviae invasion.

[PMID: 30361090]
The Drosophila Toll-1 receptor is involved in embryonic development, innate immunity, and tissue homeostasis. Currently, as a ligand for the Toll-1 receptor, only Spätzle (Spz) has been identified and characterized. We previously reported that Drosophila larva-derived tissue extract contains ligand activity for the Toll-1 receptor, which differs from Spz based on the observation that larval extract prepared from spz mutants possessed full ligand activity. Here, we demonstrate that Spz5, a member of the Spz family of proteins, functions as a ligand for the Toll-1 receptor. Processing of Spz5 by Furin protease, which is known to be important for ligand activity of Spz5 to Toll-6, is not required for its function to the Toll-1 receptor. By generating a spz5 null mutant, we further showed that the Toll-1 ligand activity of larva-derived extract is mainly derived from Spz5. Finally, we found a genetic interaction between spz and spz5 in terms of developmental processes. This study identified a novel ligand for the Drosophila Toll-1 receptor, providing evidence that Toll-1 is a multi-ligand receptor, similar to the mammalian Toll-like receptor.