[PMID: 21315459]
Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor and is thought to arise from genetic anomalies in developmental pathways required for the normal maturation of the cerebellar cortex, notably developmental pathways for granule cell progenitor (GCP) neurogenesis. Over the past decade, a wide range of studies have identified genes and their regulators within signaling pathways, as well as noncoding RNAs, that have crucial roles in both normal cerebellar development and pathogenesis. These include the Notch, Wnt/β-catenin, bone morphogenic proteins (Bmp) and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathways. In this review, we highlight the function of these pathways in the growth of the cerebellum and the formation of MB. A better understanding of the developmental origins of these tumors will have significant implications for enhancing the treatment of this important childhood cancer.

[PMID: 23951168]
Medulloblastoma, the most common pediatric brain tumor, is thought to arise from deregulated proliferation of cerebellar granule precursor (CGP) cells. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is the primary mitogen that regulates proliferation of CGP cells during the early stages of postnatal cerebellum development. Aberrant activation of Shh signaling during this time has been associated with hyperplasia of CGP cells and eventually may lead to the development of medulloblastoma. The molecular targets of Shh signaling involved in medulloblastoma formation are still not well-understood. Here, we show that Shh regulates sustained activation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and that this activity is required for continued proliferation of CGP cells. Suppression of HDAC activity not only blocked the Shh-induced CGP proliferation in primary cell cultures, but also ameliorated aberrant CGP proliferation at the external germinal layer (EGL) in a medulloblastoma mouse model. Increased levels of mRNA and protein of several HDAC family members were found in medulloblastoma compared to wild type cerebellum suggesting that HDAC activity is required for the survival/progression of tumor cells. The identification of a role of HDACs in the early steps of medulloblastoma formation suggests there may be a therapeutic potential for HDAC inhibitors in this disease.

[PMID: 25499213]
Mouse models have increased our understanding of the pathogenesis of medulloblastoma (MB), the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor that often forms in the cerebellum. A major goal of ongoing research is to better understand the early stages of tumorigenesis and to establish the genetic and environmental changes that underlie MB initiation and growth. However, studies of MB progression in mouse models are difficult due to the heterogeneity of tumor onset times and growth patterns and the lack of clinical symptoms at early stages. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is critical for noninvasive, longitudinal, three-dimensional (3D) brain tumor imaging in the clinic but is limited in resolution and sensitivity for imaging early MBs in mice. In this study, high-resolution (100 μm in 2 hours) and high-throughput (150 μm in 15 minutes) manganese-enhanced MRI (MEMRI) protocols were optimized for early detection and monitoring of MBs in a Patched-1 (Ptch1) conditional knockout (CKO) model. The high tissue contrast obtained with MEMRI revealed detailed cerebellar morphology and enabled detection of MBs over a wide range of stages including pretumoral lesions as early as 2 to 3 weeks postnatal with volumes close to 0.1 mm(3). Furthermore, longitudinal MEMRI allowed noninvasive monitoring of tumors and demonstrated that lesions within and between individuals have different tumorigenic potentials. 3D volumetric studies allowed quantitative analysis of MB tumor morphology and growth rates in individual Ptch1-CKO mice. These results show that MEMRI provides a powerful method for early in vivo detection and longitudinal imaging of MB progression in the mouse brain.

[PMID: 6502196]
Medulloblastoma is a malignant cerebellar tumor seen primarily in the pediatric age group that has a known ability to metastasize extraneurally. The skeleton is the most common site of extraneural metastases, but metastases to the bone marrow can also occur. Four cases of medulloblastoma metastatic to the marrow are reported. In addition, 31 cases from the medical literature are reviewed. Clinical features include bone tenderness, cytopenias and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and lactic dehydrogenase levels. Skeletal involvement, especially of the pelvic bones, is frequently seen radiographically. Weight loss, soft tissue masses and a requirement for blood transfusion are also associated features. Marrow biopsy specimens are characterized by the presence of a small cell tumor often with fibrosis, necrosis and osteoblastic activity. The symptomatic response to chemotherapy is rapid, but chemotherapy resistance appears quickly. Only 1 in 4 cases diagnosed antemortem in this review lived for more than a year. We conclude that marrow aspiration and biopsy are indicated in the evaluation of patients with medulloblastoma and may serve to diagnose the cause of cytopenias, to verify extraneural spread and to provide prognostic information.

[PMID: 21681603]
Medulloblastoma (MDB) is the most common malignant cerebellar tumor in children. Because of the significant rate of mortality and treatment-related morbidity, the identification of prognostic factors could lead to a more accurate selection of patients who can benefit from a less aggressive therapy and improve risk stratification. Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP), the expression of which has been associated with worse prognosis in MDB. However, both of its subcellular localizations may contribute to tumor progression, and ultimately, survivin subcellular localization prognostic value depends on tumor type biological features. The goal of this study was to analyze these survivin features in the pediatric MDB tumor samples and its impact on clinical outcome. Survivin expression and subcellular localization were accessed by immunohistochemistry in a series of 41 tumor samples. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were compared using the log-rank test. Survivin expression ranged from completely absent to fully present in a notably higher pattern of nuclear localization than cytoplasmic (19 of 41 versus 4 of 41, respectively). However, survivin expression and subcellular localization were not associated with five-year overall survival or metastasis status at diagnosis, which was the only statistically significant prognostic factor in our series (p = 0.008). Taken together, our results suggest that survivin expression should be further studied in large, multicenter series to determine its accurate impact on prognosis and pathobiology of pediatric MDB.

[PMID: 16479172]
Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor which is thought to originate from cerebellar granule cell precursors (CGNPs) that fail to properly exit the cell cycle and differentiate. Although mutations in the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway occur in 30% of cases, genetic alterations that account for MB formation in most patients have not yet been identified. We recently determined that the cyclin D-dependent kinase inhibitor, p18(Ink4c), is expressed as CGNPs exit the cell cycle, suggesting that this protein might play a central role in arresting the proliferation of these cells and in timing their subsequent migration and differentiation. In mice, disruption of Ink4c collaborates independently with loss of p53 or with inactivation of the gene (Ptc1) encoding the Shh receptor, Patched, to induce MB formation. Whereas loss of both Ink4c alleles is required for MB formation in a p53-null background, Ink4c is haplo-insufficient for tumor suppression in a Ptc(1+/-) background. Moreover, MBs derived from Ptc(1+/-) mice that lack one or two Ink4c alleles retain wild-type p53. Methylation of the INK4C (CDKN2C) promoter and complete loss of p18(INK4C) protein expression were detected in a significant fraction of human MBs again pointing toward a role for INK4C in suppression of MB formation.

[PMID: 9447621]
Pediatric central nervous system neoplasms include a spectrum of both glial and nonglial tumors that differ significantly in location and biological behavior from those of adults. Brain tumors in infants and children most often arise from central neuroepithelial tissue, whereas a significant number of adult tumors arise from central nervous system coverings (e.g., meningioma), adjacent tissue (e.g., pituitary adenoma), or metastases. Most adult brain tumors are supratentorial malignant gliomas, whereas the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor is the cerebellar primitive neuroectodermal tumor (medulloblastoma). This article reviews neuropathological characteristics of the more common pediatric brain tumors. Entities, such as the brainstem glioma, and less common neoplasms like the desmoplastic infantile ganglioglioma and the central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor are reviewed because they occur almost exclusively in children. Known cytogenetic and molecular characteristics of childhood brain tumors are also reviewed.