[PMID: 28898511]
Gas vesicles are proteinaceous, gas-filled nanostructures produced by some bacteria and archaea. The hydrophobic major structural protein GvpA forms the ribbed gas vesicle wall. An in-silico 3D-model of GvpA of the predicted coil-α1-β1-β2-α2-coil structure is available and implies that the two β-chains constitute the hydrophobic interior surface of the gas vesicle wall. To test the importance of individual amino acids in GvpA we performed 85 single substitutions and analyzed these variants in Haloferax volcanii ΔA + A<sub>mut</sub> transformants for their ability to form gas vesicles (Vac<sup>+</sup> phenotype). In most cases, an alanine substitution of a non-polar residue did not abolish gas vesicle formation, but the replacement of single non-polar by charged residues in β1 or β2 resulted in Vac<sup>-</sup> transformants. A replacement of residues near the β-turn altered the spindle-shape to a cylindrical morphology of the gas vesicles. Vac<sup>-</sup> transformants were also obtained with alanine substitutions of charged residues of helix α1 suggesting that these amino acids form salt-bridges with another GvpA monomer. In helix α2, only the alanine substitution of His53 or Tyr54, led to Vac<sup>-</sup> transformants, whereas most other substitutions had no effect. We discuss our results in respect to the GvpA structure and data available from solid-state NMR.

[PMID: 7683649]
Gas vesicle synthesis in Haloferax mediterranei involves several gene products encoded by a 9.4-kilobase pair DNA region (mc-vac region) that contains 13 genes in addition to gvpA encoding the major structural gas vesicle protein. The expression of part of this region, encompassing the genes gvpA, gvpC, gvpN, and gvpO was investigated. These genes are transcribed from a common promoter located upstream of gvpA. Transcripts of 0.34 (gvpA only), 1.8 (gvpA/C), 2.4 (gvpA/C/N) and 3 kilobases (gvpA/C/N/O) were observed, with the gvpA transcript being the predominant mRNA species. The majority of the mRNA formed terminates 64 base pairs downstream of gvpA at the cytosine of the sequence 5' TTTTTC 3'. The synthesis of the GvpA and GvpC proteins was investigated by Western analyses. An antiserum raised against isolated gas vesicles of Hf. mediterranei detects, in addition to gas vesicle fragments, the GvpA protein of the M(r) of approximately 8,000 in lysates derived from different halobacteria or from Escherichia coli expressing gvpA. In samples containing isolated gas vesicles, mainly partially disaggregated gas vesicle fragments hybridize, but a minor amount of monomeric GvpA is also seen. For the detection of the GvpC protein, two versions of the gvpC gene (full length and gvp delta C lacking the 3' part encoding the acidic C terminus) were expressed in E. coli, and the resulting proteins were purified. The two antisera raised against these GvpC versions indicate the expression of gvpC in different halobacteria. By Western analysis, GvpC is also detectable in samples containing isolated gas vesicles demonstrating that GvpC is a second, but minor, gas vesicle structural protein.

[PMID: 22580065]
The structure and assembly process of gas vesicles have received significant attention in recent decades, although relatively little is still known. This work combines state-of-the-art computational methods to develop a model for the major gas vesicle protein, GvpA, and explore its structure within the assembled vesicle. Elucidating this protein's structure has been challenging due to its adherent and aggregative nature, which has so far precluded in-depth biochemical analyses. Moreover, GvpA has extremely low similarity with any known protein structure, which renders homology modeling methods ineffective. Thus, alternate approaches were used to model its tertiary structure. Starting with the sequence from haloarchaeon Halobacterium sp. NRC-1, we performed ab initio modeling and threading to acquire a multitude of structure decoys, which were equilibrated and ranked using molecular dynamics and mechanics, respectively. The highest ranked predictions exhibited an α-β-β-α secondary structure in agreement with earlier experimental findings, as well as with our own secondary structure predictions. Afterwards, GvpA subunits were docked in a quasi-periodic arrangement to investigate the assembly of the vesicle wall and to conduct simulations of contact-mode atomic force microscopy imaging, which allowed us to reconcile the structure predictions with the available experimental data. Finally, the GvpA structure for two representative organisms, Anabaena flos-aquae and Calothrix sp. PCC 7601, was also predicted, which reproduced the major features of our GvpA model, supporting the expectation that homologous GvpA sequences synthesized by different organisms should exhibit similar structures.

[PMID: 1282192]
A series of deletions introduced into the gvp gene cluster of Haloferax mediterranei, comprising 14 genes involved in gas vesicle synthesis (mc-vac-region), was investigated by transformation experiments. Gas vesicle production and the expression of the gvpA gene encoding the major gas vesicle protein, GvpA, was monitored in each Haloferax volcanii transformant. Whereas transformants containing the entire mc-vac-region produced gas vesicles (Vac+), various deletions in the region 5' to gvpA (encompassing gvpD-gvpM) or 3' to gvpA (containing gvpC, gvpN and gvpO) revealed Vac- transformants. All these transformants expressed gvpA and contained the 8 kDa GvpA protein as shown by Western analysis. However, transformants containing the gvpA gene by itself indicated a lower level of GvpA than observed with each of the other transformants. None of these transformants containing deletion constructs assembled the GvpA protein into gas vesicles. In contrast, transformants containing a construct carrying a 918 bp deletion internal to gvpD exhibited a tremendous gas vesicle overproduction, suggesting a regulatory role for the gvpD gene or its product. This is the first assignment of a functional role for one of the 13 halobacterial gvp genes found in addition to gvpA that are involved in the synthesis of this unique structure.

[PMID: 9094221]
Gas vesicles are intracellular, microbial flotation devices that consist of mainly one protein, GvpA. The formation of halobacterial gas vesicles occurs along a complex pathway involving 14 different gvp genes that are clustered in a genomic region termed the "vac region". Various vac regions found in Halobacterium salinarum (p-vac and c-vac), Haloferax mediterranei (mc-vac), and Natronobacterium vacuolatum (nv-vac) have been investigated. Except for the latter vac region, the arrangement of the gvp genes is identical. Single gvp genes have been mutated to study the effect on gas vesicle synthesis in transformants and to determine their possible function. Each vac region exhibits a characteristic transcription pattern, and regulatory steps have been observed at the DNA, RNA, and protein level, indicating a complex regulatory network acting during gas vesicle gene expression.

[PMID: 25648404]
Halophilic Archaea (Haloarchaea) thrive in salterns containing sodium chloride concentrations up to saturation. Many Haloarchaea possess genes encoding gas vesicles, but only a few species, such as Halobacterium salinarum and Haloferax mediterranei, produce these gas-filled, proteinaceous nanocompartments. Gas vesicles increase the buoyancy of cells and enable them to migrate vertically in the water body to regions with optimal conditions. Their synthesis depends on environmental factors, such as light, oxygen supply, temperature and salt concentration. Fourteen gas vesicle protein (gvp) genes are involved in their formation, and regulation of gvp gene expression occurs at the level of transcription, including the two regulatory proteins, GvpD and GvpE, but also at the level of translation. The gas vesicle wall is solely formed of proteins with the two major components, GvpA and GvpC, and seven additional accessory proteins are also involved. Except for GvpI and GvpH, all of these are required to form the gas permeable wall. The applications of gas vesicles include their use as an antigen presenter for viral or pathogen proteins, but also as a stable ultrasonic reporter for biomedical purposes.

[PMID: 22941504]
A range of bacteria and archaea produce intracellular gas-filled proteinaceous structures that function as flotation devices in order to maintain a suitable depth in the aqueous environment. The wall of these gas vesicles is freely permeable to gas molecules and is composed of a small hydrophobic protein, GvpA, which forms a single-layer wall. In addition, several minor structural, accessory or regulatory proteins are required for gas vesicle formation. In different organisms, 8-14 genes encoding gas vesicle proteins have been identified, and their expression has been shown to be regulated by environmental factors. In this Review, I describe the basic properties of gas vesicles, the genes that encode them and how their production is regulated. I also discuss the function of these vesicles and the initial attempts to exploit them for biotechnological purposes.