[PMID: 26339994]
Emerging evidences suggest that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for tumor growth, metastasis and treatment resistance. Nanog is one of the transcription factors that are essential for stem cellular physiology process. Previous studies reported that Nanog was detected in breast cancer and other solid tumors and indicated that it has oncogenic characteristics. However, expression feature of Nanog in breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) enriched population and its biological function in BCSCs is poorly understood. In this study, CD44 + CD24- fraction sorting with Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter and mammosphere culture were used for enriching BCSCs. We report here that Nanog was highly expressed in CSCs-enriched population from the breast cancer cells, as well as stemness-associated genes. In addition, we employed the lentivirus-mediated shRNA targeting Nanog to investigate function of Nanog in BCSCs. We found that targeted inhibition of Nanog could suppress proliferation and colony formation in breast cancer cells. Further studies showed that targeted inhibition of Nanog resulted in a decrease of BCSCs activities, including mammosphere formation, CD44 + CD24- proportion and expressions of stemness-associated genes. These data therefore suggest that Nanog possesses important function in BCSCs and targeted inhibition of Nanog may provide a novel means of targeting and eliminating BCSCs.

[PMID: 29177763]
The successful development from a single-cell zygote into a complex multicellular organism requires precise coordination of multiple cell-fate decisions. The very first of these is lineage specification into the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE) during mammalian preimplantation development. In mouse embryos, transcription factors (TFs) such as Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog are enriched in cells of ICM, which gives rise to the fetus and yolk sac. Conversely, TFs such as Cdx2 and Eomes become highly upregulated in TE, which contribute to the placenta. Here, we review the current understanding of key transcriptional control mechanisms and genes responsible for these distinct differences during the first cell lineage specification. In particular, we highlight recent insights gained through advances in genome manipulation, live imaging, single-cell transcriptomics, and loss-of-function studies.

[PMID: 29414604]
Human fibroblasts were isolated from foreskin of a clinically diagnosed 40-year old patient with idiopathic infertility. The fibroblasts were reprogrammed with the Yamanaka KOSM transcriptional factors using the retroviral vectors. The obtained induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line showed pluripotency verified by the expression of pluripotency markers, NANOG, SOX2, OCT4, TRA-1-60, and SSEA-4. And the iPSC line was demonstrated to have the three germ layers differentiation capacity in vivo by teratoma assay. The iPSC line also showed normal karyotype. This patient-specific iPSC line can be used to explore the mechanism for idiopathic male infertility.

[PMID: 29243835]
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) play a central role in the development of breast cancer. The canonical Wnt/β-catenin signal pathway is critical for maintaining CSCs characteristics. Diallyl trisulfide (DATS), a natural organosulfur compound from the garlic, exhibits effective antitumor properties. However, the role of DATS in regulating breast CSCs activity and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain obscure. In the present study, we reported that DATS efficiently inhibited the viability of breast CSCs as evidenced by reducing turmorspheres formation, decreasing the expression of breast CSCs markers (CD44, ALDH1A1, Nanog, and Oct4), as well as inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Furthermore, we showed that DATS downregulated the activity of Wnt/β-catenin pathway, while LiCl-triggered Wnt/β-catenin activation diminished DATS inhibition on breast CSCs. Taken together, our results illustrated that DATS suppressed breast CSCs through inhibiting Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation. These novel findings could provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of breast CSCs regulation as well as its target intervention and might provide new strategies for preventing and treating breast cancers.

[PMID: 29486740]
Heterogeneous gene expressions of cells are widely observed in self-renewing pluripotent stem cells, suggesting possible coexistence of multiple cellular states with distinct characteristics. Though the elements regulating cellular states have been identified, the underlying dynamic mechanisms and the significance of such cellular heterogeneity remain elusive. We present a gene regulatory network model to investigate the bimodal Nanog distribution in stem cells. Our model reveals a novel role of dynamic conversion between the cellular states of high and low Nanog levels. Model simulations demonstrate that the low-Nanog state benefits cell differentiation through serving as an intermediate state to reduce the barrier of transition. Interestingly, the existence of low-Nanog state dynamically slows down the reprogramming process, and additional Nanog activation is found to be essential to quickly attaining the fully reprogrammed cell state. Nanog has been recognized as a critical pluripotency gene in stem cell regulation. Our modeling results quantitatively show a dual role of Nanog during stem cell differentiation and reprogramming, and the importance of the intermediate state during cell state transitions. Our approach offers a general method for analyzing key regulatory factors controlling cell differentiation and reprogramming.

[PMID: 29204746]
Easy isolation, lack of ethical issues, high proliferation, multi-lineage differentiation potential and immunomodulatory properties of umbilical cord (UC)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) make them a valuable tool in stem cell research. Recently, Wharton's jelly (WJ) was proven as the best MSC source among various compartments of UC. However, it is still unclear whether or not Wharton's jelly-derived MSCs (WJMSCs) from different parts of the whole cord exhibit the same characteristics. There may be varied MSCs present in different parts of WJ throughout the length of the UC. For this purpose, using an explant attachment method, WJMSCs were isolated from three different parts of the UC, mainly present towards the placenta (mother part), the center of the whole cord (central part) and the part attached to the fetus (baby part). WJMSCs from all three parts were maintained in normal growth conditions (10% ADMEM) and analyzed for mesenchymal markers, pluripotent genes, proliferation rate and tri-lineage differentiation potential. All WJMSCs were highly proliferative, positively expressed CD90, CD105, CD73 and vimentin, while not expressing CD34, CD45, CD14, CD19 or HLA-DR, differentiated into adipocytes, osteocytes and chondrocytes and expressed pluripotency markers OCT-4, SOX-2 and NANOG at gene and protein levels. Furthermore, MSCs derived from all the parts were shown to have potency towards hepatocyte-like cell differentiation. Human bone marrow-derived MSCs were used as a positive control. Finally, we conclude that WJMSCs derived from all the parts are valuable sources and can be efficiently used in various fields of regenerative medicine.

[PMID: 28866747]
The objective of this study was to explore the prognostic value of cancer stem cell markers, namely CD133, NANOG, and NOTCH1, in early stage oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). One hundred forty-four patients with early stage (cT1T2N0) OSCC were identified from a pre-existing database of patients with oral cancer. We examined the impact of the immunohistochemical expression of CD133, NANOG, and NOTCH1 in OSCC. Overall survival (OS) curves were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Predictors of outcome were identified using multivariate analysis. We found that CD133, NANOG, and NOTCH1 were significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, and NOTCH1 was also significantly associated with depth of invasion and locoregional recurrence. NOTCH1 was identified as an independent prognostic factor for OS. NOTCH1 might prove to be a useful indicator for high-risk patients with occult metastases from early stage OSCC.