[PMID: 1912490]
The major phytoalexin in alfalfa is the isoflavonoid (-)-medicarpin (or 6aR, 11aR)-medicarpin. Isoflavone reductase (IFR), the penultimate enzyme in medicarpin biosynthesis, is responsible for introducing one of two chiral centers in (-)-medicarpin. We have isolated a 1.18 kb alfalfa cDNA (pIFRalf1) which, when expressed in Escherichia coli, converts 2'-hydroxyformononetin stereospecifically to (3R)-vestitone, as would be predicted for IFR from alfalfa. The calculated molecular weight of the polypeptide (35,400) derived from the 954 bp open reading frame compares favorably to estimated Mrs determined for IFR proteins purified from other legumes. The transcript (1.4 kb) is highly induced in elicited alfalfa cell cultures. The kinetics of induction are consistent with the appearance of IFR activity, the accumulation of medicarpin, and the observed induction of other enzymes in the pathway. Low levels of IFR transcripts were found in healthy plant parts (roots and nodules) which accumulate low levels of a medicarpin glucoside. IFR appears to be encoded by a single gene in alfalfa. The cloning of IFR opens up the possibility of genetic manipulation of phytoalexin biosynthesis in alfalfa by altering isoflavonoid stereochemistry.

[PMID: 19343413]
In order to determine why the activated methyl cycle is up-regulated in plants undergoing defence responses to fungal pathogens we have monitored the utilisation of methyl groups derived from methionine in cell-suspension cultures of alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) treated for various times with fungal elicitor, by carrying out a parallel labelling study with [(35)S]methionine and [methyl-(3)H]methionine. The distribution of the two radiolabels among the medium, soluble cellular components and cell wall was then determined. In the absence of elicitor the utilisation of the two radiolabels was similar. However, in the presence of the elicitor the total incorporation of radioactivity from [methyl-(3)H]methionine into metabolites was far greater than from [(35)S]methionine, indicating that the methyl label had been utilised in methylation reactions. Elicitor treatment resulted in up to a sixfold increase in the use of (3)H-methyl groups in the methylation of hydrophobic metabolites. In the period 0-24 h after elicitor treatment, increased methylation was directed largely into the synthesis of the isoflavonoid phytoalexin medicarpin and related metabolites. Newly synthesized phytoalexins were exported into the medium, while a significant proportion of the medicarpin accumulating in the cell in the early stages of elicitation was derived from the hydrolysis of its respective conjugate. Elicitor treatment also modified the incorporation of (3)H-methyl groups into the cell wall. Between 0 and 24 h after elicitor treatment the methylation of pectin in the cell wall declined. After 24 h, pectin methylation recovered and was associated with an increase in the methylation of other wall-bound polysaccharide components. Since no other major metabolic sink for the increased methylation was determined we conclude that the increased activity of the activated methyl cycle during defence interactions in alfalfa is required to support phytoalexin synthesis and cell wall modifications.

[PMID: 16667295]
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) cell suspension cultures accumulated high concentrations of the pterocarpan phytoalexin medicarpin, reaching a maximum within 24 hours after exposure to an elicitor preparation from cell walls of the phytopathogenic fungus Colletotrichum lindemuthianum. This was preceded by increases in the extractable activities of the isoflavonoid biosynthetic enzymes l-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase, 4-coumarate coenzyme A-ligase, chalcone synthase, chalcone isomerase, and isoflavone O-methyltransferase. Pectic polysaccharides were weak elicitors of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase activity but did not induce medicarpin accumulation, whereas reduced glutathione was totally inactive as an elicitor in this system. The fungal cell wall extract was a weak elicitor of the lignin biosynthetic enzymes, caffeic acid O-methyltransferase and coniferyl alcohol dehydrogenase, but did not induce appreciable increases in the activities of the hydrolytic enzymes chitinase and 1,3-beta-d-glucanase. The results are discussed in relation to the activation of isoflavonoid biosynthesis in other legumes and the development of the alfalfa cell culture system as a model for studying the enzymology and molecular biology of plant defense expression.

[PMID: 24226375]
Cell suspension cultures of alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) accumulated phenolic secondary metabolites in a pattern similar to that seen in alfalfa roots. Upon treatment with a crude elicitor preparation from the bean pathogen Colletotrichum lindemuthianum, the pterocarpan phytoalexin medicarpin accumulated in cells and culture medium. The extractable activities of six enzymes involved in medicarpin biosynthesis (including three cytochrome P450 activities) were induced by treatment with elicitor, and their induction kinetics correlated with the rate of medicarpin accumulation. However, protoplasts prepared from these cultures accumulated neither medicarpin nor other secondary products after treatment with elicitor. The cytochrome P450 activities were induced during the preparation of the protoplasts, but could be further induced by treatment with fungal elicitor. The results are discussed in relation to the use of alfalfa protoplasts as a system for functional analysis of cloned defense genes.

[PMID: 7625843]
Medicarpin, the major phytoalexin in alfalfa, is synthesized by way of the isoflavonoid branch of phenylpropanoid metabolism. One of the final steps of medicarpin biosynthesis, from vestitone to 7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisoflavanol, is catalyzed by vestitone reductase. A 1245-bp cDNA clone which encodes vestitone reductase was identified utilizing internal amino acid sequence of purified vestitone reductase. When expressed in Escherichia coli, the cloned enzyme exhibits strict substrate stereospecificity for (3R)-vestitone, as was observed for vestitone reductase purified from alfalfa. The calculated molecular weight of the protein (35,918) is similar to that of purified vestitone reductase from alfalfa (38 kDa by SDS-PAGE). The levels of vestitone reductase transcript (1.35 kb) greatly increase within 2 h of elicitor addition to alfalfa cell suspension cultures, preceding the rapid increases in vestitione reductase enzyme activity and medicarpin biosynthesis. In healthy alfalfa plants, the highest levels of transcripts were detected in roots and root nodules, consistent with the synthesis of medicarpin and its conjugate in these tissues. The cloning of the vestitone reductase gene provides a specific tool for the study and manipulation of pterocarpan biosynthesis in legumes.

[PMID: 16667691]
The isoflavonoid conjugates medicarpin-3-O-glucoside-6''-O-malonate (MGM), afrormosin-7-O-glucoside (AG), and afrormosin-7-O-glucoside-6''-O-malonate (AGM) were isolated and characterized from cell suspension cultures of alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.), where they were the major constitutive secondary metabolites. They were also found in alfalfa roots but not in other parts of the plant. The phytoalexin medicarpin accumulated rapidly in suspension cultured cells treated with elicitor from Colletotrichum lindemuthianum, and this was subsequently accompanied by an increase in the levels of MGM. In contrast, net accumulation of afrormosin conjugates was not affected by elicitor treatment. Labeling studies with [(14)C]phenylalanine indicated that afrormosin conjugates were the major de novo synthesized isoflavonoid products in unelicited cells. During elicitation, [(14)C]phenylalanine was incorporated predominantly into medicarpin, although a significant proportion of the newly synthesized medicarpin was also conjugated. Treatment of (14)C-labeled, elicited cells with l-alpha-aminooxy-beta-phenylpropionic acid, a potent inhibitor of PAL activity in vivo, resulted in the initial appearance of labeled medicarpin of very low specific activity, suggesting that the phytoalexin could be released from a preformed conjugate under these conditions. Our data draw attention to the involvement of isoflavone hydroxylases during the constitutive and elicitor-induced accumulation of isoflavonoids and their conjugates in alfalfa cell cultures.

[PMID: 9484461]
Medicarpin, the major phytoalexin in alfalfa, is synthesized via the isoflavonoid branch of phenylpropanoid metabolism. The methyl group at the 9 position of medicarpin is generally accepted to arise via the methylation of the 4' position (B-ring) of daidzein. Surprisingly, the isoflavone-O-methyltransferase (IOMT), which is induced along with other enzymes involved in medicarpin biosynthesis, methylates the A-ring 7-hydroxyl group of daidzein in vitro, a reaction that probably does not occur in vivo. Utilizing internal amino acid sequence information from purified alfalfa IOMT, we have isolated three full-length IOMT cDNA clones. A search of the protein databases revealed sequence similarities to O-methyltransferases from various sources. The highest match (50.5% identity) was found between IOMT8 and 6a-hydroxymaackiain 3-O-methyltransferase from Pisum sativum. The molecular weight of alfalfa IOMT expressed in Escherichia coli was similar to that of purified IOMT from alfalfa cell cultures (41 kDa by SDS-PAGE). The recombinant enzyme catalyzed the O-methylation of A-ring hydroxyl group(s) of isoflavones, and could also methylate the pterocarpan (+) 6a-hydroxymaackiain. Alfalfa contains multiple IOMT genes, and closely related sequences are present in the genomes of chickpea and cowpea, species that also produce B-ring methylated isoflavonoids in vivo. Northern blot analysis indicated that IOMT transcripts are rapidly induced following elicitation, prior to the increase in IOMT activity and medicarpin accumulation. The possible role of the isoflavone 7-OMT in the synthesis of formononetin in vivo is discussed.