[PMID: 33919434]
Unmet needs in the treatment of psoriasis call for novel therapeutic strategies. Pustular psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis often represent a therapeutic challenge. Focus on IL-36 cytokines offers an interesting approach, as the IL-36 axis has been appointed a critical driver of the autoinflammatory responses involved in pustular psoriasis. Two IL-36R blocking antibodies, imsidolimab and spesolimab, are currently undergoing phase II and III clinical trials, with promising results.

[PMID: 34626330]
Pustular psoriasis is an unusual form of psoriasis that frequently presents clinical challenges for dermatologists. The condition presents with pustules on an erythematous background and has two distinct subtypes: localized disease on the palms and soles, called palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP), and generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP). The involvement of the fingers, toes, and nails is defined as a separate localized variant, acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau, and is now thought to be a subset of PPP. The rarity of pustular psoriasis frequently makes the correct diagnosis problematic. In addition, treatment is limited by a relative lack of evidence-based therapeutic options. Current management is often based on existing therapies for standard plaque psoriasis. However, there remains a need for treatments with high, sustained efficacy and a rapid onset of action in pustular psoriasis. Recent advances in understanding of the pathogenesis of pustular psoriasis have provided insights into potential therapies. Treatment of pustular psoriasis is generally determined by the extent and severity of disease, and recent years have seen an increasing use of newer agents, including biologic therapies. Current classes of biologic therapies with US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency approval for treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in the USA (and elsewhere) include tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors (adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, etanercept, infliximab), interleukin (IL)-17 inhibitors (brodalumab, ixekizumab, secukinumab), an IL-12/23 inhibitor (ustekinumab), and IL-23 inhibitors (guselkumab, risankizumab, tildrakizumab). Recently, specific inhibitors of the IL-36 pathway have been evaluated in GPP and PPP, including spesolimab, an IL-36 receptor inhibitor which has shown promising results in GPP. The emerging drugs for pustular psoriasis offer the possibility of rapid and effective treatment with lower toxicities than existing therapies. Further research into agents acting on the IL-36 pathway and other targeted therapies has the potential to transform the future treatment of patients with pustular psoriasis. This article reviews the clinical features of PPP and GPP, and current understanding of the genetics and immunopathology of these conditions; it also provides an update on emerging treatments.

[PMID: 34678325]
The IL-36 pathway plays a key role in the pathogenesis of generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP). In a proof-of-concept clinical trial, treatment with spesolimab, an anti-IL-36 receptor antibody, resulted in rapid skin and pustular clearance in patients presenting with GPP flares. We sought to compare the molecular profiles of lesional and nonlesional skin from patients with GPP or palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) with skin from healthy volunteers, and to investigate the molecular changes after spesolimab treatment in the skin and blood of patients with GPP flares. Pre- and post-treatment skin and blood samples were collected from patients with GPP who participated in a single-arm, phase I study (n = 7). Skin biopsies from patients with PPP (n = 8) and healthy volunteers (n = 16) were obtained for comparison at baseline. Biomarkers were assessed by RNA-sequencing, histopathology, and immunohistochemistry. In GPP and PPP lesions, 1287 transcripts were commonly upregulated or downregulated. Selected transcripts from the IL-36 signaling pathway were upregulated in untreated GPP and PPP lesions. In patients with GPP, IL-36 pathway-related signatures, T<sub>H</sub>1/T<sub>H</sub>17 and innate inflammation signaling, neutrophilic mediators, and keratinocyte-driven inflammation pathways were downregulated by spesolimab as early as week 1. Spesolimab also decreased related serum biomarkers and cell populations in the skin lesions from patients with GPP, including CD3<sup>+</sup> T, CD11c<sup>+</sup>, and IL-36γ<sup>+</sup> cells and lipocalin-2-expressing cells. In patients with GPP, spesolimab showed rapid modulation of commonly dysregulated molecular pathways in GPP and PPP, which may be associated with improved clinical outcomes.

[PMID: 33661508]
Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) is a chronic, inflammatory skin disease, with high disease burden, that is often refractory to treatment. There is a high unmet clinical need for the treatment of patients with PPP. The objectives of this study were to evaluate the safety and efficacy of spesolimab, a novel anti-interleukin-36 receptor antibody, in patients with PPP. This was a phase IIa, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study comparing 900 mg spesolimab (n = 19), 300 mg spesolimab (n = 19), and placebo (n = 21) administered intravenously every 4 weeks until week 12 in patients with PPP. The primary efficacy endpoint was the achievement of Palmoplantar Pustulosis Area and Severity Index 50 (PPP ASI50) at week 16, defined as achieving an ≥ 50% decrease from baseline PPP ASI. At week 16, 31.6% of patients in both spesolimab dose groups achieved PPP ASI50 versus 23.8% receiving placebo (risk difference 0.078; 95% confidence interval -0.190, 0.338). Thus, the primary endpoint was not met. Spesolimab was well tolerated with no clinically relevant treatment-emergent safety signals observed. PPP severity declined over time in all treatment groups after the start of treatment, with a faster decline in the spesolimab arms than in the placebo arm, indicating a potential treatment effect for spesolimab. Limitations to the study included a small sample size and lower overall disease severity than expected at baseline. It is possible that the primary efficacy endpoint may have coincided with natural disease resolution in some patients. Further effects of the efficacy of spesolimab in PPP are being explored in a phase IIb trial.

[PMID: 33785490]
Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare, potentially life-threatening disease characterised by recurrent flares of widespread neutrophilic aseptic skin pustular eruption. Despite the availability of approved biologics for GPP in Japan, Taiwan and Thailand, associated evidence is largely based on uncontrolled studies in which acute flares were not directly assessed. Therefore, there is a high unmet need to investigate new rapid-acting effective treatments that resolve symptoms associated with acute GPP flares. A prior Phase I proof-of-concept study showed rapid improvements in skin and pustule clearance with a single intravenous dose of spesolimab, a novel anti-interleukin-36 receptor antibody, in patients presenting with an acute GPP flare. Here, we present the design and rationale of Effisayil 1, a global, Phase II, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of spesolimab in patients presenting with an acute GPP flare. At least 51 patients with an acute GPP flare will be randomised 2:1 to receive a single 900 mg intravenous dose of spesolimab or placebo and followed for up to 28 weeks. The primary endpoint is a Generalized Pustular Psoriasis Physician Global Assessment (GPPGA) pustulation subscore of 0 (pustule clearance) at Week 1. The key secondary endpoint is a GPPGA score of 0 or 1 (clear or almost clear) at Week 1. Safety will be assessed over the study duration by the occurrence of treatment-emergent adverse events. Blood and skin biopsies will be collected to assess biomarkers. Superiority of spesolimab over placebo in the proportion of patients achieving the primary and key secondary endpoints will be evaluated. The study complies with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, the International Council for Harmonisation's Good Clinical Practice and local regulations. Ethics committee approvals have been obtained for each centre from all participating countries and are listed in online supplementary file 1. Primary results will be published in a peer-reviewed journal. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03782792; Pre-results.

[PMID: 34085329]
The registration of the tumour necrosis factor-α inhibitor adalimumab in 2015 was a major step forward in the treatment of hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa (HS). However, it soon became evident that the effectiveness of adalimumab in daily practice was highly variable. A significant unmet medical need of HS patients remained, and the search for novel therapeutic targets was intensified. During the 10th European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation (EHSF) e.V. Conference, reknown international HS investigators virtually presented and discussed the published data on these potential target molecules for future HS treatment. This article addresses the most promising molecules currently under investigation from a pathophysiological and clinical point of view. With phase III trials ongoing, the anti- interleukin (IL)-17 biologics bimekizumab and secukinumab are in the most advanced stage of clinical development showing promising results. In addition, targeting IL-1α with bermekimab has shown encouraging results in two clinical trials. Directing treatment at neutrophil recruitment and activation by targeting IL-36 with spesolimab fits well in the pathogenic concept of HS and clinical phase II trial results are pending. In contrast to in situ evidence, Complement 5a (C5a) and C5a receptor blockade have only shown greater clinical benefit in patients with severe HS. Inhibition of Janus kinase (JAK) 1 signalling in HS showed clinical efficacy only in the highest dosage, highlighting that careful surveillance of the balance between safety and efficacy of JAK inhibition is warranted. Overall, clinical efficacies of all novel treatments reported so far are modest. To guide drug development, more and better-defined translational data on the pathogenesis of this severe and enigmatic inflammatory skin disease are required.

[PMID: 32884319]
Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) is a rare, chronic, recurrent inflammatory disease that affects the palms and/or the soles with sterile, erupting pustules, which are debilitating and usually resistant to treatment. It has genetic, histopathologic and clinical features that are not present in psoriasis; thus, it can be classified as a variant of psoriasis or as a separate entity. Smoking and upper respiratory infections have been suggested as main triggers of PPP. PPP is a challenging disease to manage, and the treatment approach involves both topical and systemic therapies, as well as phototherapy and targeted molecules. No gold standard therapy has yet been identified, and none of the treatments are curative. In patients with mild disease, control may be achieved with on-demand occlusion of topical agents. In patients with moderate-to-severe PPP, phototherapy or a classical systemic agent (acitretin being the best treatment option, especially in combination with PUVA) may be effective. Refractory patients or those with contraindications to use these therapies may be good candidates for apremilast or biologic therapy, particularly anti-IL-17A and anti-IL-23 agents. Recent PPP trials are focusing on blockage of IL-36 or IL-1 pathways, which play an important role in innate immunity. Indeed, IL-36 isoforms have been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. Therefore, blockage of the IL-36 pathway has become a new treatment target in PPP, and three studies are currently evaluating the use of monoclonal antibodies that block the IL-36 receptor in PPP: ANB019 and spesolimab (BI 655130). In this review, we explore the diagnosis, screening and treatment of patients with PPP.