[PMID: 30349847]
Thelaziasis is an ocular arthropod-borne, zoonotic disease of the eye infecting the conjunctival sac, lacrimal duct, and lacrimal gland caused by a nematode of the genus <i>Thelazia</i>. We report the first case of human ocular thelaziasis in Nepal in a 6-month-old child from a Rukum district, Nepal. The infant presented with conjunctivitis, and his visual acuity and dilated fundal examination were normal. A total of 6 worms were removed for identification. Collected nematodes were identified based on morphological keys as Thelazia <i>callipaeda</i>. The patient's symptoms improved after removal of the nematodes.

[PMID: 29087095]
The first case of ocular thelaziasis in a human male patient in Croatia is presented. Thelaziasis is a zoonosis caused by nematodes of the genus Thelazia, parasites of the conjunctival bags or tear ducts of mammals and birds. Two types of the genus Thelazia (T.) have been described as causes of infection in humans, T. callipaeda and T. californiensis. To date, less than 300 thelaziasis cases in humans have been reported. This zoonosis is very rare in humans in European countries, with a high incidence in Asian countries, especially in China, Thailand and Japan. Because of the high prevalence of the parasites in the Far East, T. callipaeda is called ‘Oriental eye worm’. The first case of thelaziasis in Europe was described in 2008 in Italy and France, where cases in animals had already been reported. Seasonal occurrence of thelaziasis in Europe depends on the presence of the vector, fruit flies of Drosophilidae family, Phortica variegate as the most common type. Adult worm is milky white, females grow to 20 mm and males up to 12 mm. Dogs and cats are the most common sources of infection for humans, which occurs as unilateral ocular infection. The clinical picture of infection is similar to bacterial and allergic conjunctivitis with tearing and foreign body sensation. After removal of worms, clinical signs quickly disappear and there is no need for anthelmintic treatment. In the treatment of secondary infections, local antibiotics and corticosteroids can be applied. The 82-year-old male patient presented to outpatient ophthalmology clinic for occasional sensation of pain, itching, redness and tearing in his left eye during the last few days. His left eye was blind due to previous retinal detachment and had severe conjunctival and ciliary infection with large corneal abscess. Worm-like movement in the lateral canthus was observed. After topical anesthesia, seven worms were removed. Upon surgical extirpation of the parasite, the diagnosis of thelaziasis was verified by microbiological identification. Only two cases of Thelazia in dogs were reported in Croatia, in December 2013 and January 2014. It is important to bear in mind this cause of eye infections, especially when caused by larval stages that are difficult to identify. Untimely diagnosis and inadequate treatment lead to extended illness and complications. The appearance of this parasite in Croatian patients suggests the need for inclusion of the pathogen in the differential diagnosis of bacterial or allergic conjunctivitis.

[PMID: 24399399]
Human thelaziasis is a zoonotic eye disease caused by a nematode parasite called Thelazia. In India, seven human cases of Thelazia have been reported earlier. This is the first case report of an infant infected with Thelazia. During the month of July, 2012, the infant was presented with an eye problem to the eye clinic from a village of Dibrugarh. Five worms (three female and two male) were recovered from the left eye of the infant. Thelazia infection is rare in infant, and report of this case is suggestive of prevalence of infection in the area and warrants further investigation.

[PMID: 30672496]
An 80-year-old male reported to the clinic with complaints of diminished vision, foreign body sensation, and occasionally some black object moving in front of the right eye. Detailed ocular examination revealed three slender creamy white live worms in the conjunctival sac of the right eye. Total three worms were retrieved and sent to the pathology department for detailed examination. The worm was identified as gravid Thelazia callipaeda. As per the search results in PubMed and Cochrane search engine, this is the first report of human case of gravid Thelazia infestation with simultaneous existence of embryonated or ensheathed eggs and primary-stage larvae in the same worm.

[PMID: 28710682]
Thelazia callipaeda is the main causative organism in thelaziasis, commonly infecting orbital cavities and associated tissues of carnivores. Thelazia callipaeda infection is rarely reported in humans, especially in infants. A 5-month-old male infant presented with 2 weeks of redness and increased secretions in the left eye. On examination, the left eye revealed the presence of one creamy thread-like mobile worm in the conjunctival sac. During surgical exploration, a total of 11 worms were extracted from the left eye. The worms were morphologically identified as seven female and four male T. callipaeda. Ocular symptoms resolved rapidly after the removal of the worms, with no recurrence after the 6-month follow-up. We present here detailed clinical and morphological information pertaining to T. callipaeda infection, which is considered to be a probably neglected parasitic disease of the eye. This case illustrates the importance of including thelaziasis into the differential diagnosis of ocular surface diseases, especially in infant patients.

[PMID: 25116781]
Thelaziasis is an arthropod-born disease of the eye and adnexa caused by Thelazia callipaeda, a nematode parasite transmitted by drosophilid flies to carnivores and humans. Because of its distribution mainly confined to South Asian countries and Russia, it is commonly known as Oriental eye worm. It is often under-reported and not been given its due clinical importance. We report first case of human thelaziasis from Hassan District, Karnataka. Five creamy-white, translucent worms were removed from the conjunctival sac of a 74-year-old male patient. Based on morphological characters, the worms were identified as nematodes belonging to the genus Thelazia and speciation was confirmed by CDC, Atlanta as callipaeda. Rarity of the disease and its ability to cause both extra and intraocular manifestations leading to ocular morbidity is the reason for presenting this case. From the available data, this is the first case report from Karnataka, India.

[PMID: 17211660]
Thelaziasis is an ocular infection of several mammals caused by nematodes of the genus Thelazia (Spirurida, Thelaziidae). The adults live in the lachrymal ducts and conjunctival sacs of infected animals, and transmission occurs by means of different species of muscids. T. rhodesi, T. skrjabini, and T. gulosa affect mainly cattle, inducing conjunctivitis, keratitis, and ocular discharge. This article describes the morphological features of adult T. rhodesi, T. skrjabini, and T. gulosa by scanning electron microscopy and highlights the most relevant differences for their identification.