[PMID: 28087823]
To determine the natural history of dissecting aneurysm (DA) and whether DA is associated with an increased recurrent stroke risk and whether type of antithrombotic drugs (antiplatelets vs anticoagulants) modifies the persistence or development of DA. We included 264 patients with extracranial cervical artery dissection (CAD) from the Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study (CADISS), a multicenter prospective study that compared antiplatelet with anticoagulation therapy. Logistic regression was used to estimate age- and sex-adjusted odds ratios. We conducted a systematic review of published studies assessing the natural history of DA and stroke risk in patients with non-surgically-treated extracranial CAD with DA. In CADISS, DA was present in 24 of 264 patients at baseline. In 36 of 248 patients with follow-up neuroimaging at 3 months, 12 of the 24 baseline DAs persisted, and 24 new DA had developed. There was no association between treatment allocation (antiplatelets vs anticoagulants) and whether DA at baseline persisted at follow-up or whether new DA developed. During 12 months of follow-up, stroke occurred in 1 of 48 patients with DA and in 7 of 216 patients without DA (age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio 0.84; 95% confidence interval 0.10-7.31; <i>p</i> = 0.88). Published studies, mainly retrospective, showed a similarly low risk of stroke and no evidence of an increased stroke rate in patients with DA. The results of CADISS provide evidence suggesting that DAs may have benign prognosis and therefore medical treatment should be considered.

[PMID: 18705933]
Cervical artery dissection is an important cause of stroke in the young. It can present with local symptoms or stroke/transient ischaemic attacks. Following presentation there is a risk of stroke, particularly in the first month following presentation. The mechanism of stroke is believed to be thromboembolic in the majority of cases. Many clinicians anticoagulate patients with cervical dissection for 3-6 months. This is not evidence based and is supported by a paucity of data and no data from randomised control trials. CADISS is a prospective multicentre randomised-controlled trial in acute (within 7 days of onset) carotid and vertebral artery dissection. Intracerebral artery dissection is excluded. Patients are randomised to antiplatelet therapy (aspirin, dipyridamole or clopidogrel alone or in dual combination) or anticoagulation therapy [heparin followed by warfarin aiming for an International Normalised Ratio (INR) in the range 2-3] for at least 3 months. Treatment is open-label. The primary end-point is ipsilateral stroke or death within 3 months from randomisation. Secondary end-points include any TIA or stroke, major bleeding and presence of residual stenosis at 3 months (>50%). All neuroimaging and serious adverse events will be adjudicated blinded to treatment. An initial feasibility phase of 250 subjects will allow us to determine whether *there are sufficient clinical end-points to provide the power to determine a treatment effect and *adequate numbers of patients can be recruited. The feasibility phase will be continued into a fully powered definitive treatment trial. Initial power calculations based on limited natural history data suggest a sample size of approximately 3000. Sample size calculations will be refined once the frequency of outcome events during the feasibility phase is known.

[PMID: 22855862]
To present the results of the nonrandomized arm of the Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study (CADISS-NR) trial, comparing anticoagulation and antiplatelets for prevention of recurrent stroke after carotid and vertebral dissection, and perform a meta-analysis of these results with previously published studies comparing the 2 therapeutic strategies. A total of 88 patients from 22 centers with extracranial carotid and vertebral dissection were recruited within 1 month of symptom onset. The primary endpoint was recurrent stroke at 3 months. A systematic review was performed, and results of published studies included in a meta-analysis with the CADISS-NR results. In CADISS-NR, one patient in each group had recurrent ischemic stroke (antiplatelet 1/59 [1.69% ], anticoagulation 1/28 [3.57%]). At the primary endpoint of 3 months, 3 (5.08%) antiplatelet patients had recurrent TIA, compared with none in the anticoagulation group. For meta-analysis, there were data from 40 nonrandomized studies including 1,636 patients. There was no significant difference between the 2 treatments in recurrent stroke risk (antiplatelet 13/499 [2.6%], anticoagulant 20/1,137 [1.8%], odds ratio [OR] 1.49) or risk of death (antiplatelet 5/499 [1.00%], anticoagulant 9/1,137 [0.80%], OR 1.27). There is no evidence for superiority of anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy in prevention of stoke after carotid and vertebral artery dissection; however, all data are from nonrandomized studies and randomized studies are required. The nonrandomized CADISS data show a lower rate of recurrent stroke than reported in some previous studies. www.dissection.co.uk, ISRNCTN44555237.

[PMID: 22110554]
Spontaneous internal carotid artery dissection is not an uncommon cause of ischaemic stroke in younger patients, but multiple cervical arterial dissections at presentation are uncommon. Recurrence of dissection in a previously normal artery is common. In this case report we review the history, clinical findings and management of a 42-year-old woman who presented with stroke and Horner syndrome and was found to have spontaneous bilateral internal carotid artery dissection. She was not anticoagulated due to concerns relating to the size of her infarct. She was treated with a combination of aspirin and clopidogrel. We use dual antiplatelets for the management of cervical dissections as a part of the CADISS trial. The patient made good progress with the multidisciplinary team and was discharged on day 22 with support from the community stroke team.

[PMID: 19386884]
A 32-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of a headache and vertigo precipitated by sneezing. He had a recent history of neck trauma. Examination revealed horizontal nystagmus and a gait that veered to the left, exacerbated by heel to toe walking. A diagnosis of vertebral artery dissection (VAD) was suspected. A bleed was ruled out in the ED by computerised tomography, after which the patient was loaded with aspirin. The diagnosis was confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography. Although optimal treatment for VAD is unknown, the Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study (CADISS) is an ongoing randomised multicentre prospective study comparing antiplatelet therapy with anticoagulation for patients with both carotid artery dissection and VAD. Headache is a very common presentation to the ED and a full neurological examination is essential if rarer causes are not to be missed.

[PMID: 30801621]
Extracranial carotid and vertebral artery dissection is an important cause of stroke, particularly in younger individuals. In some but not all observational studies, it has been associated with a high risk of recurrent stroke. Both antiplatelet agents (APs) and anticoagulants (ACs) are used to reduce stroke risk, but whether 1 treatment strategy is more effective is unknown. To determine whether AP or AC therapy is more effective in preventing stroke in cervical dissection and the risk of recurrent stroke in a randomized clinical trial setting. A secondary outcome was to determine the effect on arterial imaging outcomes. Randomized, prospective, open-label international multicenter parallel design study with central blinded review of both clinical and imaging end points. Recruitment was conducted in 39 stroke and neurology secondary care centers in the United Kingdom and 7 centers in Australia between February 24, 2006, and June 17, 2013. One-year follow-up and analysis was conducted in 2018. Two hundred fifty participants with extracranial carotid and vertebral dissection with symptom onset within the last 7 days were recruited. Follow-up data at 1 year were available for all participants. Randomization to AP or AC (heparin followed by warfarin) for 3 months, after which the choice of AP and AC agents was decided by the local clinician. The primary end point was ipsilateral stroke and death. A planned per protocol (PP) analysis was performed in patients meeting the inclusion criteria following central review of imaging to confirm the diagnosis of dissection. A secondary end point was angiographic recanalization in those with imaging confirmed dissection. Two hundred fifty patients were randomized (118 carotid and 132 vertebral), 126 to AP and 124 to AC. Mean (SD) age was 49 (12) years. Mean (SD) time to randomization was 3.65 (1.91) days. The recurrent stroke rate at 1 year was 6 of 250 (2.4%) on ITT analysis and 5 of 197 (2.5%) on PP analysis. There were no significant differences between treatment groups for any outcome. Of the 181 patients with confirmed dissection and complete imaging at baseline and 3 months, there was no difference in the presence of residual narrowing or occlusion between those receiving AP (n = 56 of 92) vs those receiving AC (n = 53 of 89) (P = .97). During 12 months of follow-up, the number of recurrent strokes was low. There was no difference between treatment groups in outcome events or the rate of recanalization. ISRCTN.com Identifier: CTN44555237.

[PMID: 25684164]
Extracranial carotid and vertebral artery dissection is an important cause of stroke, especially in young people. In some observational studies it has been associated with a high risk of recurrent stroke. Both antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulant drugs are used to reduce risk of stroke but whether one treatment strategy is more effective than the other is unknown. We compared their efficacy in the Cervical Artery Dissection in Stroke Study (CADISS), with the additional aim of establishing the true risk of recurrent stroke. We did this randomised trial at hospitals with specialised stroke or neurology services (39 in the UK and seven in Australia). We included patients with extracranial carotid and vertebral dissection with onset of symptoms within the past 7 days. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) by an automated telephone randomisation service to receive antiplatelet drugs or anticoagulant drugs (specific treatment decided by the local clinician) for 3 months. Patients and clinicians were not masked to allocation, but investigators assessing endpoints were. The primary endpoint was ipsilateral stroke or death in the intention-to-treat population. The trial was registered with EUDract (2006-002827-18) and ISRN (CTN44555237). We enrolled 250 participants (118 carotid, 132 vertebral). Mean time to randomisation was 3·65 days (SD 1·91). The major presenting symptoms were stroke or transient ischaemic attack (n=224) and local symptoms (headache, neck pain, or Horner's syndrome; n=26). 126 participants were assigned to antiplatelet treatment versus 124 to anticoagulant treatment. Overall, four (2%) of 250 patients had stroke recurrence (all ipsilateral). Stroke or death occurred in three (2%) of 126 patients versus one (1%) of 124 (odds ratio [OR] 0·335, 95% CI 0·006-4·233; p=0·63). There were no deaths, but one major bleeding (subarachnoid haemorrhage) in the anticoagulant group. Central review of imaging failed to confirm dissection in 52 patients. Preplanned per-protocol analysis excluding these patients showed stroke or death in three (3%) of 101 patients in the antiplatelet group versus one (1%) of 96 patients in the anticoagulant group (OR 0·346, 95% CI 0·006-4·390; p=0·66). We found no difference in efficacy of antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs at preventing stroke and death in patients with symptomatic carotid and vertebral artery dissection but stroke was rare in both groups, and much rarer than reported in some observational studies. Diagnosis of dissection was not confirmed after review in many cases, suggesting that radiographic criteria are not always correctly applied in routine clinical practice. Stroke Association.