[PMID: 7578083]
Sites of cytosine methylation are known to be hot spots for C.G to T.A mutations in a number of systems, including human cells. Traditionally, spontaneous hydrolytic deamination of 5-methylcytosine to thymine has been invoked as the cause of this phenomenon. We show here that a bacterial cytosine methyltransferase can convert 5-methylcytosine in DNA to thymine and that this reaction creates a mutational hot spot at a site of DNA methylation. The reaction is fairly insensitive to the methyl donor in the reaction, S-adenosylmethionine. In many cancers, the most frequent class of mutations is C to T changes within CG dinucleotides of the tumor suppressor gene p53. Because of the similarities of the reaction mechanisms of mammalian and bacterial enzymes and the physiology of the cancer cells, this reaction is expected to contribute to mutations at CG dinucleotides in precancerous cells.

[PMID: 8441638]
The product of the dcm gene is the only DNA cytosine-C5 methyltransferase of Escherichia coli K-12; it catalyses transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) to the C-5 position of the inner cytosine residue of the cognate sequence CCA/TGG. Sequence-specific, covalent crosslinking of the enzyme to synthetic oligonucleotides containing 5-fluoro-2'-deoxycytidine is demonstrated. This reaction is abolished if serine replaces the cysteine at residue #177 of the enzyme. These results lend strong support to a catalytic mechanism in which an enzyme sulfhydryl group undergoes Michael addition to the C5-C6 double bond, thus activating position C-5 of the substrate DNA cytosine residue for electrophilic attack by the methyl donor SAM. The enzyme is capable of self-methylation in a DNA-independent reaction requiring SAM and the presence of cysteine at position #177.

[PMID: 1584813]
The properties of the methyl-directed DNA (cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1.37) suggest that it is the enzyme that maintains patterns of methylation in the human genome. Proposals for the enzyme's mechanism of action suggest that 5-methyldeoxycytidine is produced from deoxycytidine via a dihydrocytosine intermediate. We have used an oligodeoxynucleotide containing 5-fluorodeoxycytidine as a suicide substrate to capture the enzyme and the dihydrocytosine intermediate. Gel retardation experiments demonstrate the formation of the expected covalent complex between duplex DNA containing 5-fluorodeoxycytidine and the human enzyme. Formation of the complex was dependent upon the presence of the methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine, suggesting that it comprises an enzyme-linked 5-substituted dihydrocytosine moiety in DNA. Dihydrocytosine derivatives are extremely labile toward hydrolytic deamination in aqueous solution. Because C-to-T transition mutations are especially prevalent at CG sites in human DNA, we have used high-performance liquid chromatography to search for thymidine that might be generated by hydrolysis during the methyl transfer reaction. Despite the potential for deamination inherent in the formation of the intermediate, the methyltransferase did not produce detectable amounts of thymidine. The data suggest that the ability of the human methyltransferase to preserve genetic information when copying a methylation pattern (i.e., its fidelity) is comparable to the ability of a mammalian DNA polymerase to preserve genetic information when copying a DNA sequence. Thus the high frequency of C-to-T transitions at CG sites in human DNA does not appear to be due to the normal enzymatic maintenance of methylation patterns.

[PMID: 11208790]
Deoxycytosine methylase (Dcm) enzyme activity causes mutagenesis in vitro either directly by enzyme-induced deamination of cytosine to uracil in the absence of the methyl donor, S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), or indirectly through spontaneous deamination of [5-methyl]cytosine to thymine. Using a Lac reversion assay, we investigated the contribution of the first mechanism to Dcm mutagenesis in vivo by lowering the levels of SAM. Escherichia coli SAM levels were lowered by reducing SAM synthetase activity via the introduction of a metK84 allele or by hydrolyzing SAM using the bacteriophage T3 SAM hydrolase. The metK84 strains exhibited increased C-to-T mutagenesis. Expression of the T3 SAM hydrolase gene, under the control of the arabinose-inducible P(BAD) promoter, effectively reduced Dcm-mediated genomic DNA methylation. However, increased mutagenesis was not observed until extremely high arabinose concentrations were used, and genome methylation at Dcm sites was negligible.

[PMID: 8065896]
The DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase (m5C-MTase) M.BspRI is able to accept the methyl group from the methyl donor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) in the absence of DNA. Transfer of the methyl group to the enzyme is a slow reaction relative to DNA methylation. Self-methylation is dependent on the native conformation of the enzyme and is inhibited by S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine, DNA and sulfhydryl reagents. Amino acid sequencing of proteolytic peptides obtained from M.BspRI, which had been methylated with [methyl-3H]AdoMet, and thin layer chromatography of the modified amino acid identified two cysteines, Cys156 and Cys181 that bind the methyl group in form of S-methylcysteine. One of the acceptor residues, Cys156 is the highly conserved cysteine which plays the role of the catalytic nucleophile of m5C-MTases.

[PMID: 15273274]
Rotation of a DNA or RNA nucleotide out of the double helix and into a protein pocket ('base flipping') is a mechanistic feature common to some DNA/RNA-binding proteins. Here, we report the structure of HhaI methyltransferase in complex with DNA containing a south-constrained abasic carbocyclic sugar at the target site in the presence of the methyl donor byproduct AdoHcy. Unexpectedly, the locked south pseudosugar appears to be trapped in the middle of the flipping pathway via the DNA major groove, held in place primarily through Van der Waals contacts with a set of invariant amino acids. Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that the structural stabilization observed with the south-constrained pseudosugar will not occur with a north-constrained pseudosugar, which explains its lowered binding affinity. Moreover, comparison of structural transitions of the sugar and phosphodiester backbone observed during computational studies of base flipping in the M.HhaI-DNA-AdoHcy ternary complex indicate that the south-constrained pseudosugar induces a conformation on the phosphodiester backbone that corresponds to that of a discrete intermediate of the base-flipping pathway. As previous crystal structures of M.HhaI ternary complex with DNA displayed the flipped sugar moiety in the antipodal north conformation, we suggest that conversion of the sugar pucker from south to north beyond the middle of the pathway is an essential part of the mechanism through which flipping must proceed to reach its final destination. We also discuss the possibility of the south-constrained pseudosugar mimicking a transition state in the phosphodiester and sugar moieties that occurs during DNA base flipping in the presence of M.HhaI.

[PMID: 7607467]
In the absence of DNA substrate, the DNA methyltransferase (MTase) M.BspRI can methylate itself using the methyl donor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet). The methyl group is transferred to two Cys residues of the MTase.