[PMID: 25360794]
Gelatinase B/matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (EC 3.4.24.35) cleaves many substrates and is produced by most cell types as a zymogen, proMMP-9, in complex with the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1). Natural proMMP-9 occurs as monomers, homomultimers and heterocomplexes, but our knowledge about the overall structure of proMMP-9 monomers and multimers is limited. We investigated biochemical, biophysical and functional characteristics of zymogen and activated forms of MMP-9 monomers and multimers. In contrast with a conventional notion of a dimeric nature of MMP-9 homomultimers, we demonstrate that these are reduction-sensitive trimers. Based on the information from electrophoresis, AFM and TEM, we generated a 3D structure model of the proMMP-9 trimer. Remarkably, the proMMP-9 trimers possessed a 50-fold higher affinity for TIMP-1 than the monomers. In vivo, this finding was reflected in a higher extent of TIMP-1 inhibition of angiogenesis induced by trimers compared with monomers. Our results show that proMMP-9 trimers constitute a novel structural and functional entity that is differentially regulated by TIMP-1.

[PMID: 24570026]
The structural and functional integrity of the endothelium is crucial in maintaining vascular homeostasis and preventing atherosclerosis. Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have an increased risk of developing endothelial dysfunction and premature cardiovascular disease. Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation is increased in SLE and has been proposed to contribute to endothelial damage, but the mechanism remains unclear. To determine the mechanism by which enhanced NET formation by low-density granulocytes (LDGs) in SLE contributes to endothelial damage and disrupts the endothelium. The putative role of NET-externalised matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in altering the functional integrity of the endothelium was examined. MMP-9 externalised by lupus LDGs during NET formation specifically impaired murine aortic endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation and induced endothelial cell apoptosis. Endothelial dysfunction correlated with the activation of endothelial MMP-2 by MMP-9 present in NETs, while inhibition of MMP-2 activation restored endothelium-dependent function and decreased NET-induced vascular cytotoxicity. Moreover, immunogenic complexes composed of MMP-9 and anti-MMP-9 were identified in SLE sera. These complexes, as well as anti-MMP-9 autoantibodies, induced NETosis and enhanced MMP-9 activity. These observations implicate activation of endothelial MMP-2 by MMP-9 contained in NETs as an important player in endothelial dysfunction, and MMP-9 as a novel self-antigen in SLE. These results further support that aberrant NET formation plays pathogenic roles in SLE.

[PMID: 26013370]
Phagocytosis of malaria pigment (hemozoin) induces increased activity of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9, an endopeptidase involved in cytokine regulation. In this study, we examined whether a common functional MMP-9 promoter polymorphism (rs3918242) affects Plasmodium falciparum infection in pregnancy. Eighteen percent of Ghanaian primiparae carried the minor T allele. It was associated with reduced odds of placental hemozoin and of placental as well as peripheral blood parasitemia. The results indicate that a common MMP-9 polymorphism protects against placental malaria indicating that this endopeptidase is involved in susceptibility to P. falciparum.

[PMID: 23001203]
Extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of endopeptydases which recquire a zinc ion at their active site, for proteolityc activity. There are six members of the MMP family: matrilysins, collagenases, stromelysins, gelatinases, membrane MMPs and other MMPs. Activity of MMPs is regulated at the level of gene transcription, mRNA stability, zymogene proteolitic activation, inhibition of an active enzyme and MMP degradation. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are main intracellular inhibitors of MMPs. Host cells can be stimulated by tumor cells to produce MMPs by secreted interleukins, interferons, growth factors and an extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN). MMPs are produced by tumor cells, fibroblasts, macrophages, mast cells, polimorphonuclear neutrophiles (PMNs) and endothelial cells (ECs). MMPs affect many stages of tumor development, facilitating its growth through promoting tumor cells proliferation, invasion and migration, new blood vessels formation and blocking tumor cells apoptosis. MMPs can promote tumor development in several ways. ECM degradation results in release of peptide growth factors. Growth factors linked with cell surface or binding proteins can also be liberated by MMPs. MMPs can indirectly regulate integrin signalling or cleave E-cadherins, facilitating cell migration. MMPs support metastasis inducing an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). MMP also support transendothelial migration. MMPs support angiogenesis by releasing pro-angiogenic factors and degrading ECM to support ECs migration. Cell surface growth factor receptors are also cleaved by MMPs, which results in inhibition of tumor development, so is release of anti-angiogenic factors from ECM.

[PMID: 26087627]
To study the impact of a polymorphic variant of the matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) gene on the development and course of chronic heart failure (CHF) in patients with coronary heart disease. A total of 277 patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Class (FC) II-IV CHF were examined. MMP-3 -1171 5A/6A genetic polymorphism was studied by polymerase chain reaction. A control group included 136 patients (mean age 53.6 ± 4.8 years) with no signs of cardiovascular diseases, as evidenced by the examination. The frequency of the 5A allele and the 5A/5A genotype of the 1171 5A/6A polymorphic locus in the MMP-3 gene proved to be higher in the patients with CHF than that in the control group. Thus, the variability of the 5A allele (odds ratio (OR), 1.39; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.033 to 1.869; p = 0.03) and the 5A/5A genotype (OR, 2.15; 95% CI: 1.131 to 4.070; p = 0.02) was associated with increased risk for CHF. There were significant differences in the frequency of MMP-3 alleles and genotypes in relation to FC of CHF. The frequency of the 5A/5A genotype was substantially higher in the patients with NYHA FC IV CHF than that in those with NYHA FC II CHF (32.8% versus 15.2%; p = 0.039). The frequency of the 5A allele was significantly higher in the patients with NYHA FC IV CHF than that in those with NYHA FC II CHF (55.5% and 39.3%; respectively; p = 0.019). Thus, the carriage of the 5A allele and the 5A/5A genotype of the 1171 5A/6A polymorphic locus in the MMP-3 gene is a risk factor of severe CHF. The determination of MMP-3 -1171 5A/6A polymorphism may be recommended for the early prediction of a risk for the development and severe course of CHF.

[PMID: 26150355]
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is a secreted glycoprotein with a major role in shaping the extracellular matrix and a detailed understanding of the secretory mechanism could help identify methods to correct diseases resulting from dysregulation of secretion. MMP-9 appears to follow a canonical secretory pathway through a quality control cycle in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) before transport of the properly folded protein to the Golgi apparatus and beyond for secretion. Through a complementation assay, we determined that LMAN1, a well-studied lectin-carrier protein, interacts with a secretion-competent N-glycosylated MMP-9 in the ER while N-glycosylation-deficient secretion-compromised MMP-9 does not. In contrast, co-immunoprecipitation demonstrated protein interaction between LMAN1 and secretion-compromised N-glycosylation-deficient MMP-9. MMP-9 secretion was reduced in the LMAN1 knockout cell line compared to control cells confirming the functional role of LMAN1. These observations support the role of LMAN1 as a lectin-carrier protein mediating efficient MMP-9 secretion.

[PMID: 22257051]
Extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent neutral endopeptidases involved in physiological and pathological processes, through the cleavage of extracellular matrix. MMPs are capable of degrading essentially all matrix components, which is crucial for malignant tumor growth, invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis. The vertebrates MMP family includes at least 26 enzymes (23 have been known in humans) with only MMP-1, 2, and 7 experimentally validated as targets for antitumoral drug design. However, inhibition of MMP-1 has been hypothesized to be the cause of the clinically observed musculoskeletal syndrome when broad spectrum inhibitors are used. On the other hand, MMP-9 is a tricky enzyme, since its inhibition might be useful in treating patients with early-stage cancers, but MMP-9 is an anti-target in patients with advanced disease. So, MMP-9 inhibition should also be prevented. Therefore, selective MMP-2 inhibition arises as a pursued profile for MMP binders. Among them, hydroxamates have been extensively studied as small molecule drug candidates characterized by an effective zinc-binding group plus additional side chains responsible for the selectivity. This article pays particular attention to MMP-2 selectivity on hydroxamate-type inhibitors, especially against MMP-9, and their chemical structure, SAR, general synthetic methods, and molecular modelling studies are here reviewed in order to inspire further design of new effective anticancer agents.