[PMID: 19398896]
Ubiquilins (UBQLN), a family of adaptor proteins with partial homology with ubiquitin, are proposed to facilitate proteasomal degradation of ubiquitinated substrates. We now demonstrate a novel role for UBQLN in promoting autophagosome maturation during nutrient deprivation. Ectopic expression of UBQLN protects cells against starvation-induced cell death, while depletion renders cells more susceptible. This protective function requires the essential autophagy regulators, Atg5 and Atg7. The ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain of UBQLN is required for its association with autophagosomes as well as for its prosurvival functions.Remarkably, during starvation-induced autophagy, UBQLN promotes the fusion of early autophagosomes with lysosomes.Overall, this work illustrates an important function for UBQLN in cell survival during nutrient starvation, which requires a newly recognized function for UBQLN in autophagosome maturation.

[PMID: 23046644]
Protein quality control (PQC) is essential to intracellular proteostasis and is carried out by sophisticated collaboration between molecular chaperones and targeted protein degradation. The latter is performed by proteasome-mediated degradation, chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), and selective macroautophagy, and collectively serves as the final line of defense of PQC. Ubiquitination and subsequently ubiquitin (Ub) receptor proteins (e.g., p62 and ubiquilins) are important common factors for targeting misfolded proteins to multiple quality control destinies, including the proteasome, lysosomes, and perhaps aggresomes, as well as for triggering mitophagy to remove defective mitochondria. PQC inadequacy, particularly proteasome functional insufficiency, has been shown to participate in cardiac pathogenesis. Tremendous advances have been made in unveiling the changes of PQC in cardiac diseases. However, the investigation into the molecular pathways regulating PQC in cardiac (patho)physiology, including the function of most ubiquitin receptor proteins in the heart, has only recently been initiated. A better understanding of molecular mechanisms governing PQC in cardiac physiology and pathology will undoubtedly provide new insights into cardiac pathogenesis and promote the search for novel therapeutic strategies to more effectively battle heart disease.This article is part of a Special Issue entitled "Focus on Cardiac Metabolism".

[PMID: 27345149]
We investigated how mitochondrial membrane proteins remain soluble in the cytosol until their delivery to mitochondria or degradation at the proteasome. We show that Ubiquilin family proteins bind transmembrane domains in the cytosol to prevent aggregation and temporarily allow opportunities for membrane targeting. Over time, Ubiquilins recruit an E3 ligase to ubiquitinate bound clients. The attached ubiquitin engages Ubiquilin's UBA domain, normally bound to an intramolecular UBL domain, and stabilizes the Ubiquilin-client complex. This conformational change precludes additional chances at membrane targeting for the client, while simultaneously freeing Ubiquilin's UBL domain for targeting to the proteasome. Loss of Ubiquilins by genetic ablation or sequestration in polyglutamine aggregates leads to accumulation of non-inserted mitochondrial membrane protein precursors. These findings define Ubiquilins as a family of chaperones for cytosolically exposed transmembrane domains and explain how they use ubiquitin to triage clients for degradation via coordinated intra- and intermolecular interactions.

[PMID: 22628307]
Protein degradation occurs through several distinct proteolytic pathways for membrane and cytosolic proteins. There is evidence that these processes are linked and that crosstalk among these major protein degradation pathways occurs. Ubiquilins, a family of ubiquitin-binding proteins, are involved in all protein degradation pathways. This minireview provides an overview of ubiquilin function in protein degradation and contrasts it with sequestosome-1 (p62), a protein that also has been implicated in multiple proteolytic pathways.

[PMID: 24674348]
Ubiquilins are proteins that function as ubiquitin receptors in eukaryotes. Mutations in two ubiquilin-encoding genes have been linked to the genesis of neurodegenerative diseases. However, ubiquilin functions are still poorly understood. In this study, evolutionary and functional data are combined to determine the origin and diversification of the ubiquilin gene family and to characterize novel potential roles of ubiquilins in mammalian species, including humans. The analysis of more than six hundred sequences allowed characterizing ubiquilin diversity in all the main eukaryotic groups. Many organisms (e. g. fungi, many animals) have single ubiquilin genes, but duplications in animal, plant, alveolate and excavate species are described. Seven different ubiquilins have been detected in vertebrates. Two of them, here called UBQLN5 and UBQLN6, had not been hitherto described. Significantly, marsupial and eutherian mammals have the most complex ubiquilin gene families, composed of up to 6 genes. This exceptional mammalian-specific expansion is the result of the recent emergence of four new genes, three of them (UBQLN3, UBQLN5 and UBQLNL) with precise testis-specific expression patterns that indicate roles in the postmeiotic stages of spermatogenesis. A gene with related features has independently arisen in species of the Drosophila genus. Positive selection acting on some mammalian ubiquilins has been detected. The ubiquilin gene family is highly conserved in eukaryotes. The infrequent lineage-specific amplifications observed may be linked to the emergence of novel functions in particular tissues.

[PMID: 28933694]
Ubiquilins (Ubqlns) are a family of ubiquitin receptors that promote the delivery of hydrophobic and aggregated ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for degradation. We carried out a proteomic analysis of a B cell lymphoma-derived cell line, BJAB, that requires UBQLN1 for survival to identify UBQLN1 client proteins. When UBQLN1 expression was acutely inhibited, 120 mitochondrial proteins were enriched in the cytoplasm, suggesting that the accumulation of mitochondrial client proteins in the absence of UBQLN1 is cytostatic. Using a <i>Ubqln1<sup>-/-</sup></i> mouse strain, we found that B cell receptor (BCR) ligation of <i>Ubqln1</i><sup>-/-</sup> B cells led to a defect in cell cycle entry. As in BJAB cells, mitochondrial proteins accumulated in BCR-stimulated cells, leading to protein synthesis inhibition and cell cycle block. Thus, UBQLN1 plays an important role in clearing mislocalized mitochondrial proteins upon cell stimulation, and its absence leads to suppression of protein synthesis and cell cycle arrest.

[PMID: 28315615]
Ubiquilin (UBQLN) proteins are adaptors thought to link ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome. However, our lab has recently reported a previously unappreciated role for loss of UBQLN in lung cancer progression. In fact, UBQLN genes are lost in over 50% of lung cancer samples examined. However, a reason for the loss of UBQLN has not been proposed, nor has a selective pressure that could lead to deletion of UBQLN been reported. Diesel Exhaust Particles (DEP) are a major concern in the large cities of developing nations and DEP exposed populations are at an increased risk of developing a number of illnesses, including lung cancer. A connection between DEP and UBQLN has never been examined. In the present study, we determined the effect of DEP on lung cell lines and were interested to determine if UBQLN proteins could potentially play a protective role following treatment with DEP. Interestingly, we found that DEP treated cells have increased expression of UBQLN proteins. In fact, over-expression of UBQLN was capable of protecting cells from DEP toxicity. To investigate the mechanism by which DEP leads to increased UBQLN protein levels, we identified and interrogated microRNAs that were predicted to regulate UBQLN mRNA. We found that DEP decreases the oncogenic microRNA, MIR155. Further, we showed that MIR155 regulates the mRNA of UBQLN1 and UBQLN2 in cells, such that increased MIR155 expression increased cell invasion, migration, wound formation and clonogenicity in UBQLN-loss dependent manner. This is the first report of an environmental carcinogen regulating expression of UBQLN proteins. We show that exposure of cells to DEP causes an increase in UBQLN levels and that MIR155 regulates mRNA of UBQLN. Thus, we propose that DEP-induced repression of MIR155 leads to increased UBQLN levels, which in turn may be a selective pressure on lung cells to lose UBQLN1.