[PMID: 19948722]
Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination and ensuing down-regulation and lysosomal degradation of the interferon alpha/beta receptor chain 1 (IFNAR1) of the receptor for Type I interferons play important roles in limiting the cellular responses to these cytokines. These events could be stimulated either by the ligands (in a Janus kinase-dependent manner) or by unfolded protein response (UPR) inducers including viral infection (in a manner dependent on the activity of pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum kinase). Both ligand-dependent and -independent pathways converge on phosphorylation of Ser(535) within the IFNAR1 degron leading to recruitment of beta-Trcp E3 ubiquitin ligase and concomitant ubiquitination and degradation. Casein kinase 1 alpha (CK1 alpha) was shown to directly phosphorylate Ser(535) within the ligand-independent pathway. Yet given the constitutive activity of CK1 alpha, it remained unclear how this pathway is stimulated by UPR. Here we report that induction of UPR promotes the phosphorylation of a proximal residue, Ser(532), in a pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum kinase-dependent manner. This serine serves as a priming site that promotes subsequent phosphorylation of IFNAR1 within its degron by CK1 alpha. These events play an important role in regulating ubiquitination and degradation of IFNAR1 as well as the extent of Type I interferon signaling.

[PMID: 16551269]
The type I IFNR (interferon receptor) is a heterodimer composed of two transmembrane chains, IFNAR1 (interferon-alpha receptor 1 subunit) and IFNAR2, which are associated with the tyrosine kinases Tyk2 and Jak1 (Janus kinase 1) respectively. Ligand-induced down-regulation of the type I IFNR is a major mechanism of negative regulation of cellular signalling and involves the internalization and lysosomal degradation of IFNAR1. IFNalpha promotes the phosphorylation of IFNAR1 on Ser535, followed by recruitment of the E3 ubiquitin ligase, beta-TrCP2 (beta-transducin repeats-containing protein 2), ubiquitination of IFNAR1 and proteolysis. The non-catalytic role of Tyk2 in sustaining the steady-state IFNAR1 level at the plasma membrane is well documented; however, little is known about the function of Tyk2 in the steps that precede and succeed serine phosphorylation and ubiquitination of IFNAR1 in response to ligand binding. In the present study, we show that catalytic activation of Tyk2 is not essential for IFNAR1 internalization, but is required for ligand-induced IFNAR1 serine phosphorylation, ubiquitination and efficient lysosomal proteolysis.

[PMID: 17873516]
Interferon alpha (IFNalpha) is widely used in treatment of malignant melanoma patients. This cytokine acts on cells by engaging Type I IFN receptor consisting of two subunits, (IFNAR1 and IFNAR2) followed by activation of Janus kinases (Jak). Levels of IFNAR1 (regulated via degradation mediated by the betaTrcp E3 ubiquitin ligase) and IFNalpha signaling were reduced in 1205Lu melanoma cell line that harbors activated BRAF and exhibits high levels of betaTrcp ubiquitin ligase. Expression of stabilized IFNAR1 in melanoma cells decreased their tumorigenicity. Furthermore, RNAi-mediated BRAF knockdown and pharmacologic inhibition of either Raf or MEK1 decreased levels of betaTrcp and stabilized IFNAR1. However, despite causing stabilization of IFNAR1, Raf inhibitor BAY 43-9006 interfered with cellular responses to IFNalpha most likely due to its ability to directly inhibit Jak activity. We discuss the implications of this result for combination therapy with BAY 43-9006 and IFNalpha in melanoma patients.

[PMID: 21173164]
Alpha interferon (IFN-α) controls homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells, regulates antiviral resistance, inhibits angiogenesis, and suppresses tumor growth. This cytokine is often used to treat cancers and chronic viral infections. The extent of cellular responses to IFN-α is limited by the IFN-induced ubiquitination and degradation of the IFN-α/β receptor chain 1 (IFNAR1) chain of the cognate receptor. IFNAR1 ubiquitination is facilitated by the βTrcp E3 ubiquitin ligase that is recruited to IFNAR1 upon its degron phosphorylation, which is induced by the ligand. Here we report identification of protein kinase D2 (PKD2) as a kinase that mediates the ligand-inducible phosphorylation of IFNAR1 degron and enables binding of βTrcp to the receptor. Treatment of cells with IFN-α induces catalytic activity of PKD2 and stimulates its interaction with IFNAR1. Expression and kinase activity of PKD2 are required for the ligand-inducible stimulation of IFNAR1 ubiquitination and endocytosis and for accelerated proteolytic turnover of IFNAR1. Furthermore, inhibition or knockdown of PKD2 robustly augments intracellular signaling induced by IFN-α and increases the efficacy of its antiviral effects. The mechanisms of the ligand-inducible elimination of IFNAR1 are discussed, along with the potential medical significance of this regulation.

[PMID: 14532120]
Down-regulation of activated signaling receptors in response to their ligands plays a key role in restricting the extent and duration of the signaling. Mechanisms underlying down-regulation of the type I interferon receptor consisting of IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 subunits remain largely unknown. Here we show that IFNAR1 interacts with the Homolog of Slimb (HOS) F-box protein in a phosphorylation-dependent manner, and that this interaction is promoted by interferon alpha (IFNalpha). IFNAR1 is ubiquitinated by the Skp1-Cullin1-HOS-Roc1 (SCF(HOS)) ubiquitin ligase in vitro. HOS expression and activities are required for IFNalpha-stimulated ubiquitination of IFNAR1, endocytosis of the type I interferon receptor, down-regulation of IFNAR1 levels, and IFNAR1 proteolysis via the lysosomal pathway. Furthermore, modulations of HOS activities affect the extent of Stat1 phosphorylation and Stat-mediated transcriptional activities as well as the extent of antiproliferative effects of type I interferons. These findings characterize SCF(HOS) as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that is essential for ubiquitination, proteolysis and down-regulation of IFNAR1, and implicate HOS in the regulation of cellular responses to IFNalpha.

[PMID: 15337770]
Ubiquitination, endocytosis, and lysosomal degradation of the IFNAR1 (interferon alpha receptor 1) subunit of the type I interferon (IFN) receptor is mediated by the SCFbeta-Trcp (Skp1-Cullin1-F-box protein beta transducin repeat-containing protein) E3 ubiquitin ligase in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. In addition, stability of IFNAR1 is regulated by its binding to Tyk2 kinase. Here we characterize the determinants of IFNAR1 ubiquitination and degradation. We found that the integrity of two Ser residues at positions 535 and 539 within the specific destruction motif present in the cytoplasmic tail of IFNAR1 is essential for the ability of IFNAR1 to recruit beta-Trcp as well as to undergo efficient ubiquitination and degradation. Using an antibody that specifically recognizes IFNAR1 phosphorylated on Ser535 we found that IFNAR1 is phosphorylated on this residue in cells. This phosphorylation is promoted by treatment of cells with IFNalpha. Although the cytoplasmic tail of IFNAR1 contains seven Lys residues that could function as potential ubiquitin acceptor sites, we found that only three (Lys501, Lys525, and Lys526), all located proximal to the destruction motif, are essential for ubiquitination and degradation of IFNAR1. Expression of Tyk2 stabilized IFNAR1 in a manner that was dependent neither on its binding to beta-Trcp nor IFNAR1 ubiquitination. We discuss the complexities and specifics of the ubiquitination and degradation of IFNAR1, which is a beta-Trcp substrate that undergoes degradation via a lysosomal pathway.

[PMID: 18056411]
Ligand-induced endocytosis and lysosomal degradation of cognate receptors regulate the extent of cell signaling. Along with linear endocytic motifs that recruit the adaptin protein complex 2 (AP2)-clathrin molecules, monoubiquitination of receptors has emerged as a major endocytic signal. By investigating ubiquitin-dependent lysosomal degradation of the interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta receptor 1 (IFNAR1) subunit of the type I IFN receptor, we reveal that IFNAR1 is polyubiquitinated via both Lys48- and Lys63-linked chains. The SCF(betaTrcp) (Skp1-Cullin1-F-box complex) E3 ubiquitin ligase that mediates IFNAR1 ubiquitination and degradation in cells can conjugate both types of chains in vitro. Although either polyubiquitin linkage suffices for postinternalization sorting, both types of chains are necessary but not sufficient for robust IFNAR1 turnover and internalization. These processes also depend on the proximity of ubiquitin-acceptor lysines to a linear endocytic motif and on its integrity. Furthermore, ubiquitination of IFNAR1 promotes its interaction with the AP2 adaptin complex that is required for the robust internalization of IFNAR1, implicating cooperation between site-specific ubiquitination and the linear endocytic motif in regulating this process.