[PMID: 9106214]
The two major virulence factors of Bacillus anthracis are the tripartite toxin and the polyglutamate capsule, which are encoded by genes on the large plasmids, pXO1 and pXO2, respectively. The genes atxA, located on pXO1, and acpA, located on pXO2, encode positive trans-acting proteins that are involved in bicarbonate-mediated regulation of toxin and capsule production, respectively. A derivative strain cured of pXO1 produced less capsular substance than the parent strain harbouring both pXO1 and pXO2, and electroporation of the strain cured of pXO1 with a plasmid containing the cloned atxA gene resulted in an increased level of capsule production. An acpA-null mutant was complemented by not only acpA but also the atxA gene. The cap region, which is essential for encapsulation, contains three genes capB, capC, and capA, arranged in that order. The atxA gene stimulated capsule synthesis from the cloned cap region. Transcriptional analysis of cap by RNA slot-blot hybridization and primer-extension analysis revealed that atxA activated expression of cap in trans at the transcriptional level. These results indicate that cross-talk occurs, in which the pXO1-located gene, atxA, activates transcription of the cap region genes located on pXO2. We identified two major apparent transcriptional start sites, designated P1 and P2, located at positions 731 bp and 625 bp, respectively, upstream of the translation-initiation codon of capB. Transcription initiated from P1 and P2 was activated by both atxA and acpA, and activation appeared to be stimulated by bicarbonate. Deletion analysis of the upstream region of the cap promoter revealed that activation by both atxA and acpA required a DNA segment of 70 bp extending upstream of the P1 site. These results suggest that cross-talk by atxA to the genes encoding capsule synthesis is caused by the interaction of the atxA gene product with a regulatory sequence upstream of cap.

[PMID: 9199422]
Anthrax toxin gene expression in Bacillus anthracis is dependent on the presence of atxA, a trans-acting regulatory gene located on the resident 185-kb plasmid pXO1. In atxA+ strains, expression of the toxin genes (pag, lef, and cya) is enhanced by two physiologically significant signals: elevated CO2/bicarbonate and temperature. To determine whether increased toxin gene expression in response to these signals is associated with increased atxA expression, we monitored steady-state levels of atxA mRNA and AtxA protein in cells cultured in different conditions. We purified histidine-tagged AtxA [AtxA(His)] from Escherichia coli and used anti-AtxA(His) serum to detect AtxA in protein preparations from B. anthracis cells. AtxA was identified as a protein with an apparent size of 56 kDa in cytoplasmic fractions of B. anthracis cells. Our data indicate that atxA expression is not influenced by CO2/bicarbonate levels. However, the steady-state level of atxA mRNA in cells grown in elevated CO2/bicarbonate at 37 degrees C is five- to sixfold higher than that observed in cells grown in the same conditions at 28 degrees C. A corresponding difference in AtxA protein was also seen at the different growth temperatures. When atxA was cloned on a multicopy plasmid in B. anthracis, AtxA levels corresponding to the atxA gene copy number were observed. However, this strain produced significantly less pag mRNA and protective antigen protein than the parental strain harboring atxA in single copy on pXO1. These results indicate that increased AtxA expression does not lead to a corresponding increase in pag expression. Our data strongly suggest that an additional factor(s) is involved in regulation of pag and that the relative amounts of such a factor(s) and AtxA are important for optimal toxin gene expression.

[PMID: 8577251]
Bacillus anthracis plasmid pXO1 carries the structural genes for the three anthrax toxin proteins, cya (edema factor), lef (lethal factor), and pag (protective antigen). Expression of the toxin genes by B. anthracis is enhanced during growth under elevated levels of CO2. This CO2 effect is observed only in the presence of another pXO1 gene, atxA, which encodes a transactivator of anthrax toxin synthesis. Here we show that transcription of atxA does not appear to differ in cells grown in 5% CO2 compared with cells grown in air. Using a new efficient method for gene replacement in B. anthracis, we constructed an atxA-null mutant in which the atxA-coding sequence on pXO1 is replaced with an omega km-2 cassette. Transcription of all three toxin genes is decreased in the absence of atxA. The pag gene possesses two apparent transcription start sites, P1 and P2; only transcripts with 5' ends mapping to P1 are decreased in the atxA-null mutant. Deletion analysis of the pag promoter region indicates that the 111 bp region upstream of the P1 site is sufficient for atxA-mediated activation of this transcript. The cya and lef genes each have one apparent start site for transcription. Transcripts with 5' ends mapping to these sites are not detected in the atxA-null mutant. The atxA-null mutant is avirulent in mice. Moreover, the antibody response to all three toxin proteins is decreased significantly in atxA-null mutant-infected mice. These data suggest that the atxA gene product also regulates toxin gene expression during infection.

[PMID: 9234759]
The Bacillus anthracis toxin genes, cya, lef, and pag, can be viewed as a regulon, in which transcription of all three genes is activated in trans by the same regulatory gene, atxA, in response to the same signal, CO2. In atxA+ strains, toxin gene expression is increased 5- to 20-fold in cells grown in 5% CO2 relative to cells grown in air. CO2-enhanced toxin gene transcription is not observed in atx4-null mutants. Here, we used two independent techniques to obtain evidence for additional CO2-induced atxA-regulated genes. First, total protein preparations from atxA4+ and atxA isolates grown in 5% CO2 and in air were examined by two-dimensional electrophoresis. Comparison of the resulting protein patterns indicated that synthesis of non-toxin proteins is influenced by growth in elevated CO2 and the toxin gene regulator, atxA. Second, we generated random transcriptional lacZ fusions in B. anthracis with transposon Tn917-LTV3. Transposon-insertion libraries were screened for mutants expressing CO2-enhanced atxA-dependent beta-galactosidase activity. DNA sequence analysis of transposon insertion sites in 17 mutants carrying CO2- and atxA-regulated fusions revealed 10 mutants carrying independent insertions on the 185-kb toxin plasmid pXO1 which did not map to the toxin genes. The tcr-lacZ fusion mutants (tcr for toxin coregulated) were Tox+, indicating that these genes may not be involved in anthrax toxin gene activation. Our data indicate a clear association of atxA with CO2-enhanced gene expression in B. anthracis and provide evidence that atxA regulates genes other than the structural genes for the anthrax toxin proteins.

[PMID: 15149039]
Transcription of the major Bacillus anthracis virulence genes is triggered by CO2, a signal mimicking the host environment. A 182-kb plasmid, pXO1, carries the anthrax toxin genes and the genes responsible for their regulation of transcription, namely atxA and, pagR, the second gene of the pag operon. AtxA has major effects on the physiology of B. anthracis. It coordinates the transcription activation of the toxin genes with that of the capsule biosynthetic enzyme operon, located on the second virulence plasmid, pXO2. In rich medium, B. anthracis synthesises alternatively two S-layer proteins (Sap and EA1). An exponential phase "Sap-layer" is subsequently replaced by a stationary phase "EA1-layer". S-layer gene transcription is controlled by alternative sigma factors and by Sap acting as a transcriptional repressor of eag. Furthermore, in vitro in presence of CO2 and in vivo, AtxA is part of the sap and eag regulatory network. Only eag is significantly expressed in these conditions and this is due to AtxA activating eag and repressing sap transcription. PagR, and not AtxA itself, is the direct effector of this regulation by binding to sap and eag promoter regions. Therefore, PagR mediates the effect of AtxA on eag and sap and is the most downstream element of a signalling cascade initiated by AtxA. Taken together, these results indicate that the B. anthracis transcriptional regulator AtxA is controlling the synthesis of the three toxin components and of the surface elements (capsule and S-layer). Thus, AtxA is a master regulator that coordinates the response to host signals by orchestrating positive and negative controls over genes located on all genetic elements.

[PMID: 21923765]
AtxA, a unique regulatory protein of unknown molecular function, positively controls expression of the major virulence genes of Bacillus anthracis. The 475 amino acid sequence of AtxA reveals DNA binding motifs and regions similar to proteins associated with the phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTS). We used strains producing native and functional epitope-tagged AtxA proteins to examine protein-protein interactions in cell lysates and in solutions of purified protein. Co-affinity purification, non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and bis(maleimido)hexane (BMH) cross-linking experiments revealed AtxA homo-multimers. Dimers were the most abundant species. BMH cross-links available cysteines within 13 Å. To localize interaction sites, six AtxA mutants containing distinct Cys→Ser substitutions were tested for multimerization and cross-linking. All mutants multimerized, but one mutation, C402S, prevented cross-linking. Thus, BMH uses C402 to make the inter-molecular bond between AtxA proteins, but C402 is not required for protein-protein interaction. C402 is in a region bearing amino acid similarity to Enzyme IIB proteins of the PTS. The AtxA EIIB motif may function in protein oligomerization. Finally, cultures grown with elevated CO(2) /bicarbonate exhibited increased AtxA dimer/monomer ratios and increased AtxA activity, relative to cultures grown without added CO(2) /bicarbonate, suggesting that this host-associated signal enhances AtxA function by shifting the dimer/monomer equilibrium towards the dimeric state.

[PMID: 24661624]
Upon infection of a mammalian host, Bacillus anthracis responds to host cues, and particularly to elevated temperature (37°C) and bicarbonate/CO2 concentrations, with increased expression of virulence factors that include the anthrax toxins and extracellular capsular layer. This response requires the presence of the pXO1 virulence plasmid-encoded pleiotropic regulator AtxA. To better understand the genetic basis of this response, we utilized a controlled in vitro system and Next Generation sequencing to determine and compare RNA expression profiles of the parental strain and an isogenic AtxA-deficient strain in a 2 × 2 factorial design with growth environments containing or lacking carbon dioxide. We found 15 pXO1-encoded genes and 3 chromosomal genes that were strongly regulated by the separate or synergistic actions of AtxA and carbon dioxide. The majority of the regulated genes responded to both AtxA and carbon dioxide rather than to just one of these factors. Interestingly, we identified two previously unrecognized small RNAs that are highly expressed under physiological carbon dioxide concentrations in an AtxA-dependent manner. Expression levels of the two small RNAs were found to be higher than that of any other gene differentially expressed in response to these conditions. Secondary structure and small RNA-mRNA binding predictions for the two small RNAs suggest that they may perform important functions in regulating B. anthracis virulence. A majority of genes on the virulence plasmid pXO1 that are regulated by the presence of either CO2 or AtxA separately are also regulated synergistically in the presence of both. These results also elucidate novel pXO1-encoded small RNAs that are associated with virulence conditions.

[PMID: 17302798]
Expression of genes for Bacillus anthracis toxin and capsule virulence factors are dependent upon the AtxA transcription factor. The mechanism by which AtxA regulates the transcription of its target genes is unknown. Here we report that bioinformatic analyses suggested the presence in AtxA of two PTS (phosphenolpyruvate : sugar phosphotransferase system) regulation domains (PRD) generally regulated by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation at conserved histidine residues. By means of amino acid substitutions that mimic the phosphorylated (H to D) or the unphosphorylated (H to A) state of the protein, we showed that phosphorylation of H199 of PRD1 is likely to be necessary for AtxA activation while phosphorylation of H379 in PRD2 is inhibitory to toxin gene transcription. In vivo labelling experiments with radioactive phosphate allowed us to propose that H199 and H379 are AtxA residues subject to regulated phosphorylation. In support to these notions, we also show that deletion of ptsHI, encoding the HPr intermediate and the EI enzymes of PTS, or growth in the presence of glucose affect positively and negatively, respectively, the activity of AtxA. Our results link virulence factor production in B. anthracis to carbohydrate metabolism and, for the first time, provide a mechanistic explanation for AtxA transcriptional activity.