[PMID: 26155517]
Situs inversus totalis is a rare congenital anomaly in which position of the heart and all abdominal viscera is reversed. Situs abnormalities usually go unnoticed but may be recognized by radiography or ultrasonography as an incidental finding or during evaluation for congenital heart diseases. We present such an extremely rare and to the best of our knowledge the third reported case of an injured spleen in the right hypochondrium, following seemingly trivial blunt trauma in a patient with situs inversus totalis who underwent splenectomy. The presence of associated congenital heart defects, visceral anatomical variations and mirror imaging makes the anaesthetic management as well as the surgical exercise a challenging one in such cases.

[PMID: 26155468]
Agnathia, holoprosencephaly and situs inversus complex is an extremely rare form of congenital malformation. Though a few cases have been reported from other parts of the world, to the best of our knowledge none has been reported from India so far. Maternal alcoholism is regarded as an important factor causing holoprosencephaly. Disruption of the Shh gene signaling pathway is also said to be a factor for the occurrence of holoprosencephaly as well as left right asymmetry. Though several factors are suspected as a cause of this deformity, the precise aetiopathogenesis is still under debate. Lack of knowledge might be due to paucity of data from cases due to its rarity. Hereby, we are presenting a case of agnathia, holoprosencephaly and situs inversus born at 32 wk of gestation by an alcoholic mother. Externally the child had agnathia and cyclopia. There was no mandible or any oral cavity. It was accompanied by noticeable limb deformity. Internally there was holoprosencephaly, situs inversus totalis with several visceral abnormalities. To the best of our knowledge this is the first case of agnathia, holoprosencephaly and situs inversus complex to be reported in an indexed literature from India. This report also strengthens the association of maternal alcoholism with occurrence of holoprosencephaly.

[PMID: 26336554]
Neurally mediated reflex syncope is the most common cause of syncope in young individuals without cardiac or neurological pathology. We report a case of successful catheter ablation in a 17-year-old male with neurally mediated syncope (NMS) of the cardioinhibitory type. The patient had dextrocardia situs inversus totalis with a mirror-image reversal of the thoracic and abdominal organs. Because he experienced multiple syncope episodes despite pharmacological intervention, we performed endocardial ablation of the superior vena cava-aorta ganglionated plexus. Shortly afterwards, his heart rate increased from 40 to 76 beats per minutes. He has not experienced syncope during the 1-year follow-up.

[PMID: 26087838]
Situs inversus totalis is a relatively rare condition and is an autosomal recessive congenital defect in which an abdominal and/or thoracic organ is positioned as a "mirror image" of the normal position in the sagittal plane. We report our experience of laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy with lymph node dissection performed for gastric cancer in a patient with situs inversus totalis. A 58-year-old male was diagnosed with cT1bN0N0 gastric cancer. There were no vascular anomalies on abdominal angiographic computed tomography with three-dimensional reconstruction. laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy was performed with D1+ lymph node dissection, in accordance with the Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines. There were no intraoperative issues, and no postoperative complications. This was the first report describing laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy with the standard typical lymph node dissection in the English literature. We emphasize that the position of trocars and the standing side of the primary surgeon during the lymph node dissection are critical.

[PMID: 25527777]
Situs inversus totalis (SIT) is characterized by complete mirroring of gross cardiac anatomy and position combined with an incompletely mirrored myofiber arrangement, being normal at the apex but inverted at the base of the left ventricle (LV). This study relates myocardial structure to mechanical function by analyzing and comparing myocardial deformation patterns of normal and SIT subjects, focusing especially on circumferential-radial shear. In nine control and nine SIT normotensive human subjects, myocardial deformation was assessed from magnetic resonance tagging (MRT) image sequences of five LV short-axis slices. During ejection, no significant difference in either circumferential shortening (εcc) or its axial gradient (Δεcc) is found between corresponding LV levels in control and SIT hearts. Circumferential-radial shear (εcr) has a clear linear trend from apex-to-base in controls, while in SIT it hovers close to zero at all levels. Torsion as well as axial change in εcr (Δεcr) is as in controls in apical sections of SIT hearts but deviates significantly towards the base, changing sign close to the LV equator. Interindividual variability in torsion and Δεcr values is higher in SIT than in controls. Apex-to-base trends of torsion and Δεcr in SIT, changing sign near the LV equator, further substantiate a structural transition in myofiber arrangement close to the LV equator itself. Invariance of εcc and Δεcc patterns between controls and SIT subjects shows that normal LV pump function is achieved in SIT despite partial mirroring of myocardial structure leading to torsional and shear patterns that are far from normality.

[PMID: 25296948]
The authors reported a 73-year-old alcoholic man with previously-unrecognized situs inversus totalis suffering from left upper quadrant pain. Acute myocardial infarction was diagnosed and coronary angioplasty was performed immediately. However, the massive bleeding from the previously-unfound hepatomas caused hypovolemic shock and fatal outcome. Situs inversus totalis is a rare congenital anomaly with a complete mirror image of the thoracic and abdominal organs. Although being considered a benign entity, it would disturb diagnosis-making of the visceral diseases owing to the altered anatomy. To our knowledge, the coexistence of the coronary artery disease and ruptured hepatomas in situs inversus totalis, as in our patient, is never described. Recognition of any situs anomalies in time is the key to avoid misdiagnosis, inappropriate managements, and unwanted consequences.

[PMID: 25884612]
Situs inversus totalis (SIT) is an uncommon congenital syndrome, which refers to a reversal mirror-image of the normal thoracoabdominal organs position. The coexistence of SIT and abdominal aortic aneurysm has been seldom previously reported. We report a case of a 69-year-old man with SIT and infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) that underwent open repair with a straight graft through a minilaparatomy without evisceration. There is no consensus on which should be the optimum approach in cases of open surgical repair of AAA due to the limited number of cases described. The fact of intestinal scrolling to the left abdomen, unlike usual, is due to the anatomical arrangement of the root of the mesentery which is directed obliquely from duodenojejunal on the left side of the vertebra L2 to the ileocecal junction and right sacroiliac joint. A minilaparotomy without evisceration and with intestinal scrolling to left hemiabdomen, can be very useful and beneficial on those cases of congenital anatomical abnormalities that may add difficulty during the surgical procedure.

[PMID: 26043594]
Situs inversus totalis (SIT) represents a total vertical transposition of the thoracic and abdominal organs which are arranged in a mirror image reversal of the normal positioning. We presented a successful pre-dialysis kidney transplantation from a living sibling donor with SIT and the longest donor follow-up period, along with analysis of the reviewed literature. The pair for pre-dialysis kidney transplantation included a 68-year-old mother and 34-year-old daughter at low immunological risk. Comorbid- ities evidenced in kidney donors with previously diagnosed SIT, included moderate arterial hypertension and borderline blood glucose level. Explantation of the left donor kidney and its placement into the right iliac fossa of the recipient were performed in the course of the surgical procedure. A month after nephrectomy, second degree renal failure was noticed in the donor. A 20-month follow-up of the donor's kidney and graft in the recipient proved that their functions were excellent. In donors with previously di- agnosed SIT the multidisciplinary approach, preoperative evaluation of the patient and detection of possible vascular anomalies are required to provide maximum safety for the donor.