[PMID: 11953316]
To study the role of caspase-6 during nuclear disassembly, we generated a chicken DT40 cell line in which both alleles of the caspase-6 gene were disrupted. No obvious morphological differences were observed in the apoptotic process in caspase-6- deficient cells compared with the wild type. However, examination of apoptosis in a cell-free system revealed a block in chromatin condensation and apoptotic body formation when nuclei from HeLa cells expressing lamin A or lamin A-transfected Jurkat cells were incubated in caspase-6-deficient apoptotic extracts. Transfection of exogenous caspase-6 into the clone reversed this phenotype. Lamins A and C, which are caspase-6-only substrates, were cleaved by the wild-type and heterozygous apoptotic extracts but not by the extracts lacking caspase-6. Furthermore, the caspase-6 inhibitor z-VEID-fmk mimicked the effects of caspase-6 deficiency and prevented the cleavage of lamin A. Taken together, these observations indicate that caspase-6 activity is essential for lamin A cleavage and that when lamin A is present it must be cleaved in order for the chromosomal DNA to undergo complete condensation during apoptotic execution.

[PMID: 18497856]
Posttranslational modification of histones is known to regulate chromatin structure and transcriptional activity, and the nuclear lamina is thought to serve as a site for heterochromatin maintenance and transcriptional silencing. In this report, we show that the nuclear lamina can also play a role in the downregulation of heterochromatin and in gene activation. Herpes simplex virus DNA initiates replication in replication compartments near the inner edge of the nucleus, and histones are excluded from these structures. To define the role of nuclear lamins in HSV replication, we examined HSV infection in wild-type and A-type lamin-deficient (Lmna-/-) murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). In Lmna-/- cells, viral replication compartments are reduced in size and fail to target to the nuclear periphery, as observed in WT cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence studies demonstrate that HSV DNA is associated with increased heterochromatin in Lmna-/- MEFs. These results argue for a functional role for A-type lamins as viral gene expression, DNA replication, and growth are reduced in Lmna-/- MEFs, with the greatest effect on viral replication at low multiplicity of infection. Thus, lamin A/C is required for targeting of the viral genome and the reduction of heterochromatin on viral promoters during lytic infection. The nuclear lamina can serve as a molecular scaffold for DNA genomes and the protein complexes that regulate both euchromatin and heterochromatin histone modifications.

[PMID: 22713752]
Embryonic stem cells are characterized by unique epigenetic features including decondensed chromatin and hyperdynamic association of chromatin proteins with chromatin. Here we investigate the potential mechanisms that regulate chromatin plasticity in embryonic stem cells. Using epigenetic drugs and mutant embryonic stem cells lacking various chromatin proteins, we find that histone acetylation, G9a-mediated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation and lamin A expression, all affect chromatin protein dynamics. Histone acetylation controls, almost exclusively, euchromatin protein dynamics; lamin A expression regulates heterochromatin protein dynamics, and G9a regulates both euchromatin and heterochromatin protein dynamics. In contrast, we find that DNA methylation and nucleosome repeat length have little or no effect on chromatin-binding protein dynamics in embryonic stem cells. Altered chromatin dynamics associates with perturbed embryonic stem cell differentiation. Together, these data provide mechanistic insights into the epigenetic pathways that are responsible for chromatin plasticity in embryonic stem cells, and indicate that the genome's epigenetic state modulates chromatin plasticity and differentiation potential of embryonic stem cells.

[PMID: 20130288]
After in vitro maturation (IVM), isolation of the healthiest oocytes is essential for successful in vitro fertilization. As germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes resume meiosis through healthy or apoptotic pathways without discernable morphological criteria, we checked for an apoptotic element acting at the nucleus level. We hypothesized that caspase-6 with its corresponding substrate, lamin A/C, could be a potential target candidate, because caspase-6 is the only functional caspase for lamin A/C. We used immunohistochemistry methods, Western blots, and a specific caspase-6 inhibitor to determine the presence of lamin A/C and caspase-6 during oogenesis and in isolated oocytes. Our results demonstrated that these proteins were always present and that their distributions were related to oocyte maturity, determined by chromatin configuration and oocyte diameter. Caspase-6 inhibition slowed meiosis resumption suggesting the involvement of caspase-6 in the oocyte apoptotic pathway. Lamin A/C and caspase-6 could be valuable tools in the knowledge of oocyte in vitro destiny.

[PMID: 24153156]
Over 300 mutations in the LMNA gene, encoding A-type lamins, are associated with 15 human degenerative disorders and premature aging syndromes. Although genomic instability seems to contribute to the pathophysiology of some laminopathies, there is limited information about what mutations cause genomic instability and by which molecular mechanisms. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts depleted of A-type lamins or expressing mutants lacking exons 8-11 (Lmna(Δ8-11/Δ8-11)) exhibit alterations in telomere biology and DNA repair caused by cathepsin L-mediated degradation of 53BP1 and reduced expression of BRCA1 and RAD51. Thus, a region encompassing exons 8-11 seems essential for genome integrity. Given that deletion of lamin A exon 9 in the mouse (Lmna(Δ9/Δ9)) results in a progeria phenotype, we tested if this domain is important for genome integrity. Lmna(Δ9/Δ9) MEFs exhibit telomere shortening and heterochromatin alterations but do not activate cathepsin L-mediated degradation of 53BP1 and maintain expression of BRCA1 and RAD51. Accordingly, Lmna(Δ9/Δ9) MEFs do not present genomic instability, and expression of mutant lamin A Δexon9 in lamin-depleted cells restores DNA repair factors levels and partially rescues nuclear abnormalities. These data reveal that the domain encoded by exon 9 is important to maintain telomere homeostasis and heterochromatin structure but does not play a role in DNA repair, thus pointing to other exons in the lamin A tail as responsible for the genomic instability phenotype in Lmna(Δ8-11/Δ8-11) mice. Our study also suggests that the levels of DNA repair factors 53BP1, BRCA1 and RAD51 could potentially serve as biomarkers to identify laminopathies that present with genomic instability.

[PMID: 19141474]
The nuclear lamins function in the regulation of replication, transcription, and epigenetic modifications of chromatin. However, the mechanisms responsible for these lamin functions are poorly understood. We demonstrate that A- and B-type lamins form separate, but interacting, stable meshworks in the lamina and have different mobilities in the nucleoplasm as determined by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS). Silencing lamin B1 (LB1) expression dramatically increases the lamina meshwork size and the mobility of nucleoplasmic lamin A (LA). The changes in lamina mesh size are coupled to the formation of LA/C-rich nuclear envelope blebs deficient in LB2. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analyses of microdissected blebs, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and immunofluorescence localization of modified histones demonstrate that gene-rich euchromatin associates with the LA/C blebs. Enrichment of hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and histone marks for active transcription suggest that blebs are transcriptionally active. However, in vivo labeling of RNA indicates that transcription is decreased, suggesting that the LA/C-rich microenvironment induces promoter proximal stalling of Pol II. We propose that different lamins are organized into separate, but interacting, microdomains and that LB1 is essential for their organization. Our evidence suggests that the organization and regulation of chromatin are influenced by interconnections between these lamin microdomains.

[PMID: 3497271]
Certain DNA binding proteins are thought to organize the mammalian genome into distinct 3 dimensional structures, each characteristic of a given differentiated state. Autoantibodies to 2 types of DNA binding protein complexes, the nuclear lamina and p70/p80 (Ku), were identified in sera of patients with collagen vascular diseases. The intranuclear distribution, DNA binding, and behavior during mitosis of these antigens were examined using autoimmune sera and murine monoclonal antibodies. In vivo, the antigens have different intranuclear distributions and solubility characteristics. However, both antigens appear to reversibly bind to DNA during interphase and to rapidly dissociate from DNA during mitosis. Although the binding affinity of p70/p80 to DNA is heterogeneous, the interaction between p70/p80 and DNA in vitro is stable over 2 h or more. The rapid dissociation of p70/p80 from DNA during mitosis may therefore be mediated by a modification in either chromatin structure or in the p70/p80 antigen itself. Other proteins that reversibly interact with DNA, such as the lamins and nuclear pores, may have a role in the organization of DNA into transcribable euchromatin and nontranscribable heterochromatin. Autoantibodies to these proteins, and possibly those reactive with p70/p80, or other DNA binding proteins may be useful probes for studying both chromatin organization and the causes of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.

[PMID: 7172763]
Distribution of in vivo SCEs in euchromatin and constitutive heterochromatin of Nesokia indica has been studied. The distinct partitioning of the euchromatin and constitutive heterochromatin into different arms of the large X chromosome greatly facilitates such a comparison. The constitutive heterochromatin showed a higher SCE rate per unit length than the total euchromatin. However, between the two types of chromatin in the X itself there was no significant difference. These values were also comparable to that observed for the largest autosome. This study suggests that factor(s) other than chromatin condensation, DNA base composition, and DNA replication kinetics is (are) responsible for the formation of SCEs.