[PMID: 10748089]
Hydroxylation of lysyl residues is crucial for the unique glycosylation pattern found in collagens and for the mechanical strength of fully assembled extracellular collagen fibers. Hydroxylation is catalyzed in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by a specific enzyme, lysyl hydroxylase (LH). The absence of the known ER-specific retrieval motifs in its primary structure and its association with the ER membranes in vivo have suggested that the enzyme is localized in the ER via a novel retention/retrieval mechanism. We have identified here a 40-amino acid C-terminal peptide segment of LH that is able to convert cathepsin D, normally a soluble lysosomal protease, into a membrane-associated protein. The same segment also markedly slows down the transport of the reporter protein from the ER into post-ER compartments, as assessed by our pulse-chase experiments. The retardation efficiency mediated by this C-terminal peptide segment is comparable with that of the intact LH but lower than that of the KDEL receptor-based retrieval mechanism. Within this 40-amino acid segment, the first 25 amino acids appear to be the most crucial ones in terms of membrane association and ER localization, because the last 15 C-terminal amino acids did not possess substantial retardation activity alone. Our findings thus define a short peptide segment very close to the extreme C terminus of LH as the only necessary determinant both for its membrane association and localization in the ER.

[PMID: 15170512]
The sub-cellular localization of a native protein constitutes one coarse-grained aspect of its function. Transport between compartments is often regulated through short sequence motifs. Here, we analyzed experimentally characterized endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ Golgi retrieval motifs and investigated the accuracy of homology-transfer. Only the C-terminal ER retrieval motifs KDEL, HDEL and AIAKE were sufficiently specific. However, even unspecific motifs may help, provided we know the probability for localization given the motif. We provided such estimates. We also rigorously estimated the accuracy and coverage for inferring ER and Golgi localization through homology-transfer by sequence similarity. In entire proteomes, we could thereby annotate 3304 ER (3182 membrane) and 1853 Golgi (759 membrane) proteins. We identified another putative 5157 globular and 3941 membrane ER or Golgi proteins. Each experimental annotation yielded, on average, one to three high-accuracy and five to six low-accuracy homology-transfers in the six proteomes. These numbers will increase with each new experimental annotation.

[PMID: 7798312]
The carboxyl-terminal Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu (KDEL), or a closely-related sequence, is important for ER localization of both lumenal as well as type II membrane proteins. This sequence functions as a retrieval signal at post-ER compartment(s), but the exact compartment(s) where the retrieval occurs remains unresolved. With an affinity-purified antibody against the carboxyl-terminal sequence of the mammalian KDEL receptor, we have investigated its subcellular localization using immunogold labeling on thawed cryosections of different tissues, such as mouse spermatids and rat pancreas, as well as HeLa, Vero, NRK, and mouse L cells. We show that rab1 is an excellent marker of the intermediate compartment, and we use this marker, as well as budding profiles of the mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) in cells infected with this virus, to identify this compartment. Our results demonstrate that the KDEL receptor is concentrated in the intermediate compartment, as well as in the Golgi stack. Lower but significant labeling was detected in the rough ER. In general, only small amounts of the receptor were detected on the trans side of the Golgi stack, including the trans-Golgi network (TGN) of normal cells and tissues. However, some stress conditions, such as infection with vaccinia virus or vesicular stomatitis virus, as well as 20 degrees C or 43 degrees C treatment, resulted in a significant shift of the distribution towards the trans-TGN side of the Golgi stack. This shift could be quantified in HeLa cells stably expressing a TGN marker. No significant labeling was detected in structures distal to the TGN under all conditions tested. After GTP gamma S treatment of permeabilized cells, the receptor was detected in the beta-COP-containing buds/vesicles that accumulate after this treatment, suggesting that these vesicles may transport the receptor between compartments. We propose that retrieval of KDEL-containing proteins occurs at multiple post-ER compartments up to the TGN along the exocytotic pathway, and that within this pathway, the amounts of the receptor in different compartments varies according to physiological conditions.

[PMID: 9914159]
To investigate the role of the KDEL receptor in the retrieval of protein toxins to the mammalian cell endoplasmic reticulum (ER), lysozyme variants containing AARL or KDEL C-terminal tags, or the human KDEL receptor, have been expressed in toxin-treated COS 7 and HeLa cells. Expression of the lysozyme variants and the KDEL receptor was confirmed by immunofluorescence. When such cells were challenged with diphtheria toxin (DT) or Escherichia coli Shiga-like toxin 1 (SLT-1), there was no observable difference in their sensitivities as compared to cells which did not express these exogenous proteins. By contrast, the cytotoxicity of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE) is reduced by expressing lysozyme-KDEL, which causes a redistribution of the KDEL receptor from the Golgi complex to the ER, and cells are sensitised to this toxin when they express additional KDEL receptors. These data suggest that, in contrast to SLT-1, PE can exploit the KDEL receptor in order to reach the ER lumen where it is believed that membrane transfer to the cytosol occurs. This contention was confirmed by microinjecting into Vero cells antibodies raised against the cytoplasmically exposed tail of the KDEL receptor. Immunofluorescence confirmed that these antibodies prevented the retrograde transport of the KDEL receptor from the Golgi complex to the ER, and this in turn reduced the cytotoxicity of PE, but not that of SLT-1, to these cells.

[PMID: 1334264]
In eukaryotic cells, protein secretion provides a complex organizational problem. Secretory proteins are first transported, in an unfolded state, across the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and are then carried in small vesicles to the Golgi apparatus and finally to the cell membrane. The ER contains soluble proteins which catalyse the folding of newly synthesized polypeptides. These proteins are sorted from secretory proteins in the Golgi complex: they carry a sorting signal (the tetrapeptide KDEL or a related sequence) that allows them to be selectively retrieved and returned to the ER. This retrieval process also appears to be used by some bacterial toxins to aid their invasion of the cell: these toxins contain KDEL-like sequences and may, in effect, follow the secretory pathway in reverse. The membrane-bound receptor responsible for sorting luminal ER proteins has been identified in yeast by genetic means, and related receptors are found in mammalian cells. Unexpectedly, this receptor has a second role: in yeast it is required to maintain the normal size and function of the Golgi apparatus. By helping to maintain the composition of both ER and Golgi compartments, the KDEL receptor has an important role in the organization of the secretory pathway.

[PMID: 9442098]
Retention of soluble proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum is dependent on their interaction with the KDEL (Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) receptor in the Golgi apparatus and their subsequent retrieval back to the endoplasmic reticulum. We have studied the three-dimensional organization of the human KDEL receptor using site-directed mutagenesis and sulfhydryl-specific labeling. We have identified four amino acid residues, Arg-5, Asp-50, Tyr-162, and Asn-165, which we suggest participate in the formation of the ligand binding pocket. Arg-5 and Asp-50 are shown to be located on the lumenal side of the membrane and are inaccessible from the cytoplasm. In addition, our results strongly support a topology of the KDEL receptor similar to the family of G-protein-coupled receptors with seven transmembrane domains. Furthermore, Asp-50 plays a crucial role in the binding of His/Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu ligands, but is not required for Asp-Asp-Glu-Leu binding, suggesting that this residue forms an ion pair with the positively charged amino acid residue positioned 4 residues from the carboxyl terminus of the ligand.

[PMID: 8385108]
The erd2 protein is the receptor responsible for recycling proteins bearing the carboxyl-terminal sequence KDEL (single-letter amino acid code) to the endoplasmic reticulum, following their loss from that organelle by the process of forward transport. To study the interaction of erd2p with the sequence KDEL we have reconstituted binding of erd2p to its ligand in vitro. Binding in vitro exhibits the same sequence specificity as retention of lumenal proteins in vivo and is strikingly sensitive to pH. Our results raise the possibility that erd2p-mediated sorting of lumenal endoplasmic reticulum proteins is facilitated by the pH differences between compartments of the secretory pathway.

[PMID: 9118249]
The secretory pathway of eukaryotic cells consists of a number of distinct membrane-bound compartments interconnected by vesicular traffic. Each compartment has a characteristic content of proteins and lipids, which must be maintained. This is achieved in most cases by active sorting-proteins may reach the wrong compartment but are continually retrieved. A good example is the retrieval system for lumenal ER proteins. These proteins carry a specific sorting signal, typically the tetrapeptide KDEL, which is bound by a receptor in the Golgi apparatus. The receptor-ligand complex, together with escaped ER membrane proteins, returns to the ER. Many of the components of vesicle traffic, including the coat proteins required for vesicle budding from the ER, those that form retrograde vesicles on post-ER compartments, and integral membrane proteins that target the vesicles to their correct destination, have been identified. The sorting events that occur can largely be understood in terms of specific protein-protein interactions involving these components. However, sorting of some membrane proteins, including the vesicle targeting molecules, is influenced by their transmembrane domains, and it is likely that segregation of these is dependent on the composition and biophysical properties of the lipid bilayer, which very between compartments. The secretory pathway is thus a dynamic entity, split into discrete organelles by the constant segregation and recycling of lipids and proteins, processes that are ultimately driven by the mechanics of vesicle formation and fusion.