[PMID: 28188403]
In common with other stereotactic procedures, stereotactic laser thermocoagulation (SLT) promises gentle destruction of pathological tissue, which might become especially relevant for epilepsy surgery in the future. Compared to standard resection, no large craniotomy is necessary, cortical damage during access to deep-seated lesions can be avoided and interventions close to eloquent brain areas become possible. We describe the history and rationale of laser neurosurgery as well as the two available SLT systems (Visualase® and NeuroBlate®; CE marks pending). Both systems are coupled with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and MR thermometry, thereby increasing patient safety. We report the published clinical experiences with SLT in epilepsy surgery (altogether approximately 200 cases) with respect to complications, brain structural alterations, seizure outcome, neuropsychological findings and treatment costs. The rate of seizure-free patients seems to be slightly lower than for resection surgery. Due to the inadequate quality of studies, the neuropsychological superiority of SLT has not yet been unambiguously demonstrated.

[PMID: 27838155]
Magnetic resonance-guided laser interstitial thermal therapy (MRgLITT) is a novel minimally invasive modality that uses heat from laser probes to destroy tissue. Advances in probe design, cooling mechanisms, and real-time MR thermography have increased laser utilization in neurosurgery. The authors perform a systematic analysis of two commercially available MRgLITT systems used in neurosurgery: the Visualase® thermal therapy and NeuroBlate® Systems. Data extraction was performed in a blinded fashion. Twenty-two articles were included in the quantitative synthesis. A total of 223 patients were identified with the majority having undergone treatment with Visualase (n=154, 69%). Epilepsy was the most common indication for Visualase therapy (n=8 studies, 47%). Brain mass was the most common indication for NeuroBlate therapy (n=3 studies, 60%). There were no significant differences, except in age, wherein the NeuroBlate group was nearly twice as old as the Visualase group (p<0.001). Frame, total complications, and length-of-stay (LOS) were non-significant when adjusted for age and number of patients. Laser neurosurgery has evolved over recent decades. Clinical indications are currently being defined and will continue to emerge as laser technologies become more sophisticated. Head-to-head comparison of these systems was difficult given the variance in indications (and therefore patient population) and disparate literature.

[PMID: 23560574]
Laser interstitial thermal therapy has been used as an ablative treatment for glioma; however, its development was limited due to technical issues. The NeuroBlate System incorporates several technological advances to overcome these drawbacks. The authors report a Phase I, thermal dose-escalation trial assessing the safety and efficacy of NeuroBlate in recurrent glioblastoma multiforme (rGBM). Adults with suspected supratentorial rGBM of 15- to 40-mm dimension and a Karnofsky Performance Status score of ≥ 60 were eligible. After confirmatory biopsy, treatment was delivered using a rigid, gas-cooled, side-firing laser probe. Treatment was monitored using real-time MRI thermometry, and proprietary software providing predictive thermal damage feedback was used by the surgeon, along with control of probe rotation and depth, to tailor tissue coagulation. An external data safety monitoring board determined if toxicity at lower levels justified dose escalation. Ten patients were treated at the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center (Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals-Case Medical Center). Their average age was 55 years (range 34-69 years) and the median preoperative Karnofsky Performance Status score was 80 (range 70-90). The mean tumor volume was 6.8 ± 5 cm(3) (range 2.6-19 cm(3)), the percentage of tumor treated was 78% ± 12% (range 57%-90%), and the conformality index was 1.21 ± 0.33 (range 1.00-2.04). Treatment-related necrosis was evident on MRI studies at 24 and 48 hours. The median survival was 316 days (range 62-767 days). Three patients improved neurologically, 6 remained stable, and 1 worsened. Steroid-responsive treatment-related edema occurred in all patients but one. Three had Grade 3 adverse events at the highest dose. NeuroBlate represents new technology for delivering laser interstitial thermal therapy, allowing controlled thermal ablation of deep hemispheric rGBM. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NO.: NCT00747253 ( ClinicalTrials.gov ).

[PMID: 24471476]
Treatment of brain tumors remains challenging. Cytoreductive surgery is used as the first line treatment for most brain tumors. However complete, curative, resection is not achievable in many tumors leading to the need for adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT) is a minimally invasive cytoreductive treatment. A low voltage laser is used to induce hyperthermia and to kill tumor cells. The extent of thermal damage is controlled through use of real-time MR-thermography guidance. Initial results have shown the feasibility of LITT for a variety of brain pathologies. LITT can be considered as an alternative type of surgery for difficult to access brain tumors and also for tumors in patients who are deemed high risk for more traditional surgery. Randomized trials are currently planned to continue assessing the efficacy of LITT and long-term follow-up data are awaited.

[PMID: 28348940]
We describe the feasibility of using minimally invasive robotic laser interstitial thermotherapy (LITT) for achieving an anterior two-thirds as well as a complete corpus callosotomy. Ten probe trajectories were plotted on normal magentic resonance imaging (MRI) scans using the Brainlab Stereotactic Planning Software (Brainlab, Munich, Germany). The NeuroBlate® System (Monteris Medical, MN, USA) was used to conform the thermal burn to the corpus callosum along the trajectory of the probe. The distance of the ideal entry site from either the coronal suture and the torcula or nasion and the midline was calculated. The distance of the probe tip from the dorsal and ventral limits of the callosotomy in the sagittal plane were also calculated. Anterior two-thirds callosotomy was possible in all patients using a posterior parieto-occipital paramedian trajectory through the non-dominant lobe. The average entry point was 3.64 cm from the midline, 10.6 cm behind the coronal suture, and 9.2 cm above the torcula. The probe tip was an average of 1.4 cm from the anterior commissure. For a total callosotomy, an additional contralaterally placed frontal probe was used to target the posterior one-third of the corpus callosum. The average entry site was 3.3 cm from the midline and 9.1 cm above the nasion. The average distance of the probe tip from the base of the splenium was 0.94 cm. The directional thermoablation capability of the NeuroBlate® system allows for targeted lesioning of the corpus callosum, to achieve a two-thirds or complete corpus callosotomy. A laser distance of < 2 cm is sufficient to reach the entire corpus callosum through one trajectory for an anterior two-thirds callosotomy and two trajectories for a complete callosotomy.

[PMID: 29328005]
The authors describe the case of a 22-month-old boy who presented with gelastic seizures and developmental delay. Magnetic resonance imaging and video-electroencephalography monitoring revealed a primarily intraventricular hypothalamic hamartoma and gelastic seizures occurring 20-30 times daily. The patient was treated with various regimens of antiepileptic medications for 16 months, but the seizures remained medically intractable. At 3 years of age, he underwent stereotactic laser ablation with an aim of disconnection of the lesion. The procedure was performed with the NeuroBlate SideFire probe. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first reported use of this technology for this procedure and serves as proof of concept. There were no perioperative complications, and 2 years postprocedure, the patient remains seizure free with marked behavioral and cognitive improvements.

[PMID: 28411414]
Besides other innovative stereotactic procedures (radiofrequency thermocoagulation, focused ultrasound, gamma knife) laser interstitial thermotherapy (LiTT) provides minimally invasive destruction of pathological soft tissues which could be especially relevant for epilepsy surgeries involving adult and pediatric patients. Unlike standard resections, no craniotomy is required; just a tiny borehole trepanation is sufficient. Damage to cortical areas when accessing deep lesions can be minimized or completely avoided, and treating epileptogenic foci near eloquent or even vital brain areas becomes possible. Here, we briefly describe the history and rationale of laser neurosurgery as well as the technical key features of the two currently available systems for magnetic resonance-guided LiTT (Visualase<sup>®</sup>, NeuroBlate<sup>®</sup>; CE marks pending for both). We also discuss the published clinical experience with LiTT in the field of epilepsy surgery (approximately 200 cases) with regard to complications, LiTT-induced, long-term brain structural alterations, seizure outcome, preliminary neuropsychological findings and first estimates of treatment costs. Overall, the seizure outcome appears to be slightly worse than for resective surgery. Due to insufficient research methods (e.g. non-established measures, lack of a control condition), the expected neuropsychological superiority over resective surgery has not been unambiguously demonstrated thus far. Also, the cost-benefit ratio requires further critical evaluation. Clinical, multi-center and adequately controlled outcome studies of high quality should also accompany the imminent introduction of LiTT into the field of epilepsy surgery and therewith permit critical scientific evaluation and rational, individual, clinical decisions.

[PMID: 24810945]
Surgical extent-of-resection has been shown to have an impact on high-grade glioma (HGG) outcomes; however, complete resection is rarely achievable in difficult-to-access (DTA) tumors. Controlled thermal damage to the tumor may have the same impact in DTA-HGGs. We report our multicenter results of laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT) in DTA-HGGs. We retrospectively reviewed 34 consecutive DTA-HGG patients (24 glioblastoma, 10 anaplastic) who underwent LITT at Cleveland Clinic, Washington University, and Wake Forest University (May 2011-December 2012) using the NeuroBlate(®) System. The extent of thermal damage was determined using thermal damage threshold (TDT) lines: yellow TDT line (43 °C for 2 min) and blue TDT line (43°C for 10 min). Volumetric analysis was performed to determine the extent-of-coverage of tumor volume by TDT lines. Patient outcomes were evaluated statistically. LITT was delivered as upfront in 19 and delivered as salvage in 16 cases. After 7.2 months of follow-up, 71% of cases demonstrated progression and 34% died. The median overall survival (OS) for the cohort was not reached; however, the 1-year estimate of OS was 68 ± 9%. Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 5.1 months. Thirteen cases who met the following two criteria-(1) <0.05 cm(3) tumor volume not covered by the yellow TDT line and (2) <1.5 cm(3) additional tumor volume not covered by the blue TDT line-had better PFS than the other 21 cases (9.7 vs. 4.6 months; P = 0.02). LITT can be used effectively for treatment of DTA-HGGs. More complete coverage of tumor by TDT lines improves PFS which can be translated as the extent of resection concept for surgery.