[PMID: 19552401]
Translocator protein (18 kDa, TSPO), previously known as the peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor, is an outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) protein necessary for cholesterol import and steroid production. We reconstituted the mitochondrial targeting and insertion of TSPO into the OMM to analyze the signals and mechanisms required for this process. Initial studies indicated the formation of a mitochondrial 66 kDa complex through Blue Native-PAGE analysis. The formation of this complex was found to be dependent on the presence of ATP and the cytosolic chaperone Hsp90. Through mutational analysis we identified two areas necessary for TSPO targeting, import, and function: amino acids 103-108 (Schellman motif), which provide the necessary structural orientation for import, and the cholesterol-binding C-terminus required for insertion. Although the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) complex proteins Tom22 and Tom40 were present in the OMM, the TOM complex did not interact with TSPO. In search of proteins involved in TSPO import, we analyzed complexes known to interact with TSPO by mass spectrometry. Formation of the 66 kDa complex was found to be dependent on an identified protein, Metaxin 1, for formation and TSPO import. The level of import of TSPO into steroidogenic cell mitochondria was increased following treatment of the cells with cAMP. These findings suggest that the initial targeting of TSPO to mitochondria is dependent upon the presence of cytosolic chaperones interacting with the import receptor Tom70. The C-terminus plays an important role in targeting TSPO to mitochondria, whereas its import into the OMM is dependent upon the presence of the Schellman motif. Final integration of TSPO into the OMM occurs via its interaction with Metaxin 1. Import of TSPO into steroidogenic cell mitochondria is regulated by cAMP.

[PMID: 11027586]
Metaxin is an outer membrane protein of mammalian mitochondria which is suggested to be involved in protein import into the organelle. RNA blot analysis showed that distribution of metaxin mRNA in human tissues differs from that of mRNA for the translocase component Tom20. Effect of overexpression of human metaxin on mitochondrial preprotein import and processing in COS-7 cells was studied. Overexpression of metaxin resulted in impaired mitochondrial import of natural and chimeric preproteins and in their accumulation. We previously reported that overexpression of Tom20 in cultured cells causes inhibition of import of mitochondrial preprotein. Coexpression of metaxin with Tom20 had no further effect on the preprotein import. Overexpression of the cytosolic domain of metaxin also caused inhibition of preprotein import, although less strongly than the full-length metaxin. In blue native PAGE, Tom40, Tom22, and a portion of Tom20 migrated as a complex of approximately 400 kDa, and the other portion of Tom20 migrated in smaller forms of approximately 100 and approximately 40 kDa. On the other hand, metaxin migrated at a position of approximately 50 kDa. These results confirm earlier in vitro results that metaxin participates in preprotein import into mammalian mitochondria, and indicates that it does not associate with the Tom complex.

[PMID: 17981999]
The role of plant mitochondrial outer membrane proteins in the process of preprotein import was investigated, as some of the principal components characterized in yeast have been shown to be absent or evolutionarily distinct in plants. Three outer membrane proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondria were studied: TOM20 (translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane), METAXIN, and mtOM64 (outer mitochondrial membrane protein of 64 kD). A single functional Arabidopsis TOM20 gene is sufficient to produce a normal multisubunit translocase of the outer membrane complex. Simultaneous inactivation of two of the three TOM20 genes changed the rate of import for some precursor proteins, revealing limited isoform subfunctionalization. Inactivation of all three TOM20 genes resulted in severely reduced rates of import for some but not all precursor proteins. The outer membrane protein METAXIN was characterized to play a role in the import of mitochondrial precursor proteins and likely plays a role in the assembly of beta-barrel proteins into the outer membrane. An outer mitochondrial membrane protein of 64 kD (mtOM64) with high sequence similarity to a chloroplast import receptor was shown to interact with a variety of precursor proteins. All three proteins have domains exposed to the cytosol and interacted with a variety of precursor proteins, as determined by pull-down and yeast two-hybrid interaction assays. Furthermore, inactivation of one resulted in protein abundance changes in the others, suggesting functional redundancy. Thus, it is proposed that all three components directly interact with precursor proteins to participate in early stages of mitochondrial protein import.

[PMID: 17624330]
A monoclonal antibody (mAb) has been produced which reacts with human mitofilin, a mitochondrial inner membrane protein. This mAb immunocaptures its target protein in association with six other proteins, metaxins 1 and 2, SAM50, CHCHD3, CHCHD6 and DnaJC11, respectively. The first three are outer membrane proteins, CHCHD3 has been assigned to the matrix space, and the other two proteins have not been described in mitochondria previously. The functional role of this new complex is uncertain. However, a role in protein import related to maintenance of mitochondrial structure is suggested as mitofilin helps regulate mitochondrial morphology and at least four of the associated proteins (metaxins 1 and 2, SAM50 and CHCHD3) have been implicated in protein import, while DnaJC11 is a chaperone-like protein that may have a similar role.

[PMID: 10381257]
A recently described protein, metaxin 1, serves as a component of a preprotein import complex in the outer membrane of the mammalian mitochondrion. A yeast two-hybrid screen with metaxin 1 as bait has now identified a novel protein, which we have termed metaxin 2, as a metaxin 1-binding protein. Metaxin 2 shares 29% identity with metaxin 1 at the amino acid level, but metaxin 2, unlike metaxin 1, lacks a C-terminal mitochondrial outer membrane signal-anchor domain. Two C. elegans hypothetical proteins, CelZC97.1 and CelF39B2.i, share high sequence similarity with metaxin 2 and metaxin 1, respectively, and likely represent the C. elegans orthologs. Affinity-purified antibodies against metaxin 2 were prepared against the recombinant protein produced in E. coli and were used to analyze the subcellular distribution of metaxin 2. In subcellular fractions of mouse liver, a 29 kD immunoreactive protein, consistent in size with the predicted translation product of metaxin 2 cDNA, was found solely in mitochondria. Alkali extraction of mitochondria indicated that metaxin 2 is peripherally associated with mitochondrial membranes. Metaxin 2 in intact mitochondria was susceptible to digestion with proteinase K, indicating that metaxin 2 is located on the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane. Finally, baculoviruses encoding a His6-tagged metaxin 2 and an untagged metaxin 1 lacking its C-terminal transmembrane domain were produced and used separately or in combination to infect Sf21 insect cells. Metaxin 1 bound to a Ni2+-chelate affinity column only in the presence of metaxin 2, indicating that metaxin 1 and metaxin 2 interact when overexpressed in insect cells. These results suggest that metaxin 2 is bound to the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane by means of its interaction with membrane-bound metaxin 1, and that this complex may play a role in protein import into mammalian mitochondria.

[PMID: 9045676]
Metaxin, a novel gene located between the glucocerebrosidase and thrombospondin 3 genes in the mouse, is essential for survival of the postimplantation mouse embryo. In this study, the subcellular location, domain structure, and biochemical function of metaxin were investigated. Anti-recombinant metaxin antibodies recognized 35- and 70-kDa proteins in mitochondria from various tissues; the 35-kDa protein is consistent in size with the predicted translation product of metaxin cDNA. When metaxin cDNA was transfected into COS cells, immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that the protein is located in mitochondria. Metaxin contains a putative mitochondrial outer membrane signal anchor domain at its C terminus, and a truncated form of metaxin lacking this signal anchor domain had a reduced association with mitochondria. In addition, metaxin was highly susceptible to proteases in intact mitochondria. We therefore conclude that metaxin is a mitochondrial protein that extends into the cytosol while anchored into the outer membrane at its C terminus. In its N-terminal region, metaxin shows significant sequence identity to Tom37, a component of the outer membrane portion of the mitochondrial preprotein translocation apparatus in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but important structural differences, including apparently different mechanisms of targeting to membranes, also exist between the two proteins. Given the similar subcellular locations of metaxin and Tom37, the possible role of metaxin in mitochondrial preprotein import was investigated. Antibodies against metaxin, when preincubated with mitochondria, partially inhibited the uptake of radiolabeled preadrenodoxin into mitochondria. Metaxin is therefore the second mammalian component of the protein translocation apparatus of the mitochondrial outer membrane to be characterized at the molecular level and the first for which an inherited mutation has been described. The early embryonic lethal phenotype of mice lacking metaxin demonstrates that efficient import of proteins into mitochondria is crucial for cellular survival. The characterization of metaxin provides an opportunity to elucidate similarities and possible differences in the mechanisms of protein import between fungi and mammals and in the phenotypes of fungi and mammals lacking mitochondrial import receptors.

[PMID: 9705320]
Thrombospondin 3 (TSP3) is a secreted, pentameric glycoprotein whose regulation of expression and function are not well understood. Mouse Thbs3 is located just downstream from the divergently transcribed metaxin gene (Mtx), which encodes an outer mitochondrial membrane import protein. Although Thbs3 and Mtx share a common promoter region, previous studies showed that Mtx is regulated by proximal elements that had little effect on Thbs3 expression. In this study, transient transfection of rat chondrosarcoma cells and NIH-3T3 fibroblasts demonstrated that Thbs3 is regulated in a cell type-specific manner by a position- and orientation-independent far upstream enhancer located within intron 6 of Mtx. Despite its greater proximity to the transcription start site of Mtx, the Thbs3 enhancer did not have a significant effect on Mtx expression. Two DNA-protein complexes, which were both required for activity, were identified when nuclear extracts were assayed with a probe containing the enhancer sequence. The protein in one of these complexes was identified as Sp1, while the other DNA-protein complex remains uncharacterized. A 6-kilobase pair promoter containing the enhancer was able to direct specific expression of the E. coli lacZ gene in transgenic mice, whereas a 2-kilobase pair promoter that lacked the enhancer was inactive. Thus, despite their close proximity, the genes of the Mtx/Thbs3 gene cluster are regulated independently.

[PMID: 17510655]
Voltage-dependent anion-selective channel (VDAC) is a beta-barrel protein in the outer mitochondrial membrane that is necessary for metabolite exchange with the cytosol and is proposed to be involved in certain forms of apoptosis. We studied the biogenesis of VDAC in human mitochondria by depleting the components of the mitochondrial import machinery by using RNA interference. Here, we show the importance of the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) complex in the import of the VDAC precursor. The deletion of Sam50, the central component of the sorting and assembly machinery (SAM), led to both a strong defect in the assembly of VDAC and a reduction in the steady-state level of VDAC. Metaxin 2-depleted mitochondria had reduced levels of metaxin 1 and were deficient in import and assembly of VDAC and Tom40, but not of three matrix-targeted precursors. We also observed a reduction in the levels of metaxin 1 and metaxin 2 in Sam50-depleted mitochondria, implying a connection between these three proteins, although Sam50 and metaxins seemed to be in different complexes. We conclude that the pathway of VDAC biogenesis in human mitochondria involves the TOM complex, Sam50 and metaxins, and that it is evolutionarily conserved.