[PMID: 16265378]
Short QT syndrome is an inheritable primary electrical disease of the heart that was discovered in 1999. The disorder is characterized by an abnormally short QT interval (<300 ms) and a propensity to atrial fibrillation, sudden cardiac death or both. As in the case of long QT syndrome, more than one relevant genetic mutation has been identified that can lead to a short QT interval on electrocardiography; so far two have been identified. Shortening of the effective refractory period combined with increased dispersion of repolarization is the likely substrate for re-entry and life-threatening tachyarrhythmias. Thus far, 22 people have been classified as having short QT syndrome: 15 from the actual measurement of a short QT interval on electrocardiograms and 7 by history after they died from sudden cardiac death. Several cases, especially among children, have probably been overlooked, since the shortness of the QT interval becomes apparent only at heart rates less than 80 beats/min. The best form of treatment is still unknown, but prevention of atrial fibrillation has been accomplished by propafenone. Implantation of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator is recommended for prevention of sudden cardiac death.

[PMID: 17497253]
Short QT syndrome is a new genetic disorder associated with familial atrial fibrillation and/or sudden death or syncope. To date, different mutations in genes encoding for cardiac ion channels (KCNH2, KCNQ1, and KCNJ2) have been identified to cause the short QT syndrome. The mutations lead to a gain of function of the affected current (IKr, IKs, and IK1). The phenotype is characterized by a shortened QT interval<335 ms after correction for heart rate at rates<80 beats/min. Furthermore, the QT interval poorly adapts to heart rate. Patients exhibit shortened atrial and ventricular effective refractory periods and, in the majority, inducibility of ventricular fibrillation. Death occurs already in newborns. Therapy of choice seems to be the implantable cardioverter defibrillator because of the high incidence of sudden death. Pharmacological treatment has been studied and it could be demonstrated, that some mutant currents may be insufficiently suppressed by drugs targeted to block the specific current such as, e.g., sotalol or ibutilide in patients with a mutation in the IKr-coding gene KCNH2 (HERG). Quinidine proved to be efficient in prolonging the QT interval and normalizing the effective refractory periods in some patients.

[PMID: 15890322]
The short QT syndrome constitutes a new clinical entity that is associated with a high incidence of sudden cardiac death, syncope, and/or atrial fibrillation even in young patients and newborns. Patients with this congenital electrical abnormality are characterized by rate-corrected QT intervals<320 ms. Missense mutations in KCNH2 (HERG) linked to a gain-of-function of the rapidly activating delayed-rectifier current I(Kr) have been identified in the first two reported families with familial sudden cardiac death. Recently, two further gain-of-function mutations in the KCNQ1 gene encoding the alpha-subunit of the KvLQT1 (I(Ks)) channel and in the KCNJ2 gene encoding the strong inwardly rectifying channel protein Kir2.1 confirmed a genetically heterogeneous disease. The possible substrate for the development of ventricular tachyarrhythmias may be a significant transmural dispersion of the repolarisation due to a heterogeneous abbreviation of the action potential duration. The implantable cardioverter defibrillator is the therapy of choice in patients with syncope and a positive family history of sudden cardiac death. However, ICD therapy in patients with a short QT syndrome has an increased risk for inappropriate shock therapies due to possible T wave oversensing. The impact of sotalol, ibutilide, flecainide, and quinidine on QT prolongation has been evaluated, but only quinidine effectively suppressed gain-of-function in I(Kr) with prolongation of the QT interval. In patients with a mutation in HERG, it rendered ventricular tachycardias/ventricular fibrillation non-inducible and restored the QT interval/heart rate relationship towards a normal range. It may serve as an adjunct to ICD therapy or as a possible alternative treatment, especially for children and newborns.

[PMID: 15569843]
The short-QT syndrome is a new clinical entity characterized by corrected QT intervals <300 ms and a high incidence of ventricular tachycardia (VT) and fibrillation (VF). Gain-of-function mutations in the gene for outward potassium currents have been shown to underlie the congenital syndrome. The present study examined the cellular basis of VT/VF in an experimental model associated with short QT intervals created with a potassium channel activator. Transmembrane action potentials from epicardial and M regions, 4 transmural unipolar electrograms, and a pseudo-ECG were simultaneously recorded in canine arterially perfused left ventricular wedge preparations. At a basic cycle length of 2000 ms, pinacidil (2 to 3 mumol/L) abbreviated the QT interval from 303.7+/-5.4 to 247.3+/-6.9 ms (mean+/-SEM, P<0.0001). The maximal transmural dispersion of repolarization (TDR(max)) increased from 27.0+/-3.8 to 64.9+/-9.2 ms (P<0.01), and an S2 applied to the endocardium induced a polymorphic VT (pVT) in 9 of 12 wedge preparations (P<0.01). Addition of isoproterenol (100 nmol/L, n=5) led to greater abbreviation of the QT interval, a further increase in TDR(max) (from 55.4+/-13.7 to 69.7+/-8.3 ms), and more enduring pVT. TDR(max) was correlated significantly with the T(peak)-T(end) interval under all conditions. The effects of pinacidil were completely reversed by glybenclamide (10 micromol/L, n=4) and partially reversed by E4031 (5 micromol/L, n=5), which prevented induction of pVT in 3 of 5 preparations. Our data suggest that heterogeneous abbreviation of the action potential duration among different cell types spanning the ventricular wall creates the substrate for the genesis of VT under conditions associated with short QT intervals.

[PMID: 16482041]
Aim. To determine limits of interval QT in children and adolescents aged 0-17 years and to detect possible ethnic differences of its changes. Material and Method. Twelve lead ECGs were recorded in 1531 subjects without overt cardiovascular pathology (47.2% females, 52.8 males, 57.3% of Slavic and 42.7% of Buryat i.e. mongoloid ethnicity). Results. Corrected QT interval (QTc) exceeded 440, 460 and 480 ms in 2.3, 1.05, and 0.26% of children. Prolongation of QTc was found in 0.46% and 0.11% of Slavic and Buryat children, respectively (p=ns). Starting from the age of 8 years girls had longer QTc than boys (454.1+/-15.2 and 438.3+/-8.4 ms, respectively, p<0.05). QTc less than 350 ms was registered in 12 children (0.78%). Eight of these children with mean QTc 329.1+/-32.3 ms had family history of syncope or sudden death. Variability of absolute QT values was 8+/-14.3 ms (maximally up to 40 ms). Conclusions. QT interval is prolonged when QTc duration exceeds 440 ms in children younger than 8 years and in male adolescents or 460 ms in girls aged 8 years or older and in children during first year of life. QT interval is shortened when QTc is less than 350 ms (1st degree of shortening). In children with QTc below 330 ms (2nd degree of shortening) short QT syndrome should be excluded. Normal variability of absolute QT value during sinus arrhythm on ECG at rest does not exceed 40 ms.

[PMID: 17432514]
Short QT syndrome is a newly described cardiologic entity which associates a short OT interval (QT and QTc < or = 300 ms) on the surface ECG to a high risk of syncope or sudden death due to malignant ventricular arrhythmia. This extremely rare syndrome affects mainly young adults or infants and has a wide clinical expression. It is frequently associated with atrial fibrillation. Mutations in 3 different genes KCNQ1, KCNH2, and KCNJ2, all encoding cardiac ionic potassium channels have been identified in affected patients. The clinical spectrum is very wide ranging from asymptomatic carriers to syncope or sudden death. It is an autosomal dominant transmission. Expression studies have shown a gain of function and a shortening of the action potential duration thus explaining the short OT interval. At electrophysiologic study, atrial and ventricular refractory periods are short, and ventricular fibrillation inducible in the majority of patients. As of today, automatic implantable defibrillator is the only effective treatment for the prevention of sudden death in the short QT syndrome.

[PMID: 16255754]
Short QT syndrome (SQTS) is an inheritable primary electrical disease of the heart, discovered in 1999. It is characterized by an abnormally short QT interval (<300 ms) and a propensity to atrial fibrillation and sudden cardiac death (SCD). Like in the case of long QT syndrome there is more than one genetic mutation that can lead to a short QT interval in the ECG and so far two have been identified. Shortening of the effective refractory period combined with increased dispersion of repolarization is the likely substrate for reentry and life threatening tachyarrhythmias. Only 22 people have been classified as having SQTS: 15 from the actual measurement of a short QT interval in their ECG and 7 by history, all having died from SCD. It is very likely that several cases, especially among children, have been overlooked, since the shortness of the QT interval only becomes apparent at heart rates <80 beats/min. The best form of treatment is still not known, but prevention of atrial fibrillation has been accomplished by propafenone, and an implantable cardioverter defibrillator is recommended for prevention of SCD.

[PMID: 19829181]
The past 2 decades have witnessed the emergence of many disease states related to ion-channel disorders, the so-called "channelopathies," usually associated with structurally normal hearts. The initial emphasis was directed toward the congenital long QT syndrome and the Brugada syndrome. Recently, the hereditary short QT syndrome has emerged as yet another rare channelopathy. This autosomal dominant syndrome can afflict infants, children, or young adults; often a remarkable family background of sudden cardiac death is elucidated. The electrocardiogram is characterized by a strikingly short QT interval (typically <320 milliseconds); virtual absence of the ST segment; and tall, peaked, narrow-based T waves. There is a marked propensity for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and increased risk for sudden cardiac death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias. At electrophysiology study, short atrial and ventricular refractory periods are found, with easily inducible atrial fibrillation and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia with programmed electrical stimulation. Gain-of-function mutations in 3 genes encoding potassium channels have been identified, which explain the abbreviated repolarization seen in this condition. The suggested treatment is an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, though the possibilities of inappropriate shocks have caused some concern, especially in younger patients. The ability of quinidine and disopyramide to prolong the QT interval has the potential to be effective pharmacological therapy for patients with short QT syndrome, but awaits additional confirmatory clinical data.