[PMID: 11428412]
Pulmonary cryptococcal infections occur in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals, with a reported increased incidence of diffuse pulmonary disease in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients. The authors observed no differences in the radiographic appearances of pulmonary cryptococcal disease between human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients and other immunocompromised individuals. Chest computed tomography (CT) contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of pulmonary cryptococcal infections.

[PMID: 16034947]
Cryptococcal disease is an opportunistic infection that causes significant morbidity and mortality in adults with HIV. Primary prophylaxis with antifungal interventions may decrease cryptococcal disease incidence and associated mortality. To assess the efficacy of antifungal interventions for the primary prevention of cryptococcal disease in adults with HIV. We searched the following databases: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), ClinicalTrials.gov, Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effectiveness (DARE), Latin American and Caribbean Literature on the Health Sciences (LILACS), and the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (CCTR). We reviewed abstracts from the following relevant conferences: International AIDS Conference, International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Pathogenesis and Treatment, and Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. We searched reference lists for all primary and other pertinent articles identified. We attempted to contact experts in the field, particularly primary authors of included studies, to better ensure completeness of included studies. We also approached pharmaceutical companies for any available and relevant unpublished data. The time period searched was from 1980 to August 2004. We placed no language restrictions on the search. Key words used include: meningitis, cryptococcal, cryptococcus, cryptococcosis, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, human immunodeficiency virus, prophylaxis, chemoprevention, antifungal agents, and the Cochrane screen for randomized controlled trials. Randomized controlled trials using antifungal interventions for the primary prevention of cryptococcal disease in adults with HIV were selected. Two reviewers independently assessed trial eligibility and quality. Trial authors, experts, and pharmaceutical companies were contacted for additional and/or missing information. Data were abstracted by two reviewers. Data were pooled, where appropriate, to yield summary estimates. Five studies (N=1316) were identified. All study patients had CD4 cell counts <300 cells/microl, and the majority of patients had CD4 cell counts <150 cells/microl. When all five studies are analyzed as a single group (N=1316), the incidence of cryptococcal disease was decreased in those taking primary prophylaxis (RR 0.21, 95% CI 0.09, 0.46) compared to those taking placebo. However, there was no significant difference in overall mortality observed (RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.71, 1.44). When the three studies using itraconazole as the intervention were analyzed together (N=798), the incidence of cryptococcal disease was decreased in those taking itraconazole for primary prophylaxis (RR 0.12, 95% CI 0.03, 0.51) compared to those taking placebo; however, there was no significant difference in overall mortality (RR 1.12, 95% CI 0.70, 1.80). When the two studies using fluconazole as the intervention were analyzed together (N=518), the incidence of cryptococcal disease was decreased in those taking fluconazole for primary prophylaxis (RR 0.25, 95% CI 0.07, 0.87) compared to those taking placebo; however, there was no significant difference in overall mortality (RR 0.59, 95% CI 0.14, 2.62). Antifungal primary prophylaxis with either itraconazole or fluconazole is effective in reducing the incidence of cryptococcal disease in adults with advanced HIV disease. However, neither of these interventions has a clear effect on overall mortality. Further research is needed to better understand these interventions and the populations in which they may be most effective.

[PMID: 19127040]
Cryptococcal meningitis is a common opportunistic infection in Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-infected individuals. There is little information specifically addressing cryptococcal meningitis in HIV-infected patients from North India. To determine clinical presentation, hospital course, response to treatment, complications developed, in-hospital mortality, any recurrence of cryptococcal meningitis and reasons of recurrence during follow-up. A retrospective observational study undertaken in a large tertiary care center. Patient's demographic data, presenting clinical symptomatology, physical findings, laboratory parameters, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination findings, side-effects of treatment, development of any complications and hospital outcome were analyzed. During follow-up any recurrence of cryptococcal meningitis, possible reasons of recurrence, type of treatment received, complications developed and outcome was recorded as well. Forty patients diagnosed to have cryptococcal meningitis were analyzed. Twenty-two (55%) patients had acute/ subacute presentation. Thirty-six (90%) patients presented with headache and 18 (45%) had altered sensorium. Twenty (50%) patients had no cells in the CSF. Hypoglycorrhchia was seen in 30 (75%) patients. Cryptococcal meningitis was the first acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-defining illness in 30 (75%) patients. Thirty-five patients developed some adverse effects to amphotericin-B. Thirty-three patients improved with treatment while three patients died. Four patients had recurrence of cryptococcal meningitis within six months of first episode. Non-compliance of fluconazole therapy was the reason for recurrence in all of these patients. Cryptococcal meningitis is a common initial AIDS-defining illness. Acute and/or subacute presentation of cryptococcal meningitis is not uncommon in HIV-infected individuals. An early diagnosis of HIV infection might reduce the incidence of this infection.

[PMID: 16011530]
Despite advances in the treatment of HIV disease, the incidence and mortality of invasive cryptococcal disease remain significant. A matched, case-control study was performed to examine the impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and azole use on the incidence of invasive cryptococcal disease in HIV-infected patients. The study was performed at a metropolitan hospital with a large indigent population and an incidence of seven cases of cryptococcal disease per 1000 persons with AIDS. Bivariate analysis, matched on CD4 count, revealed that both HAART use [odds ratio (OR) 0.43; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.23-0.99] and azole use (OR 0.14; 95% CI 0.06-0.34) had a protective effect. Conditional logistic regression stratified on CD4 lymphocyte count revealed a protective role for azole use (OR 0.15; 95% CI 0.06-0.40) but not for HAART use (OR 0.47; 95% CI 0.18-1.26). Of note, the prevalence of HAART use was low in both cases and controls, with only 12% of cases and 23% of controls on HAART. The results of this study support previous evidence that azole use prevents invasive cryptococcal disease. Although current guidelines for the prophylaxis of opportunistic infections do not suggest routine prophylaxis for cryptococcal infection, this issue should be reconsidered, especially in populations that have a low prevalence of HAART use.

[PMID: 14716388]
Cryptococcus neoformans causes systemic disease in patients with immunodeficiency. The incidence of cryptococcal meningitis has increased in parallel with that of HIV infection. Cancer is also a known predisposing factor. We present two case reports and a review of the literature concerning the epidemiology, diagnostics and treatment of cryptococcal meningitis. The incidence of cryptococcal meningitis in Scandinavia seems to be lower than in other parts of the world. Clinical signs and symptoms are often uncharacteristic. Detection of antigen in spinal fluid is a sensitive and fast test. Cryptococcal meningitis is a rare disease, often with uncharacteristic symptoms. Patients with haematological malignancies have a higher risk of contracting this disease. It is a differential diagnosis when neurological symptoms occur in these patients.

[PMID: 19009138]
The objective of this article was to evaluate the epidemiology of cryptococcal meningitis in Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil, from 1994 to 2004. Six hundred and ninety-six cases of cryptococcal meningitis were reported, with a mean incidence of 0.45 per 100,000 inhabitants. Patients were predominantly male; mean age was 35.9 years; AIDS was practically the only underlying disease, reported in 61.2% of cases; case-fatality was 51.8%. No decline in incidence was observed during the study period. AIDS is the main predisposing condition for cryptococcal meningitis, and thus the profile of most patients mirrors that of HIV infection. Missing information prevented the evaluation of other underlying diseases.

[PMID: 8228302]
The incidence of infection with Cryptococcus neoformans in the United Kingdom during the years between 1953 and 1981 is compared with that between 1982 and 1991. The patients were those from whom samples were submitted to the PHLS Mycological Reference Laboratory (MRL), or those in whom the disease was confirmed elsewhere in the United Kingdom and reported to PHLS Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre (CDSC). In all, 83 cases were identified between 1953 and 1981 and 322 between 1982 and 1991, 201 of which were known to be HIV-associated. The incidence of infection with Cryptococcus neoformans has increased four-fold in the last decade. It is an increasing cause of infection in immunosuppressed patients, most notably those with HIV infection. Currently, 4.0% patients with AIDS in the United Kingdom are known to have developed cryptococcosis.

[PMID: 21905781]
Cryptococcal meningitis (CM), a fungal disease caused by Cryptococcus spp., is the most common form of meningitis and a leading cause of death among persons with HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa. Detection of cryptococcal antigen, which is present several weeks before overt signs of meningitis develop, provides an opportunity to detect infection early. Screening persons with HIV for cryptococcal infection when they access healthcare can identify asymptomatic infected patients allowing for prompt treatment and prevention of death. A newly developed point-of-care assay for cryptococcal antigen, as well as growing evidence supporting the utility and cost-effectiveness of screening, are further reasons to consider broad implementation of cryptococcal screening in countries with a high burden of cryptococcal disease.