[PMID: 17108242]
Sex hormones have long been implicated in autoimmune diseases because women account for 80% of cases. The mechanism of hormonal action in autoimmunity is unknown. Drawing on genetic studies of autoimmune disease, this article discusses how both genes and sex hormones may exert their effects through the same general mechanism, dysregulation of transcription factor NF-kappaB, an immunoregulatory protein. Gene and hormone alterations of the NF-kappaB signaling cascade provide a unifying hypothesis to explain the wide-ranging human and murine autoimmune disease phenotypes regulated by NF-kappaB, including cytokine balance, antigen presentation, lymphoid development, and lymphoid repertoire selection by apoptosis.

[PMID: 25956531]
Autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis are multifactorial in nature, requiring both genetic and environmental factors for onset. Increased predisposition of females to a wide range of autoimmune diseases points to a gender bias in the multifactorial etiology of these disorders. However, the existing evidence to date has not provided any conclusive mechanism of gender-bias beyond the role of hormones and sex chromosomes. The gut microbiome, which impacts the innate and adaptive branches of immunity, not only influences the development of autoimmune disorders but may interact with sex-hormones to modulate disease progression and sex-bias. Here, we review the current information on gender bias in autoimmunity and discuss the potential of microbiome-derived biomarkers to help unravel the complex interplay between genes, environment and hormones in rheumatoid arthritis.

[PMID: 30394940]
To give an overview of recently published articles addressing the mechanisms underlying sex bias in autoimmune disease. Recent studies investigating the origins of sex bias in autoimmune disease have revealed an extensive and interconnected network of genetic, hormonal, microbial, and environmental influences. Investigation of sex hormones has moved beyond profiling the effects of hormones on activity and prevalence of immune cell types to defining the specific immunity-related genes driving these changes. Deeper examination of the genetic content of the X and Y chromosomes and genetic escapees of X chromosome inactivation has revealed some key drivers of female-biased autoimmunity. Animal studies are offering further insights into the connections among microbiota, particularly that of the gut, and the immune system. Sex bias in autoimmune disease is the manifestation of a complex interplay of the sex chromosomes, sex hormones, the microbiota, and additional environmental and sociological factors.

[PMID: 18603021]
Autoimmune diseases include several conditions that cumulatively are estimated to affect over 5% of the US population with a striking female predominance reported for most of them. The cause and mechanisms of this sex bias remains unknown despite multiple proposed hypotheses. Indeed, it is well established in several experimental settings that the human immune system exhibits sexual dimorphism with basic immune responses differing between females and males. Among candidate factors to explain these differences we note that particular attention has been primarily devoted to sex hormones, yet data have been inconclusive or have not been confirmed. The same seems to apply to the hypothesis of fetal microchimerism. Most recently, sex chromosome abnormalities and skewed X chromosome inactivation have been suggested as novel players, particularly in later-onset diseases. We review herein the most recent data on the mechanisms proposed for the female predominance. We also attempt to determine whether observed sex ratios are in fact the result of sex-biased awareness in case-finding studies.

[PMID: 508371]
Investigators from this laboratory have been studying sex hormones in normal and autoimmune mice for the past 10 years. We have found that immune responses to DNa are influenced by sex hormones. Androgens reduce and estrogens increase both spontaneous and immunization-induced antibodies to single-stranded DNA in NZB X NZW, NZB X C3H, NZB X CBA, NZB X DBA mice. Treatment of female NZB/W mice with testosterone or 5 alpha dihydrotestosterone retards the progress of autoimmunity. Castration is not necessary for this effect. In contrast, danazol has no favorable effect on the disease process. Estrogens cause a marked acceleration of autoimmunity and a reduction in thymus weight. During the course of these studies, we found that a number of problems or variables arise in studying sex hormone effects, including: 1) X-linked genes, 2) metabolism of testosterone to estrogens, 3) dose of hormone, 4) age at which administration is initiated, 5) differential effects of sex hormones on different autoantibodies and various immune responses.

[PMID: 1958563]
The immune response of males and females is not identical but instead has been shown to be dimorphic in its nature, with females generally demonstrating a greater overall response than males. This dimorphism extends to both the humoral and cell mediated systems and appears to be mechanistically based on the differences in type and concentration of sex steroids in males vs females. Furthermore, growth hormone and prolactin secretions which are different in males and females may also be partly responsible for the observed dimorphism. Because autoimmune disease results from a pathological perturbation of normal immune function, it follows that expression of these diseases will also demonstrate a dimorphic pattern. Examples of this autoimmune dimorphism include (but are not limited to) lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis with the two former more prevalent in females than males and the latter more severe during pregnancy. To explain autoimmune dimorphism it therefore becomes necessary firstly to describe the cellular and hormonal interactions found in normal immune regulation and thereafter extrapolate these to autoimmune phenomena.

[PMID: 22155196]
The number of human conditions that are currently considered to be autoimmune diseases (AID) has been steadily growing over the past decades and it is now estimated that over 10 million people are affected in the United States. One of the major shared features among AID is the predominance in the female sex which in some cases changes with the age at disease diagnosis. Numerous hypotheses have been formulated based on intuitive scientific backgrounds to justify this sex imbalance, i.e. sex hormones and reproductive factors, fetal microchimerism, other sex-related environmental factors, a skewing of the X-chromosome inactivation patterns, and major defects in sex chromosomes. Nevertheless, none of these hypotheses has thus far gathered enough convincing evidence and in most cases data are conflicting, as well illustrated by the reports on fetal microchimerism in systemic sclerosis or primary biliary cirrhosis. The present article will critically discuss the main hypotheses (loss of mosaicism, reactivation, and haploinsufficiency) that have been proposed based on findings in female patients with specific AID along with two additional mechanisms (X-chromosome vulnerability and X-linked polyamine genes) that have been observed in AID models. Further, recent data have significantly shifted the paradigm of X chromosome inactivation by demonstrating that a large number of genes can variably escape silencing on one or both chromosomes. As a result we may hypothesize that more than one mechanism may contribute to the female susceptibility to tolerance breakdown while the possibility that unknown factors may indeed protect men from AID should not be overlooked.

[PMID: 16549717]
The sexually dimorphic prevalence of autoimmune disease remains one of the most intriguing clinical observations among this group of disorders. While sex hormones have long been recognized for their roles in reproductive functions, within the past 2 decades scientists have found that sex hormones are integral signaling modulators of the mammalian immune system. Sex hormones have definitive roles in lymphocyte maturation, activation, and synthesis of antibodies and cytokines. Sex hormone expression is altered among patients with autoimmune disease, and this variation of expression contributes to immune dysregulation. English-language literature from the last 10 years was reviewed to examine the relationship between sex hormones and the function of the mammalian immune system. Approximately 50 publications were included in this review, and the majority were controlled trials with investigator blinding that compared both male and female diseased and normal subjects. The review provided basic knowledge regarding the broad impact of sex hormones on the immune system and how abnormal sex hormone expression contributes to the development and maintenance of autoimmune phenomena, with a focus on systemic lupus erythematosus, as models of "lupus-prone" mice are readily available. Sex hormones affect the function of the mammalian immune system, and sex hormone expression is different in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus than in healthy subjects. Sex hormones play a role in the genesis of autoimmunity. Future research may provide a therapeutic approach that is capable of altering disease pathogenesis, rather than targeting disease sequelae.