[PMID: 20582309]
The polyneuropathy of juvenile Greyhound show dogs shows clinical similarities to the genetically heterogeneous Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease in humans. The pedigrees containing affected dogs suggest monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance and all affected dogs trace back to a single male. Here, we studied the neuropathology of this disease and identified a candidate causative mutation. Peripheral nerve biopsies from affected dogs were examined using semi-thin histology, nerve fibre teasing and electron microscopy. A severe chronic progressive mixed polyneuropathy was observed. Seven affected and 17 related control dogs were genotyped on the 50k canine SNP chip. This allowed us to localize the causative mutation to a 19.5 Mb interval on chromosome 13 by homozygosity mapping. The NDRG1 gene is located within this interval and NDRG1 mutations have been shown to cause hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Lom in humans (CMT4D). Therefore, we considered NDRG1 a positional and functional candidate gene and performed mutation analysis in affected and control Greyhounds. A 10 bp deletion in canine NDRG1 exon 15 (c.1080_1089delTCGCCTGGAC) was perfectly associated with the polyneuropathy phenotype of Greyhound show dogs. The deletion causes a frame shift (p.Arg361SerfsX60) which alters several amino acids before a stop codon is encountered. A reduced level of NDRG1 transcript could be detected by RT-PCR. Western blot analysis demonstrated an absence of NDRG1 protein in peripheral nerve biopsy of an affected Greyhound. We thus have identified a candidate causative mutation for polyneuropathy in Greyhounds and identified the first genetically characterized canine CMT model which offers an opportunity to gain further insights into the pathobiology and therapy of human NDRG1 associated CMT disease. Selection against this mutation can now be used to eliminate polyneuropathy from Greyhound show dogs.

[PMID: 15082788]
NDRG1 is an intracellular protein that is induced under a number of stress and pathological conditions, and it is thought to be associated with cell growth and differentiation. Recently, human NDRG1 was identified as a gene responsible for hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Lom (classified as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4D), which is characterized by early-onset peripheral neuropathy, leading to severe disability in adulthood. In this study, we generated mice lacking Ndrg1 to analyze its function and elucidate the pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4D. Histological analysis showed that the sciatic nerve of Ndrg1-deficient mice degenerated with demyelination at about 5 weeks of age. However, myelination of Schwann cells in the sciatic nerve was normal for 2 weeks after birth. Ndrg1-deficient mice showed muscle weakness, especially in the hind limbs, but complicated motor skills were retained. In wild-type mice, NDRG1 was abundantly expressed in the cytoplasm of Schwann cells rather than the myelin sheath. These results indicate that NDRG1 deficiency leads to Schwann cell dysfunction, suggesting that NDRG1 is essential for maintenance of the myelin sheaths in peripheral nerves. These mice will be used for future analyses of the mechanisms of myelin maintenance.

[PMID: 12884740]
Hereditary neuropathies are classified into several subtypes according to clinical, electrophysiologic and pathologic findings. Recent genetic studies have revealed their phenotypic and genetic diversities. In the primary peripheral demyelinating neuropathies(CMT1), at least 9 genes have been associated with the disorders; altered dosage of peripheral myelin protein 22(PMP22) or point mutation of PMP22, the gap junction protein 1(GJB1), the myelin protein zero gene(MPZ), the early growth response gene 2(EGR2), the myotubularin-related protein 2 gene(MTMR2), the N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), the L-periaxin gene(PRX), SRY-related HMG-BOX gene 10(SOX10) and the ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 gene(GDAP1). In the primary peripheral axonal neuropathies(CMT2), at least 8 genes have been associated with these disorders; the neurofilament light chain gene(NEFL), the kinesin 1B gene(KIF1B), the gigaxonin gene(GAN1), Lamin A/C(LMNA) and tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1(TDP1). In addition, some mutations in GJB1, MPZ and GDAP1 also present with clinical and electrophysiologic findings of CMT2. Mutation of NEFL or KIF1B cause dominantly inherited axonal neuropathies, whereas mutation of GJB1 or MPZ can present as genocopies of dominant axonal neuropathies. In addition to the above diseases, we have reported a new type of NMSNP(MIM # *604484) characterized by proximal dominant neurogenic atrophy, obvious sensory nerve involvement and the gene locus on 3q13. Here, we summarize the genetic bases of hereditary neuropathies and attempt to highlight significant genotype-phenotype correlations.

[PMID: 15651351]
Hereditary neuropathies are classified into several subtypes according to clinical, electrophysiologic and pathologic findings. Recent genetic studies have revealed their phenotypic and genetic diversities. In the primary peripheral demyelinating neuropathies (CMT1), at least 15 genes have been associated with the disorders; altered dosage or point mutation of PMP22, GJB1, MPZ, EGR2, MTMR2, NDRG1, PRX, SOX10, GDAP1 and MTMR13/SBF2. In the primary peripheral axonal neuropathies (CMT2), at least 10 genes have been associated with these disorders; NEFL, KIF1B, MFN2, GAN1, LMNA, RAB7, GARS, TDP1, APTX, and SETX. In addition, some mutations in GJB1, MPZ, GDAP1 and NEFL also present with clinical and electrophysiologic findings of CMT2. Patients with TDP1, APTX or SETX mutations share common clinical findings; autosomal recessive inheritance, cerebellar ataxia, and axonal neuropathy. These genes are suspected to be related to DNA/RNA repair and induce cell death especially in neuronal cells. In addition to the above diseases, we have reported a new type of NMSNP (MIM# * 604484) characterized by proximal dominant neurogenic atrophy, obvious sensory nerve involvement and the gene locus on 3q12.3. Here, we summarize the genetic bases of hereditary neuropathies and attempt to highlight significant genotype-phenotype correlations with a special interest in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.

[PMID: 12872253]
In a previous study, we have shown that N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), classified in databases as a tumor suppressor and heavy metal-response protein, is mutated in hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Lom (HMSNL), a severe autosomal recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. The private founder mutation R148X, causing HMSNL in patients of Romani ethnicity, has so far remained the only molecular defect linking NDRG1 to a specific disease phenotype. Here we report the first study aiming to assess the overall contribution of this gene to the pathogenesis of peripheral neuropathies, in cases where the most common causes of CMT disease have been excluded. Sequence analysis of NDRG1 in 104 CMT patients of diverse ethnicity identified one novel disease-causing mutation, IVS8-1G>A (g.2290787G>A), which affects the splice-acceptor site of IVS8 and results in the skipping of exon 9. The phenotype of the IVS8-1G>A homozygote was very closely related to that of HMSNL patients. In addition, we have detected homozygosity for the known R148X mutation in two affected individuals. Mutations in NDRG1 thus accounted for 2.88% of our overall group of patients, and for 4.68% of cases with demyelinating neuropathies. No other variants were identified in the coding sequence, whereas 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms were observed in the introns. Hum Mutat 22:129-135, 2003.

[PMID: 16541790]
Inherited neuropathies are clinically and genetically heterogeneous. At least 28 genes and 12 loci have been associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and related inherited neuropathies. Most causes of inherited neuropathy have been discovered by positional cloning technique and in the past two years, the pace of CMT gene discovery has accelerated. Genetic studies have revealed the following gene mutations as the causes of inherited neuropathies; PMP22, MPZ, EGR2, SOX10, SIMPLE/LITAF, ARHGEF10 for CMT1 (autosomal dominant demyelinating form); GDAP1, MTMR2, SBF2/MTMR13, KIAA1985, NDRG1 PRX for CMT4 (autosomal recessive demyelinating form), MFN2, KIF1B, RAB7, GARS, NEFL, HSPB1, HSPB8 for CMT2 (autosomal dominant axonal form); LMNA, GAN1, KCC3, TDP1, APTX, SETX for AR-CMT2 (autosomal recessive axonal form); GIB1 for CMTX (X-linked CMT); DNM2 for CMT-DI (autosomal dominant CMT with intermediate nerve conduction velocities); and DHH for minifascicular neuropathy. These discovered CMT causing genes/proteins include those which show unpredictable correlations with the peripheral nervous system. However, these genes/proteins are definitely important for the peripheral nerve, and their discovery should pave the way for dramatic progress in the understanding of peripheral nerve biology. On the other hand, genotype-phenotype correlations of these genes are also important in order to understand the pathomechanisms of inherited neuropathy. Because, based on mutation studies, a large number of genes associated with both the CMT1/4 and CMT2 forms have been identified, it is usually difficult to predict the causative gene based on clinical information from patients without specific complications. To clarify the specific features and molecular mechanisms of five diseases that we previously reported, we reviewed recent progress in HMSN-P linked to chromosome 3, CMT4F caused by PRX, CMT4A caused by GDAP1, CMT4B2 caused by SBF2/MTMR13, and SCAN1 caused by TDP1. HMSN-P is characterized by late onset, proximal dominant severe muscle weakness, fasciculations, muscle cramp and sensory involvement. HMSN-P is a primary neuronopathy. Mutations in periaxin are associated with a broad spectrum of demyelinating neuropathies including DSS, a sensory dominant form and early onset slowly progressive CMT. Pathologically, loss of myelinated fibers, demyelination, small onion bulb formations, tomacula formation and myelin foldings were seen in sural nerves. Absence of septate like junction in the paranodal loop suggests that periaxin could be required for the adhesion complex. GDAP1 is a relatively common cause of CMT4. Half of reported patients showed the demyelinating form, while the rest showed the axonal form. The typical feature of CMT4A is paresis of the vocal cords and diaphragm. CMT4B2 is characterized by autosomal recessive, juvenile onset glaucoma and focally folded myelin in sural nerves. SBF2/MTMR13 mutations cause CMT4B2. Early onset glaucoma was seen in patients with nonsense mutations. SBF2/MTMR13 and MTMR2, which is the cause of CMT4B1, could be acting on the same 3-phosphoinositide signaling pathway. Clinical phenotypes of patients with TDP1, APTX, or SETX mutations share common clinical findings, namely cerebellar ataxia and axonal neuropathy. TDP1 and aprataxin both act on the single strand break repair pathway, with TDP1 working specifically on topoisomerase I related SSBR. Senataxin is a RNA helicase acting on RNA maturation and termination in yeast. Since these three proteins share a common pathway, disruption in any of them could induce a delay in the transcription process. The low rate of protein supply could lead to deaths of large neuronal cells.

[PMID: 23996628]
Autosomal recessive forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) account for less than 10 % of all CMT cases, but are more frequent in the populations with a high rate of consanguinity. Roma (Gypsies) are a transnational minority with an estimated population of 10 to 14 million, in which a high degree of consanguineous marriages is a generally known fact. Similar to the other genetically isolated founder populations, the Roma harbour a number of unique or rare autosomal recessive disorders, caused by "private" founder mutations. There are three subtypes of autosomal recessive CMT with mutations private to the Roma population: CMT4C, CMT4D and CMT4G. We report on the molecular examination of four families of Roma origin in Slovakia with early-onset demyelinating neuropathy and autosomal recessive inheritance. We detected mutation p.R148X (g.631C>T) in the NDRG1 (NM_006096.3) gene in two families and mutation g.9712G>C in the HK1 (NM_033498) gene in the other two families. These mutations cause CMT4D and CMT4G, respectively. The success of molecular genetic analysis in all families confirms that autosomal recessive forms of CMT caused by mutations on the NDRG1 and HK1 genes are common causes of inherited neuropathies among Slovak Roma. Providing genetic analysis of these genes for patients with Roma origin as a common part of diagnostic procedure would contribute to a better rate of diagnosed cases of demyelinating neuropathy in Slovakia and in other countries with a Roma minority.

[PMID: 21303696]
CMT4D disease is a severe autosomal recessive demyelinating neuropathy with extensive axonal loss leading to early disability, caused by mutations in the N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1). NDRG1 is expressed at particularly high levels in the Schwann cell (SC), but its physiological function(s) are unknown. To help with their understanding, we characterise the phenotype of a new mouse model, stretcher (str), with total Ndrg1 deficiency, in comparison with the hypomorphic Ndrg1 knock-out (KO) mouse. While both models display normal initial myelination and a transition to overt pathology between weeks 3 and 5, the markedly more severe str phenotype suggests that even low Ndrg1 expression results in significant phenotype rescue. Neither model replicates fully the features of CMT4D: although axon damage is present, regenerative capacity is unimpaired and the mice do not display the early severe axonal loss typical of the human disease. The widespread large fibre demyelination coincides precisely with the period of rapid growth of the animals and the dramatic (160-500-fold) increase in myelin volume and length in large fibres. This is followed by stabilisation after week 10, while small fibres remain unaffected. Gene expression profiling of str peripheral nerve reveals non-specific secondary changes at weeks 5 and 10 and preliminary data point to normal proteasomal function. Our findings do not support the proposed roles of NDRG1 in growth arrest, terminal differentiation, gene expression regulation and proteasomal degradation. Impaired SC trafficking failing to meet the considerable demands of nerve growth, emerges as the likely pathogenetic mechanism in NDRG1 deficiency.