[PMID: 23559085]
The negative impact of subclinical hypothyroidism (sHT) on cardiovascular risk, widely recognized in young adults (aged <55-60 y), is still debated in the elderly (>65 y), especially in the oldest olds (>80 y). We searched Medline for reports published with the following search terms: "hypothyroidism," "subclinical hypothyroidism," "ageing," "elderly," "L-thyroxin," "thyroid," "guidelines," "treatment," "quality of life," "cardiovascular risk," "heart failure," "coronary heart disease" (CHD), "atherosclerosis," and "endothelial dysfunction." We limited our search to reports in English published after 1980, although we incorporated some reports published before 1980. We supplemented the search with records from personal files, textbooks, and relevant articles. Analyzed parameters included the epidemiology of thyroid failure, the effect of thyroid hormone on the aging process, cardiovascular function, and CHD risk factors. We also included the potential benefits of L-T4 therapy on the quality of life, cardiovascular events, and survival. TSH levels increase with age, even in older people without thyroid disease. Most longitudinal studies show an increased risk for CHD events and mortality in sHT participants. This increase is less evident in the elderly, mainly in cases of serum TSH values above 10 mIU/L. Lower mortality rate in a cohort of the oldest olds (>85 y) has been reported. sHT in older people should be not regarded as a unique condition, and moderately old patients (aged <70-75 y) could be considered clinically similar to the adult population, albeit with a higher optimal TSH target value. Conversely, the oldest old subjects should be carefully followed with a wait-and-see strategy, generally avoiding hormonal treatment. The decision to treat elderly people is still an unresolved clinical challenge--first, due to a lack of appropriately powered randomized controlled trials of L-T4 in sHT patients, examining cardiovascular hard endpoints in various classes of age; and second, because of the negative effects of possible overtreatment.

[PMID: 16542047]
Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as an elevated serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level in the face of normal free thyroid hormone values. The overall prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism is 4-10% in the general population and up to 20% in women aged >60 years. The potential benefits and risks of therapy for subclinical hypothyroidism have been debated for 2 decades, and a consensus is still lacking. Besides avoiding the progression to overt hypothyroidism, the decision to treat patients with subclinical hypothyroidism relies mainly on the risk of metabolic and cardiovascular alterations. Subclinical hypothyroidism causes changes in cardiovascular function similar to, but less marked than, those occurring in patients with overt hypothyroidism. Diastolic dysfunction both at rest and upon effort is the most consistent cardiac abnormality in patients with subclinical hypothyroidism, and also in those with slightly elevated TSH levels (>6 mIU/L). Moreover, mild thyroid failure may increase diastolic blood pressure as a result of increased systemic vascular resistance. Restoration of euthyroidism by levothyroxine replacement is generally able to improve all these abnormalities. Early clinical and autopsy studies had suggested an association between subclinical hypothyroidism and coronary heart disease, which has been subsequently confirmed by some, but not all, large cross-sectional and prospective studies. Altered coagulation parameters, elevated lipoprotein (a) levels, and low-grade chronic inflammation are regarded to coalesce with the hypercholesterolemia of untreated patients with subclinical hypothyroidism to enhance the ischemic cardiovascular risk. Although a consensus is still lacking, the strongest evidence for a beneficial effect of levothyroxine replacement on markers of cardiovascular risk is the substantial demonstration that restoration of euthyroidism can lower both total and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels in most patients with subclinical hypothyroidism. However, the actual effectiveness of thyroid hormone substitution in reducing the risk of cardiovascular events remains to be elucidated. In conclusion, the multiplicity and the possible reversibility of subclinical hypothyroidism-associated cardiovascular abnormalities suggest that the decision to treat a patient should depend on the presence of risk factors, rather than on a TSH threshold. On the other hand, levothyroxine replacement therapy can always be discontinued if there is no apparent benefit. Levothyroxine replacement therapy is usually safe providing that excessive administration is avoided by monitoring serum TSH levels. However, the possibility that restoring euthyroidism may be harmful in the oldest of the elderly population of hypothyroid patients has been recently raised, and should be taken into account in making the decision to treat patients with subclinical hypothyroidism who are aged >85 years.

[PMID: 17544610]
Subclinical hypothyroidism affects 5-15% of the population and is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity, although this is controversial. We recently reported a significant increase in brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV), a parameter of arterial stiffening and an independent predictor for cardiovascular events, in subclinical hypothyroidism. The current study was performed to assess changes in enhanced baPWV in subclinical hypothyroidism during normalization of thyroid function. Forty-two subclinical hypothyroid patients (male/female ratio 8/34) were monitored for changes in baPWV before and after levothyroxine (L-T(4)) replacement therapy. After attaining euthyroidism, 59.5% and 40.5% of the patients showed reduction and increase of baPWV, respectively. Baseline baPWV and pulse pressure were significantly higher in patients with reduced baPWV (1940.3+/-126.4 vs. 1726.4+/-110.4 cm/s, P=0.046; 62.1+/-3.1 vs. 50.7+/-3.7 mmHg, P=0.026, respectively). Baseline baPWV was significantly correlated with baseline pulse pressure in both groups, but the change in baPWV was significantly correlated with baseline pulse pressure only in patients with reduced baPWV (rho=-0.522, P=0.046). The male/female ratio was significantly lower in patients with reduced baPWV (4/21 vs. 7/10), and systolic, diastolic and pulse pressures and pulse rate decreased significantly only in patients with reduced baPWV. Our results suggest that L-T(4) replacement therapy may be especially beneficial in female subclinical hypothyroid patients with high baseline baPWV and pulse pressure. The beneficial effects of L-T(4) replacement therapy in decreasing arterial stiffening and thus preventing cardiovascular disease might be limited to this sub-population.

[PMID: 22529180]
BACKGROUND Subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) has been associated with ischemic heart disease (IHD); however, it is unknown whether treatment of SCH with levothyroxine sodium will reduce the risk of IHD. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between levothyroxine treatment of SCH with IHD morbidity and mortality. METHODS We used the United Kingdom General Practitioner Research Database to identify individuals with new SCH (serum thyrotropin levels of 5.01-10.0 mIU/L and normal free thyroxine levels) recorded during 2001 with outcomes analyzed until March 2009. All analyses were performed separately for younger (40-70 years) and older (&gt;70 years) individuals. Hazard ratios (HRs) for IHD events (fatal and nonfatal) were calculated after adjustment for conventional IHD risk factors, baseline serum thyrotropin levels, and initiation of levothyroxine treatment as a time-dependent covariate. RESULTS Subclinical hypothyroidism was identified in 3093 younger and 1642 older individuals. For a median follow-up period of 7.6 years, 52.8% and 49.9% of younger and older patients with SCH were treated with levothyroxine, respectively. There were 68 incident IHD events in 1634 younger patients treated with levothyroxine (4.2%) vs 97 IHD events in 1459 untreated individuals (6.6%) (multivariate-adjusted HR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.39-0.95). In contrast, in the older group there were 104 events in 819 treated patients (12.7%) vs 88 events in 823 untreated individuals (10.7%) (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.59-1.33). CONCLUSIONS Treatment of SCH with levothyroxine was associated with fewer IHD events in younger individuals, but this was not evident in older people. An appropriately powered randomized controlled trial of levothyroxine in SCH examining vascular outcomes is now warranted.

[PMID: 16026106]
Subclinical hypothyroidism (SH), defined by elevated serum levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) with normal levels of free thyroid hormones, is common in adults, especially in women over 60 years of age. Among individuals with this condition, up to two-thirds have serum TSH levels between 5-10 mU/L and thyroid autoantibodies; almost half of them may progress to overt thyroid failure, the annual percent risk increasing with serum TSH level. There is evidence that elevated TSH levels in patients with SH do not reflect pituitary compensation to maintain euthyroidism, but a mild tissue hypothyroidism sensu strictu. When lasting more than 6-12 months, SH may be associated with an atherogenic lipid profile, a hypercoagulable state, a subtle cardiac defect with mainly diastolic dysfunction, impaired vascular function, and reduced submaximal exercise capacity. The deviation from normality usually increases with serum TSH level ('dosage effect' phenomenon). Restoration of euthyroidism by levothyroxine (LT4) treatment may correct the lipid profile and cardiac abnormalities, especially in patients with an initially higher deviation from normality and higher serum TSH levels. Importantly, a strong association between SH and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, independent of the traditional risk factors, has been recently reported in a large cross-sectional survey (the Rotterdam Study). However, whether SH confers a high risk for cardiovascular disease, and whether LT4 therapy has a long-term benefit that clearly outweighs the risks of overzealous treatment in these individuals, remain topics of controversy. Therefore, until randomized, controlled, prospective, and adequately powered trials provide unequivocal answers to these critical questions, it is advisable to prescribe LT4 therapy on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the risk of progressive thyroid failure and the risk of cardiovascular events.

[PMID: 17636722]
Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as an elevated serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level with normal free thyroid hormones values. The prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism is 4% to 8% in the general population, and up to 15% to 18% in women who are over 60 years of age. There is considerable controversy regarding the morbidity, the clinical significance of subclinical hypothyroidism and if these patients should be treated. To assess the effects of thyroid hormone replacement for subclinical hypothyroidism. We searched The Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, EMBASE and LILACS. Ongoing trials databases, reference lists and abstracts of congresses were scrutinized as well. All studies had to be randomised controlled trials comparing thyroid hormone replacement with placebo or no treatment in adults with subclinical hypothyroidism. Minimum duration of follow-up was one month. Two authors independently assessed trial quality and extracted data. We contacted study authors for missing or additional information. Twelve trials of six to 14 months duration involving 350 people were included. Eleven trials investigated levothyroxine replacement with placebo, one study compared levothyroxine replacement with no treatment. We did not identify any trial that assessed (cardiovascular) mortality or morbidity. Seven studies evaluated symptoms, mood and quality of life with no statistically significant improvement. One study showed a statistically significant improvement in cognitive function. Six studies assessed serum lipids, there was a trend for reduction in some parameters following levothyroxine replacement. Some echocardiographic parameters improved after levothyroxine replacement therapy, like myocardial relaxation, as indicated by a significant prolongation of the isovolumic relaxation time as well as diastolic dysfunction. Only four studies reported adverse events with no statistically significant differences between groups. In current RCTs, levothyroxine replacement therapy for subclinical hypothyroidism did not result in improved survival or decreased cardiovascular morbidity. Data on health-related quality of life and symptoms did not demonstrate significant differences between intervention groups. Some evidence indicates that levothyroxine replacement improves some parameters of lipid profiles and left ventricular function.

[PMID: 19463607]
Some studies have proposed that subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) has adverse effects on the cardiovascular system, but little is known about the effect on patients undergoing cardiovascular operations. We examined the influence of preoperative SCH on postoperative outcome in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Among patients who underwent CABG between July 2005 and June 2007 at Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 224 with normal thyroid function and 36 with SCH were enrolled. Preoperative risks and postoperative outcomes were evaluated prospectively without thyroid hormone replacement. There were no significant differences in primary outcomes (major adverse cardiovascular events) and secondary outcomes such as wound problems, mediastinitis, leg infection, respiratory complications, delirium, or reoperation during the same hospitalization. However, patients with SCH had a higher incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation than those with normal thyroid function after adjustment for age, gender, body mass index, and other independent variables such as emergency operation, the use of cardiopulmonary bypass, combined valvular operation, preoperative creatinine levels, left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and nonuse of beta-blockers (45.5% vs 29%; odds ratio, 2.552; 95% confidence interval, 1.117 to 5.830; p = 0.026). SCH appears to influence the postoperative outcome for patients by increasing the development of postoperative atrial fibrillation. However, it is still unproven whether preoperative thyroxine replacement therapy for patients with SCH might prevent postoperative atrial fibrillation after CABG.

[PMID: 19114542]
Subclinical hypothyroidism affects 5-15% of the general population, is especially prevalent in females, and may be associated with increased morbidity from cardiovascular disease, although it remains controversial. We recently reported a significant increase in the brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV), a parameter of arterial stiffening and an independent predictor of cardiovascular events, in subclinical hypothyroidism without thyroiditis. The current study was performed to assess changes in baPWV in female subclinical hypothyroidism with autoimmune chronic thyroiditis (Hashimoto's disease) after restoration of normal thyroid function. In a randomized placebo-controlled study, 95 female subclinical hypothyroid patients were monitored for changes in baPWV before and after levothyroxine (l-T(4)) replacement therapy. Changes in baPWV were also measured in 42 age-matched normal female subjects. The baseline baPWV values in patients with subclinical hypothyroidism were significantly higher than in normal subjects. With attainment of euthyroidism, baPWV showed a significant decrease from 1776.7+/-86.0 to 1674.3+/-79.2 cm/s (P=0.006) in patients treated with l-T(4), but the changes in baPWV and TSH were not correlated. The change in baPWV was significantly and negatively correlated with age and baseline pulse pressure, but multiple regression analysis revealed that these parameters failed to be associated with the change in baPWV. Sustained normalization of thyroid function during l-T(4) replacement therapy significantly decreases baPWV in female subclinical hypothyroid patients with autoimmune chronic thyroiditis, suggesting the improvement of arterial stiffening and, consequently, possible prevention of cardiovascular disease.