[PMID: 28255506]
Spinal epidural hematoma (SEH) is a rare disease that causes cord compression and neurologic deficit. Spontaneous SEH is related to minor trauma, bleeding disorders, and anticoagulant medications. Posttraumatic SEH has been associated with low-energy spine hyperextension injuries in patients with ankylosing spinal disorders such as ankylosing spondylitis and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). A variant named atypical DISH-like with SEH is reported. To describe the management, diagnosis, and treatment of an unusual SEH case in a patient causing delayed neurologic deficit with rigid atypical DISH-like spine. An elderly woman with prior antiplatelet therapy presented with delayed neurological deficit suffering trauma after falling. Computed tomography (CT) imaging studies reveal hyperextension fracture pattern and signs mimic DISH missed on standard X-ray images. Magnetic resonance (MR) study demonstrates posterior epidural mass compatible with SEH in thoracic spine with cord compression. Using a midline posterior approach, an urgent intervention and a left multiple partial unilateral decompressive laminectomy at T4-T7 and a long instrumented fusion at T3-T9 were performed for achieving spinal stability and neurological improvement, both of which were observed. Patients with rigid spine who sustain low-energy injuries may be prone to have a fracture and epidural hematoma, especially if they take anticoagulant medications. Imaging studies including MR and CT scans should be reviewed carefully to rule out any occult fracture. Urgent or early surgical hematoma drainage and instrumented fusion must be performed to achieve stability and functional recovery.

[PMID: 12520314]
Spinal hematoma has been described in autopsies since 1682 and as a clinical diagnosis since 1867. It is a rare and usually severe neurological disorder that, without adequate treatment, often leads to death or permanent neurological deficit. Epidural as well as subdural and subarachnoid hematomas have been investigated. Some cases of subarachnoid spinal hematoma may present with symptoms similar to those of cerebral hemorrhage. The literature offers no reliable estimates of the incidence of spinal hematoma, perhaps due to the rarity of this disorder. In the present work, 613 case studies published between 1826 and 1996 have been evaluated, which represents the largest review on this topic to date. Most cases of spinal hematoma have a multifactorial etiology whose individual components are not all understood in detail. In up to a third of cases (29.7%) of spinal hematoma, no etiological factor can be identified as the cause of the bleeding. Following idiopathic spinal hematoma, cases related to anticoagulant therapy and vascular malformations represent the second and third most common categories. Spinal and epidural anesthetic procedures in combination with anticoagulant therapy represent the fifth most common etiological group and spinal and epidural anesthetic procedures alone represent the tenth most common cause of spinal hematoma. Anticoagulant therapy alone probably does not trigger spinal hemorrhage. It is likely that there must additionally be a "locus minoris resistentiae" together with increased pressure in the interior vertebral venous plexus in order to cause spinal hemorrhage. The latter two factors are thought to be sufficient to cause spontaneous spinal hematoma. Physicians should require strict indications for the use of spinal anesthetic procedures in patients receiving anticoagulant therapy, even if the incidence of spinal hematoma following this combination is low. If spinal anesthetic procedures are performed before, during, or after anticoagulant treatment, close monitoring of the neurological status of the patient is warranted. Time limits regarding the use of anticoagulant therapy before or after spinal anesthetic procedures have been proposed and are thought to be safe for patients. Investigation of the coagulation status alone does not necessarily provide an accurate estimate of the risk of hemorrhage. The most important measure for recognizing patients at high risk is a thorough clinical history. Most spinal hematomas are localized dorsally to the spinal cord at the level of the cervicothoracic and thoracolumbar regions. Subarachnoid hematomas can extend along the entire length of the subarachnoid space. Epidural and subdural spinal hematoma present with intense, knife-like pain at the location of the hemorrhage ("coup de poignard") that may be followed in some cases by a pain-free interval of minutes to days, after which there is progressive paralysis below the affected spinal level. Subarachnoid hematoma can be associated with meningitis symptoms, disturbances of consciousness, and epileptic seizures and is often misdiagnosed as cerebral hemorrhage based on these symptoms. Most patients are between 55 and 70 years old. Of all patients with spinal hemorrhage, 63.9% are men. The examination of first choice is magnetic resonance imaging. The treatment of choice is surgical decompression. Of the patients investigated in the present work, 39.6% experienced complete recovery. The less severe the preoperative symptoms are and the more quickly surgical decompression can be performed, the better are the chances for complete recovery. It is therefore essential to recognize the relatively typical clinical presentation of spinal hematoma in a timely manner to allow correct diagnostic and therapeutic measures to be taken to maximize the patient's chance of complete recovery.

[PMID: 26074484]
Spontaneous epidural hematoma of the spine (SEHS) is an extremely rare entity. Patients known to have thrombophilia or on anticoagulant drugs are the most affected. It is generally caused by a rupture of the postero-internal vertebral venous plexus secondary to minor barotrauma such as cough, peridural catheter insertion... Early diagnosis and treatment showed to have the best outcome. We report 3 cases of spontaneous epidural hematoma in patients treated by acenocoumarol, which occurred without any provocative factor. All 3 patients were treated with decompressive laminectomy. We described the MRI findings and discussed the spontaneity of the entity. Our present case studies and the review of the literature showed that early diagnosis and management of SEHS can lead to improvement of the neurological state and avoid definitive motor and sensitive deficit. This rare entity should be suspected in every acute medullary syndrome with spinal pain, motor and/or sensory deficit. In order to decrease the sequelae, neurologically unstable patients should benefit from early diagnosis and urgent surgical decompression.

[PMID: 2797370]
The authors report a case of acute spinal epidural hematoma occurring in a patient receiving antiplatelet drugs. A 76-year-old man with a history of cerebral infarction had been taking antiplatelet agents for one year. He suddenly developed severe back pain which woke him from sleep, and numbness of his lower extremities was then noted. He was hospitalized 15 hours later. Neurological examination revealed flaccid paralysis of both lower extremities with negative Babinski's reflex, and sensory disturbance below the level of L1. The bleeding time and prothrombin time were prolonged. Computed tomographic (CT) scan revealed a biconvex, relatively hyperdense mass in the posterior spinal canal at the level of T12. Metrizamide myelography disclosed an incomplete blockage caused by an epidural mass at the level of T11. Post-myelographic CT scan demonstrated a sharply demarcated extradural filling defect at the level of T11. Seventeen hours after the onset of symptoms, an emergency laminectomy was performed extending from T12 to L3, and the epidural clot was totally evacuated. Histological examination of the capsule of the hematoma revealed no vascular anomalies. The patient made a good postoperative recovery. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first reported case of spontaneous intraspinal hemorrhage in a patient taking antiplatelet drugs. Acute onset of persistent pain anywhere along the spinal axis and the development of spinal neurological deficits in a patient on antiplatelet therapy should raise the suspicion of a spinal epidural hematoma. It should be stressed that prompt neuroradiological diagnosis and rapid surgical decompression are essential to allow good recovery. The present case illustrates that neurological emergencies can occur in patients receiving antiplatelet therapy.

[PMID: 15043358]
Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma is an uncommon cause of spinal cord compression. It may be associated with various causative factors, but in many patients, anticoagulation can be implicated. It is noteworthy that many of the reported cases were anticoagulated in the therapeutic range. Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma should be suspected in any patient receiving anticoagulant agents who complains of local or referred spinal pain associated with limb weakness, sensory deficits, or urinary retention. Early diagnosis and treatment are very important for the functional recovery of the patient. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging is the most suitable neuroradiological method for early diagnosis. Although primary management is the surgical evacuation of the spinal epidural hematoma via laminectomy, rare cases in which the patient is improving rapidly and progressively could be treated conservatively. A 22-yr-old man with a spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma who was receiving warfarin treatment for a mechanical aortic valve is presented in this article.

[PMID: 27923756]
Spinal subdural hematoma is a rare clinical entity marked by the onset of pain and paralysis, which is usually associated with hemorrhagic disorders, trauma, and iatrogenic causes such as lumbar puncture or epidural anesthesia. A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with 2 weeks' history of bilateral lower leg pain, dysesthesia, paraparesis, and urinary disturbance. Magnetic resonance imaging showed characteristic findings at the thoracolumbar spine, and surgical evacuation successfully treated this condition. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient gradually recovered from paraparesis and was discharged 4 weeks after operation. We report an extremely rare case of chronic spinal subdural hematoma associated with antiplatelet therapy. Spinal subdural hematoma should be considered as the differential diagnosis of gait disturbance in patients undergoing antiplatelet therapy. Early diagnosis and identification of the extent of the hematoma are necessary for successful treatment.

[PMID: 23351908]
We report the case of a man of 65 who, at 20 and 37 days from surgery of C6 corpectomy, experienced two epidural hematomas at C7-D1. We assume that the pathogenic cause of this rare disease was an overlap between three main factors: the surgical aggression of the internal anterior epidural venous plexus; a possible increase of intra-thoracic pressure due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and double antiplatelet drug therapy.

[PMID: 27347652]
<b>Aim</b> Spinal epidural hematomas are rare entity in neurosurgery practice. Most of them are spontaneous due to anticoagulant therapy and called spontaneous spinal epidural hematomas (SSEHs). Laminectomy or hemilaminectomy for affected levels is still the first choice in the operative treatment of an SSEH. We describe a new less invasive surgical technique, performing single-level laminectomy and washing with 0.9% sodium chloride through a thin soft catheter for a 12-level thoracic-cervical SSEH in a patient under anticoagulant therapy. <b>Patient and Operative Technique</b> A 55-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department with a rapid onset of pain in her upper back and both legs with weakness of her lower extremities. An urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the whole spine showed a SEH. During the operation, after T2 laminectomy, a thin soft catheter was epidurally placed under the T1 lamina and gently pushed forward rostrally. Then continuous saline irrigation was utilized and aspiration made via the catheter to wash out the hematoma. Drainage of blood was observed. The procedure was performed for 15 minutes. Then the catheter was epidurally placed under the T3 lamina, and the procedure for the hematoma in the lower segment was repeated. Decompression of spinal cord and nerve roots was observed. <b>Result</b> Postoperative early MRI of the thoracic-cervical spine showed gross total evacuation of the SEH. Accordingly, the patient's muscle strength improved. <b>Conclusion</b> Although multiple laminectomy or hemilaminectomy for affected levels to evacuate the hematoma and decompress the spinal cord is the main choice of surgical treatment, single-level laminectomy and irrigation plus aspiration via a thin soft catheter can be performed successfully with good results in SSEH.