[PMID: 8015613]
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II is essential in vivo, and is found in either an unphosphorylated (IIa) or hyperphosphorylated (IIo) form. The Drosophila uninduced hsp70 and hsp26 genes, and the constitutively expressed beta-1 tubulin and Gapdh-2 genes, contain an RNA polymerase II complex which pauses after synthesizing a short transcript. We report here that, using an in vivo ultraviolet crosslinking technique and antibodies directed against the IIa and IIo forms of the CTD, these paused polymerases have an unphosphorylated CTD. For genes containing a 5' paused polymerase, passage of the paused RNA polymerase into an elongationally competent mode in vivo coincides with phosphorylation of the CTD. Also, the level of phosphorylation of the CTD of elongating polymerases is shown not to be related to the level of transcription, but is promoter specific.

[PMID: 23064645]
Promoter-proximal pausing by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) ensures gene-specific regulation and RNA quality control. Structural considerations suggested a requirement for initiation-factor eviction in elongation-factor engagement and pausing of transcription complexes. Here we show that selective inhibition of Cdk7--part of TFIIH--increases TFIIE retention, prevents DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) recruitment and attenuates pausing in human cells. Pause release depends on Cdk9-cyclin T1 (P-TEFb); Cdk7 is also required for Cdk9-activating phosphorylation and Cdk9-dependent downstream events--Pol II C-terminal domain Ser2 phosphorylation and histone H2B ubiquitylation--in vivo. Cdk7 inhibition, moreover, impairs Pol II transcript 3'-end formation. Cdk7 thus acts through TFIIE and DSIF to establish, and through P-TEFb to relieve, barriers to elongation: incoherent feedforward that might create a window to recruit RNA-processing machinery. Therefore, cyclin-dependent kinases govern Pol II handoff from initiation to elongation factors and cotranscriptional RNA maturation.

[PMID: 17942706]
The Drosophila JIL-1 kinase is known to phosphorylate histone H3 at Ser10 (H3S10) during interphase. This modification is associated with transcriptional activation, but its function is not well understood. Here we present evidence suggesting that JIl-1-mediated H3S10 phosphorylation is dependent on chromatin remodeling by the brahma complex and is required during early transcription elongation to release RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from promoter-proximal pausing. JIL-1 localizes to transcriptionally active regions and is required for activation of the E75A ecdysone-responsive and hsp70 heat-shock genes. The heat-shock transcription factor, the promoter-paused form of Pol II (Pol IIo(ser5)), and the pausing factor DSIF (DRB sensitivity-inducing factor) are still present at the hsp70 loci in JIL-1-null mutants, whereas levels of the elongating form of Pol II (Pol IIo(ser2)) and the P-TEFb kinase are dramatically reduced. These observations suggest that phosphorylation of H3S10 takes place after transcription initiation but prior to recruitment of P-TEFb and productive elongation. Western analyses of global levels of both forms of Pol II further suggest that JIL-1 plays a general role in early elongation of a broad range of genes. Taken together, the results introduce H3S10 phosphorylation by JIL-1 as a hallmark of early transcription elongation in Drosophila.

[PMID: 12612070]
The carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) can be phosphorylated at serine 2 (Ser-2) and serine 5 (Ser-5) of the CTD heptad repeat YSPTSPS, and this phosphorylation is important in coupling transcription to RNA processing, including 5' capping, splicing, and polyadenylation. The mammalian endogenous dihydrofolate reductase and gamma-actin genes have been used to study the association of Pol II with different regions of transcribed genes (promoter-proximal compared to distal regions) and the phosphorylation status of its CTD. For both genes, Pol II is more concentrated in the promoter-proximal regions than in the interior regions. Moreover, different phosphorylation forms of Pol II are associated with distinct regions. Ser-5 phosphorylation of Pol II is concentrated near the promoter, while Ser-2 phosphorylation is observed throughout the gene. These results suggest that the accumulation of paused Pol II in promoter-proximal regions may be a common feature of gene regulation in mammalian cells.

[PMID: 21095588]
In eukaryotic cells, there is evidence for functional coupling between transcription and processing of pre-mRNAs. To better understand this coupling, we performed a high-resolution kinetic analysis of transcription and splicing in budding yeast. This revealed that shortly after induction of transcription, RNA polymerase accumulates transiently around the 3' end of the intron on two reporter genes. This apparent transcriptional pause coincides with splicing factor recruitment and with the first detection of spliced mRNA and is repeated periodically thereafter. Pausing requires productive splicing, as it is lost upon mutation of the intron and restored by suppressing the splicing defect. The carboxy-terminal domain of the paused polymerase large subunit is hyperphosphorylated on serine 5, and phosphorylation of serine 2 is first detected here. Phosphorylated polymerase also accumulates around the 3' splice sites of constitutively expressed, endogenous yeast genes. We propose that transcriptional pausing is imposed by a checkpoint associated with cotranscriptional splicing.

[PMID: 21385935]
The in vivo role of glucocorticoids in controlling prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase-2 (PTGS2) expression in the human amnion is unclear despite extensive studies using in vitro models. We addressed this issue by determining PTGS2 mRNA levels and gene transcriptional activity, RNA polymerase-II (pol-II) binding, pol-II C-terminal domain (CTD) phosphorylation, histone acetylation, and histone methylation at the PTGS2 gene in fresh amnion and in amnion explants incubated with dexamethasone for 24 h after delivery, when adaptation from in vivo to in vitro conditions occurred. PTGS2 mRNA turnover changed during incubation involving the initial rapid decrease and subsequent rebound of the transcription rate and stabilization of mRNA. pol-II accumulated in the 5'-region of the gene, which indicated postinitiation pausing. pol-II binding, 5'-accumulation, C-terminal domain Ser-5 and Ser-2 phosphorylation, and histone acetylation decreased rapidly and did not reverse during the transcriptional rebound, suggesting that the transcriptional mechanism altered in vitro. Dexamethasone decreased PTGS2 gene activity and mRNA levels. Glucocorticoid receptor-α (GRα) was bound to the PTGS2 promoter but did not affect pol-II recruitment, pausing, or the epigenetic marks. GRα binding, however, decreased initiating (Ser-5) and elongating (Ser-2) pol-II phosphorylation. The ability of the PTGS2 promoter to bind GRα in response to dexamethasone diminished during incubation. We conclude that PTGS2 mRNA turnover is accelerated in vivo, but the underlying mechanisms are not sustained beyond 24 h in explants. Glucocorticoids chronically transrepress PTGS2 gene activity in vivo in part by interfering with transcription initiation and elongation. Glucocorticoid transrepression of PTGS2 may be important for pregnancy maintenance and the timing of parturition.

[PMID: 23087403]
Somatic hypermutation (SHM) diversifies the V region of Ig genes and underlies the process of affinity maturation, in which B lymphocytes producing high-affinity Abs are generated and selected. SHM is triggered in activated B cells by deamination of deoxycytosine residues mediated by activation-induced deaminase (AID). Whereas mistargeting of SHM and AID results in mutations and DNA damage in many non-Ig genes, they act preferentially at Ig loci. The mechanisms responsible for preferential targeting of SHM and AID activity to Ig loci are poorly understood. Using an assay involving an SHM reporter cassette inserted into the Ig L chain locus (IgL) of chicken DT40 B cells, we have identified a 1.9-kb DIVAC (diversification activator) element derived from chicken IgL that supports high levels of AID-dependent mutation activity. Systematic deletion analysis reveals that targeting activity is spread throughout much of the sequence and identifies two core regions that are particularly critical for function: a 200-bp region within the IgL enhancer, and a 350-bp 3' element. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that whereas DIVAC does not alter levels of several epigenetic marks in the mutation cassette, it does increase levels of serine-5 phosphorylated RNA polymerase II in the mutation target region, consistent with an effect on transcriptional elongation/pausing. We propose that multiple, dispersed DNA elements collaborate to recruit and activate the mutational machinery at Ig gene variable regions during SHM.

[PMID: 14560008]
The uninduced Drosophila hsp70 gene is poised for rapid activation. Here we examine the rapid changes upon heat shock in levels and location of heat shock factor (HSF), RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and its phosphorylated forms, and the Pol II kinase P-TEFb on hsp70 in vivo by using both real-time PCR assays of chromatin immunoprecipitates and polytene chromosome immunofluorescence. These studies capture Pol II recruitment and progression along hsp70 and reveal distinct spatial and temporal patterns of serine 2 and serine 5 phosphorylation: in uninduced cells, the promoter-paused Pol II shows Ser5 but not Ser2 phosphorylation, and in induced cells the relative level of Ser2-P Pol II is lower at the promoter than at regions downstream. An early time point of heat shock activation captures unphosphorylated Pol II recruited to the promoter prior to P-TEFb, and during the first wave of transcription Pol II and the P-TEFb kinase can be seen tracking together across hsp70 with indistinguishable kinetics. Pol II distributions on several other genes with paused Pol II show a pattern of Ser5 and Ser2 phosphorylation similar to that of hsp70. These studies of factor choreography set important limits in modeling transcription regulatory mechanisms.