[PMID: 30915717]
This multicenter, phase I, open-label dose escalation study evaluated safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary anti-tumor activity of inebilizumab in Japanese patients with relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), follicular lymphoma (FL), or multiple myeloma (MM) who were ineligible for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Patients received inebilizumab 2, 4, or 8 mg/kg intravenously on days 1 and 8 of the first 28-day cycle, and once every 28 days thereafter, with a 12 mg/kg cohort added. Twenty patients (11 FL, six DLBCL, two CLL, and one MM) received inebilizumab at four dose levels (2 mg/kg cohort, n = 3; 4 mg/kg cohort, n = 7; 8 mg/kg cohort, n = 4; 12 mg/kg cohort, n = 6). Three patients experienced dose-limiting toxicities: grade 4 neutropenia/grade 3 leukopenia (n = 1, 12 mg/kg) and grade 3 infusion reaction (n = 1 each, 4 mg/kg and 12 mg/kg); the maximum tolerated dose was 8 mg/kg. Four (three FL and one DLBCL) patients achieved complete response; eight (six FL and two DLBCL) achieved partial response. Overall response rate was 60%. Over the dose ranges evaluated, the pharmacokinetic profile of inebilizumab in Japanese patients was generally dose proportional. This phase I study showed acceptable toxicity and preliminary and promising efficacy of inebilizumab in patients with relapsed/refractory FL and DLBCL.

[PMID: 29512131]
For decades, B cells were ignored in multiple sclerosis (MS) pathogenesis, and the disease was always regarded as a T cell-mediated disorder. Recent evidence shows that there is an antigen-driven B-cell response in the central nervous system of patients with MS, and memory B cells/plasma cells are detectable in MS lesions. The striking efficacy of B cell-depleting therapies in reducing the inflammatory activity of the disease highlights that B cells may play more pathogenetic roles than expected. B cells express several unique characteristic markers on their surface, for example, CD19, CD20 molecules, that provide selective targets for monoclonal antibodies. In this respect, several B cell-targeted therapies emerged, including anti-CD20 antibodies (rituximab, ocrelizumab, and ofatumumab), anti-CD19 antibody (inebilizumab), and agents targeting the BAFF/APRIL signaling pathway (atacicept, belimumab, and LY2127399). In this review, we discuss, in detail, the immunobiology of B cells and their protective and destructive roles in MS pathogenesis. In the second part, we list the completed and ongoing clinical trials investigating the safety and efficacy of B cell-related monoclonal antibodies in MS.

[PMID: 29143550]
B cells may be involved in the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis (MS). Inebilizumab (formerly MEDI-551) binds to and depletes CD19<sup>+</sup> B cells. To assess safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and immunogenicity of inebilizumab in adults with relapsing MS. This phase 1 trial randomised 28 patients 3:1 (21, inebilizumab; 7, placebo) to inebilizumab (2 intravenous (IV) doses, days 1 and 15: 30, 100 or 600 mg; or single subcutaneous (SC) dose on day 1: 60 or 300 mg) or matching placebo, with follow-up until at least week 24 or return of CD19<sup>+</sup> B-cell count to ⩾80 cells/µL. Complete B-cell depletion was observed across all doses. Infusion/injection (grade 1/2) reactions occurred in 6/15 patients receiving inebilizumab IV, 2/5 placebo IV and 1/6 inebilizumab SC. Serious adverse events occurred in three patients receiving inebilizumab: pyrexia, mixed-drug intoxication (unrelated to inebilizumab; resulted in death) and urinary tract infection. Mean number of cumulative new gadolinium-enhancing lesions over 24 weeks was 0.1 with inebilizumab versus 1.3 with placebo; mean numbers of new/newly enlarging T2 lesions were 0.4 and 2.4, respectively. Inebilizumab had an acceptable safety profile in relapsing MS patients and showed a trend in reductions in new/newly enlarging and gadolinium-enhancing lesions.

[PMID: 29956883]
B cells impact the progression of systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma) through multiple pathogenic mechanisms. CD19 inhibition in mice reduced skin thickness, collagen production, and autoantibody levels, consistent with CD19 expression on plasma cells (PCs), the source of antibody production. PC depletion could effectively reduce collagen deposition and inflammation in SSc; therefore, we investigated the effects of PC depletion on SSc disease activity. A PC gene signature was evaluated in SSc skin biopsy samples in 2 phase I clinical trials. We assessed microarray data from tissue from public studies of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), dermatomyositis (DM), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and atopic dermatitis, as well as blood from a phase IIb clinical trial in SLE. The PC signature was elevated in SSc skin specimens compared to healthy donor skin (P = 2.28 × 10<sup>-6</sup> ) and correlated with the baseline modified Rodnan skin thickness score (MRSS) (r = 0.64, P = 0.0004). Patients with a high PC signature at baseline showed greater improvement in the MRSS (mean ± SD change 35 ± 16%; P = 6.30 × 10<sup>-4</sup> ) following anti-CD19 treatment with inebilizumab (MEDI-551) than did patients with a low PC signature at baseline (mean ± SD change 8 ± 12%; P = 0.104). The PC signature was overexpressed in tissue from patients with SLE, DM, COPD, interstitial lung disease, and IPF relative to controls (all fold change >2; P < 0.001). The PC signature also differed significantly between SLE patients with mild-to-moderate disease and those with severe disease (SLE Disease Activity Index cutoff at 10) (fold change 1.44; P = 3.90 × 10<sup>-3</sup> ) and correlated significantly with the degree of emphysema in COPD (r = 0.53, P = 7.55 × 10<sup>-8</sup> ). Our results support the notion that PCs have a role in the pathogenesis of SSc and other autoimmune or pulmonary indications. An elevated pretreatment PC signature was associated with increased benefit from MEDI-551 in SSc.

[PMID: 28910968]
Monoclonal antibody therapy is a new treatment strategy for many types of diseases including cancers and autoimmune diseases, realizing a high efficacy and tolerability. In multiple sclerosis (MS) and neuromyelitis optica (NMO) spectrum disorders, several monoclonal antibodies have been suggested to decrease the incidence of clinical relapse and the disease activity. In MS, anti-α4 integrin (natalizumab), anti-CD52 (alemtuzumab), anti-CD25 (daclizumab) and anti-CD20 (ocrelizumab) have been shown to effectively reduce the relapses in randomized controlled trials and have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Specifically, ocrelizumab is the first drug that has shown significant suppression of brain volume loss and suppression of chronic disability progression. In NMO, though there have yet to be any approved monoclonal antibodies, rituximab, anti-complement C5 (eculizumab), anti-IL-6 receptor (tocilizumab), anti-CD19 (inebilizumab) and non-pathogenic anti-aquaporin 4 (aquaporumab) have been suggested to be effective, and some of these are now under clinical trials. Aquaporumab is a non-pathogenic recombinant human monoclonal antibody that competitively inhibits the binding of the pathogenic auto-antibody against aquaporin 4 in NMO patients; thus, it is expected to be highly disease specific with less non-specific adverse events. Some of these monoclonal antibodies in MS and NMO are known to cause several notable adverse events. Natalizumab and rituximab increase the risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Eculizumab increases the risk of meningococcal infection. Tocilizumab is known to cause intestinal diverticulitis that can cause intestinal perforation. In this review, we summarize the characteristics of, evidence for and notable adverse events of each monoclonal antibody in MS and NMO.

[PMID: 27886126]
Exaggerated or inappropriate responses by B cells are an important feature in many types of autoimmune neurological diseases. The recent success of B-cell depletion in the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) has stimulated the development of novel B-cell-targeting therapies with the potential for improved efficacy. CD19 has emerged as a promising target for the depletion of B cells as well as CD19-positive plasmablasts and plasma cells. Inebilizumab (MEDI-551), an anti-CD19 antibody with enhanced antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity against B cells, is currently being evaluated in MS and neuromyelitis optica. This review discusses the role of B cells in autoimmune neurological disorders, summarizes the development of inebilizumab, and analyzes the recent results for inebilizumab treatment in an autoimmune encephalitis mouse model. The novel insights obtained from these preclinical studies can potentially guide future investigation of inebilizumab in patients.

[PMID: 29447988]
The present review is part of the ESCMID Study Group for Infections in Compromised Hosts (ESGICH) Consensus Document on the safety of targeted and biological therapies. To review, from an Infectious Diseases perspective, the safety profile of agents targeting CD19, CD20 and CD52 and to suggest preventive recommendations. Computer-based MEDLINE searches with MeSH terms pertaining to each agent or therapeutic family. Although CD19-targeted agents (blinatumomab or inebilizumab) are not associated with an increased risk of infection, they may cause IgG hypogammaglobulinaemia and neutropenia. The requirement for prolonged intravenous infusion of blinatumomab may increase the risk of catheter-associated bloodstream infections. Infection remains the most common non-haematological adverse effect of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, including severe respiratory tract infection, hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation and varicella-zoster virus infection. Screening for chronic or resolved HBV infection is recommended for patients receiving anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies. Antiviral prophylaxis should be offered for 12-18 months to hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive and HBsAg-negative/anti-hepatitis B core antibody (HBc)-positive patients. Anti-Pneumocystis prophylaxis should be considered in patients receiving concomitant chemotherapy, particularly steroids. Alemtuzumab (anti-CD52) increases the risk of infections, in particular among leukaemia and solid organ transplant patients. These populations benefit from anti-Pneumocystis prophylaxis, prevention strategies for cytomegalovirus infection, and screening for HBV, hepatitis C virus and tuberculosis. Antiviral prophylaxis for at least 6-12 months should be provided for HBsAg-positive patients. As there are limited clinical data for many of the reviewed agents, special attention must be given to promptly detect and report emerging infectious complications.

[PMID: 31495497]
No approved therapies exist for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), a rare, relapsing, autoimmune, inflammatory disease of the CNS that causes blindness and paralysis. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of inebilizumab, an anti-CD19, B cell-depleting antibody, in reducing the risk of attacks and disability in NMOSD. We did a multicentre, double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled phase 2/3 study at 99 outpatient specialty clinics or hospitals in 25 countries. Eligible participants were adults (≥18 years old) with a diagnosis of NMOSD, an Expanded Disability Status Scale score of 8·0 or less, and a history of at least one attack requiring rescue therapy in the year before screening or at least two attacks requiring rescue therapy in the 2 years before screening. Participants were randomly allocated (3:1) to 300 mg intravenous inebilizumab or placebo with a central interactive voice response system or interactive web response system and permuted block randomisation. Inebilizumab or placebo was administered on days 1 and 15. Participants, investigators, and all clinical staff were masked to the treatments, and inebilizumab and placebo were indistinguishable in appearance. The primary endpoint was time to onset of an NMOSD attack, as determined by the adjudication committee. Efficacy endpoints were assessed in all randomly allocated patients who received at least one dose of study intervention, and safety endpoints were assessed in the as-treated population. The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02200770. Between Jan 6, 2015, and Sept 24, 2018, 230 participants were randomly assigned to treatment and dosed, with 174 participants receiving inebilizumab and 56 receiving placebo. The randomised controlled period was stopped before complete enrolment, as recommended by the independent data-monitoring committee, because of a clear demonstration of efficacy. 21 (12%) of 174 participants receiving inebilizumab had an attack versus 22 (39%) of 56 participants receiving placebo (hazard ratio 0·272 [95% CI 0·150-0·496]; p<0·0001). Adverse events occurred in 125 (72%) of 174 participants receiving inebilizumab and 41 (73%) of 56 participants receiving placebo. Serious adverse events occurred in eight (5%) of 174 participants receiving inebilizumab and five (9%) of 56 participants receiving placebo. Compared with placebo, inebilizumab reduced the risk of an NMOSD attack. Inebilizumab has potential application as an evidence-based treatment for patients with NMOSD. MedImmune and Viela Bio.