[PMID: 7591257]
The t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(21;22)(q22;q12) are specific chromosomal translocations found in the Ewing family of tumors including ES, PNET and Askin tumors. In these translocations, the amino-terminal portion of the EWS gene located in 22q12 fuses to the carboxyl-terminal portion of the FLI-1 gene located in 11q24 or the ERG gene located in 21q22, which belong to the ets oncogene superfamily of transcription activators. We investigated the chimeric mRNAs of 15 ESs (7 cell lines and 8 tumor samples) and 7 PNETs (3 cell lines and 4 tumor samples) using the RT-PCR method and sequencing. We detected 2 types of EWS-ERG chimeric mRNA in 2 ES cell lines and 1 PNET tumor sample in addition to 4 types of EWS-FLI-1 chimeric mRNA in 11 ESs (4 cell lines and 7 tumor samples) and 4 PNETs (2 cell lines and 2 tumor samples). There seemed to be no association between the type of chimeric mRNA and clinical features such as sex, age, primary site and histopathology of the patients. All of the chimeric mRNAs are generated from in-frame junctions and are thought to encode fusion proteins that may be the molecular mechanism involved in the Ewing family of tumors.

[PMID: 17009618]
Ewing tumor family consists of Ewing tumor of bone, extraosseous Ewing tumor, primitive neurectodermal tumor and Askin tumor. All of them share genetic abnormality, reciprocal translocation (11; 22) (q24; q12), and originate from the same primordial stem cell. Ewing tumor is the most common form, found in 60% of cases. It is the second primary malignant bone tumor. Localized lesion is found in nearly 80% and metastatic disease in 20% of cases. Patients present mostly due to pain and palpable tumefaction, and pathological fracture as the initial problem develops in long bones. Ewing tumor can develop in virtually any bone of the body and in extraosseous localizations as well, while localization in the extremities occurs in 50% of patients. Head or neck localizations are extremely rare. Paraspinal, retroperitoneal or deep pelvic tumor localization is manifested by back pain. Systemic symptoms are also present, commonly fever or weight loss, which often indicates the presence of metastatic disease with predominant invasion of lung, bone and bone marrow. Multimodal chemotherapy with local radiation and/or surgical resection is the best way of modern treatment. Distal parts of extremities and axial skeleton are good prognostic features, while proximal parts, pelvic girdle, metastatic disease and low index of postchemotherapeutic necrosis are associated with poor outcome.

[PMID: 2162733]
A patient previously reported to have Ewing's sarcoma showed a t(11;22) (q23;q11) and spontaneous expression of fra(11)(q23) [1]. Subsequent review of pathologic specimen indicated, however, that it was an Askin's tumor. Reciprocal translocations of chromosomes 11 and 22 are the most common cytogenetic abnormalities in Ewing's sarcoma and the related Askin's tumor. After radiation therapy of a residual metastatic brain lesion, subsequent studies of the recurrent brain tumor indicated the presence of the original translocations as well as five new reciprocal translocations and two deleted segments (9p-, 10p-). The new chromosome abnormalities were consistently found, indicating that progression of the tumor was clonal. The newly observed clonal aberrations were considered secondary in nature. A relationship between craniocerebral irradiation and development of brain tumors has been reported in several studies, but the mechanism for tumor induction has not yet been elucidated. It is important that the role of radiation therapy in the evolutionary process of chromosomal changes be studied in a large group of similar cases.

[PMID: 1333942]
The Askin tumor, a primitive malignant small-cell tumor of the chest wall, is mostly seen among children and adolescents. It is closely related to Ewing's sarcoma of the same location, both tumors showing a chromosomal translocation t(11;22). Its origin from neuroectodermal cells is deducted from several ultrastructural details and from the expression of specific markers like NSE. Pain and deformation of the chest wall are the cardinal clinical signs of the tumor. Chest X-rays will frequently show destruction of ribs and pleural effusions. Effective therapy consists of radical surgery, local radiation and adjuvant chemotherapy. This multimodal concept allows minority of patients to remain disease-free but the overall outcome is rather unfortunate.

[PMID: 3004699]
Small, round, blue-cell tumors (SRCT), including rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma of bone and soft tissue, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, small cell osteosarcoma, hemangiopericytoma, neuroblastoma, peripheral neurectodermal tumor (peripheral neuroepithelioma of bone and soft tissue), and the malignant small cell tumor of the thoracopulmonary region described by Askin (Askin's tumor), are often difficult to distinguish by light microscopy. We have evaluated the cytogenetics of these tumors by studying 24 tumor explants in short-term culture and 22 tumor cell lines. In Ewing's sarcoma (a tumor of unknown histogenesis), and in peripheral neuroepithelioma and Askin's tumor (tumors with evidence of neural origin), we have observed an indistinguishable t(11;22) translocation.

[PMID: 7571088]
Malignant small cell tumor of the thoracopulmonary region (MSCT) was first described in 1979 and has been referred to as the Askin tumor. This malignant neoplasm is a member of the peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PPNET) family and typically involves the periosteum, soft tissue, and extrapulmonary tissue of the thoracic wall. MSCT may also involve the lung parenchyma by local extension or may arise de novo in peripheral lung tissue. Local recurrence, abdominal involvement by tumor extravasation across the diaphragm, and skeletal metastatic disease are relatively common. However, metastasis to the head and neck region and in particular to the oral cavity is extremely rare. We present a recurrent intrapulmonary MSCT with metastasis to the oral cavity in an adolescent Hispanic boy, and review the literature regarding this member of the PPNET family. Differentiation from neuroblastoma may be made based on immunoreactivity for beta 2 microglobulin and HBA71 and lack of immunoreactivity for chromogranin in PPNET and MSCT. Ultrastructural features commonly seen in MSCT and PPNET are round to ovoid tumor cells with occasional cytoplasmic processes with relatively few pleomorphic dense core granules. These tumors lack the gangliocytic and Schwann cell differentiation that is characteristic of neuroblastoma. MSCT and PPNET have a common reciprocal cytogenetic translocation [t(11;22)q(24;q12)], which is shared with Ewing's sarcoma. Prognosis in MSCT is quite dismal, with a 2-year survival of 38% and a 6-year survival of only 14%.

[PMID: 9213191]
A rare case of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is reported. A 68-year-old woman complaining of lumbago was admitted to our hospital. Diagnosis was made based on pathological findings characterized by Homer Wright-type rosettes. Ultrastructural examination showed the presence of neurosecretory granules and short cytoplasmic processes, which were highly suggestive of neural differentiation. Chromosomal analysis of the neoplastic cells revealed translocation (11;22)(q24;q12), which is often found in Ewing's sarcoma and Askin tumor. These results strengthen the hypothesis of a common histogenesis for these small round cell tumors, and suggest common oncogenesis for these neoplasms.

[PMID: 23674776]
The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors includes osseous Ewing sarcoma, extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, and Askin tumor. They share a karyotype abnormality with translocation involving chromosomes 11 and 22. Histologically, these lesions demonstrate crowded sheets of small round blue cells. Imaging features of osseous Ewing sarcoma often suggest the diagnosis, with aggressive long-bone destruction in the metadiaphysis of an adolescent or young adult and an associated soft-tissue mass. Focal areas of cortical destruction are frequent, allowing continuity between the intraosseous and extraosseous components. This continuity is also commonly seen as subtle channels extending through the cortex at computed tomography or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, a finding that reflects the underlying pathologic appearance. Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma commonly demonstrates a nonspecific radiologic appearance of a large soft-tissue mass affecting the paraspinal region or lower extremity. Askin tumor represents extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma involving the chest wall. Imaging typically reveals a large pleural-based mass and associated pleural effusion. Treatment of these tumors is usually a combination of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical resection, which may be supplemented with radiation therapy. Imaging, particularly MR, is also vital to evaluate response to neoadjuvant therapy, direct surgical resection, and detect local recurrence or metastatic disease.