[PMID: 20681793]
Mutations within the tumor suppressor BRCA1 cause the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. The BRCA1 protein is an important regulator of DNA double-strand break repair, and BRCA1-deficient cells are highly sensitive to ionizing radiation. Furthermore, BRCA1 function may contribute to enforcement of the G(2) cell cycle checkpoint. E3-ubiquitin ligase activity is the only known enzymatic activity of BRCA1, which is mediated by the N-terminal RING finger domain. The C-terminal BRCT repeat domain, which mediates protein-protein interactions, is the only other identified structural domain. By investigating cancer-linked mutations within each domain, we demonstrate that truncation of the BRCT domain greatly impairs the stability and nuclear localization of BRCA1 protein. A missense mutation within the RING domain does not affect these biochemical properties. However, both mutant forms of BRCA1 fail to colocalize in nuclear foci with the known BRCA1-interacting proteins BARD1 and BACH1, which are important for DNA repair. This failure occurs despite the continued ability of the RING mutant protein to interact with BACH1 and the ability of the BRCT mutant to interact with BARD1. Furthermore, neither mutant form of BRCA1 is recruited into DNA damage-associated foci marked by gamma-H2AX. Therefore, our data suggest that both the RING and BRCT domains of BRCA1 are required for an early step in the function of BRCA1 during DNA repair: recruitment to the sites of DNA damage.

[PMID: 24278741]
Inherited mutations in the BRCA1 gene predispose to a higher risk of breast/ovarian cancer. The BRCA1 tumor suppressor is a 1863 amino acid protein with multiple protein interaction domains that facilitate its roles in regulating DNA repair and maintenance, cell cycle progression, transcription, and cell survival/apoptosis. BRCA1 was first identified as a nuclear phosphoprotein, but has since been shown to contain different transport sequences including nuclear export and nuclear localization signals that enable it to shuttle between specific sites within the nucleus and cytoplasm, including DNA repair foci, centrosomes, and mitochondria. BRCA1 nuclear transport and ubiquitin E3 ligase enzymatic activity are tightly regulated by the BRCA1 dimeric binding partner BARD1 and further modulated by cancer mutations and diverse signaling pathways. This paper will focus on the transport, dynamics, and multiple intracellular destinations of BRCA1 with emphasis on how regulation of these events has impact on, and determines, a broad range of important cellular functions.

[PMID: 15254397]
The BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene is expressed in all mammalian cells. Within these cells, the BRCA1 protein product interacts with several seemingly distinct nuclear complexes. Proteins within these complexes are potential targets for the E3-ubiquitin ligase activity associated with BRCA1:BARD1 complexes. Recent breakthroughs have centered on elucidating critical DNA repair and chromatin-remodeling functions associated with BRCA1 activity. During both DNA replication and DNA repair, BRCA1 appears to serve both adaptor and enzymatic functions. Roles include transient physical recruitment of NBS1, gammaH2AX, FANCD2 and other proteins in specific repair associated complexes, and enzymatic activity as an E3-ubiquitin ligase against a subset of these proteins. BRCA1 has also been implicated as a regulator of transcription. It is in this second capacity that progress has been much more difficult to assess. In particular, unambiguous adaptor and enzymatic functions have yet to be demonstrated in transcriptional machinery. Addressing the critical gap in our understanding of enzymatic targets of BRCA1 will be required for significant future progress in this field. The following review puts forward a model for BRCA1 interactions with the transcriptional complex in undamaged cells, and a potential mechanism for substrate switching between transcription and DNA-repair complexes following exposure of cells to proliferative or genotoxic stress. This model incorporates recent evidence that BRCA1 interacts predominantly with hyper-phosphorylated, enzymatically active, RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) in undamaged cells. The model proposes that BRCA1 binds processive RNA polymerase as part of a genome surveillance function, upstream of critical roles in DNA repair.

[PMID: 16479151]
Discovering the precise function of the breast and ovarian specific tumor suppressor, BRCA1, has proven to be quite complicated. It has been determined that BRCA1, together with BARD1, comprise an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Since it is now known that BRCA1 is an enzyme, the challenge for BRCA1 research is to learn how this enzymatic activity functions in normal breast and ovarian cells in order to suppress cancerous transformation. This review will survey the known ubiquitination substrates of BRCA1 and suggest how these reactions may influence the genomic stability and proliferation of breast cells.

[PMID: 16710298]
Polycomb group proteins Ring1b and Bmi1 (B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukaemia virus integration site 1) are critical components of the chromatin modulating PRC1 complex. Histone H2A ubiquitination by the PRC1 complex strongly depends on the Ring1b protein. Here we show that the E3-ligase activity of Ring1b on histone H2A is enhanced by Bmi1 in vitro. The N-terminal Ring-domains are sufficient for this activity and Ring1a can replace Ring1b. E2 enzymes UbcH5a, b, c or UbcH6 support this activity with varying processivity and selectivity. All four E2s promote autoubiquitination of Ring1b without affecting E3-ligase activity. We solved the crystal structure of the Ring-Ring heterodimeric complex of Ring1b and Bmi1. In the structure the arrangement of the Ring-domains is similar to another H2A E3 ligase, the BRCA1/BARD1 complex, but complex formation depends on an N-terminal arm of Ring1b that embraces the Bmi1 Ring-domain. Mutation of a critical residue in the E2/E3 interface shows that catalytic activity resides in Ring1b and not in Bmi1. These data provide a foundation for understanding the critical enzymatic activity at the core of the PRC1 polycomb complex, which is implicated in stem cell maintenance and cancer.

[PMID: 17420471]
Loss of function of the tumor suppressor protein BRCA1 is responsible for a high percentage of familial and also sporadic breast cancers. Early work identified a stimulatory transcriptional coactivator function for the BRCA1 protein, and more recently, BRCA1 has been implicated in transcriptional repression, although few examples of repressed genes have been characterized. We recently used an in vitro transcription assay to identify a biochemical mechanism that explained the BRCA1 stimulatory activity. In this study, we identified an ubiquitin-dependent mechanism by which BRCA1 inhibits transcription. BRCA1 ubiquitinates the transcriptional preinitiation complex, preventing stable association of TFIIE and TFIIH, and thus blocks the initiation of mRNA synthesis. What is striking about this mechanism of regulation by BRCA1 is that the ubiquitination of the preinitiation complex is not targeting proteins for degradation by the proteasome, nor are ubiquitin receptors modifying the activity, but rather the ubiquitin moiety itself interferes with the assembly of basal transcription factors at the promoter. Using RNAi to knockdown expression of the endogenous BRCA1 protein, we assessed the level of repression dependent on BRCA1 in the cell, and we found that BRCA1 is at least as significant a transcriptional repressor as it is an activator. These results define a biochemical mechanism by which the BRCA1 enzymatic activity regulates a key cellular process.

[PMID: 22034435]
Germline mutations of the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene are a major cause of familial breast and ovarian cancer. The BRCA1 protein displays E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, and this enzymatic function is thought to be required for tumor suppression. To test this hypothesis, we generated mice that express an enzymatically defective Brca1. We found that this mutant Brca1 prevents tumor formation to the same degree as does wild-type Brca1 in three different genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models of cancer. In contrast, a mutation that ablates phosphoprotein recognition by the BRCA C terminus (BRCT) domains of BRCA1 elicits tumors in each of the three GEM models. Thus, BRCT phosphoprotein recognition, but not the E3 ligase activity, is required for BRCA1 tumor suppression.

[PMID: 19088202]
Hereditary cases of breast and ovarian cancer are often attributed to germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 tumor suppressor gene. Although BRCA1 is involved in diverse cellular processes, its role in the maintenance of genomic integrity may be a key component of its tumor suppression activity. The protein encoded by BRCA1 interacts in vivo with the related BARD1 protein to form a heterodimeric complex that acts as a ubiquitin E3 ligase. Because the enzymatic activity of the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer is conserved over a broad phylogenetic range, it is thought to be critical for the central functions of BRCA1. To test this hypothesis, we have generated isogenic clones of embryonic stem cells that do or do not express an enzymatically proficient Brca1 polypeptide. Surprisingly, cells lacking the ubiquitin ligase activity of BRCA1 are viable and do not accumulate spontaneous cytogenetic rearrangements. Gene targeting efficiencies are modestly reduced in these cells, and chromosomal rearrangements arise at elevated rates in response to genotoxic stress. Nonetheless, cells lacking Brca1 enzymatic activity are not hypersensitive to the DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C. They also form Rad51 focus in response to ionizing radiation and repair chromosome breaks by homologous recombination at wild-type levels. These results indicate that key aspects of BRCA1 function in genome maintenance, including its role in homology-directed repair of double-strand DNA breaks, do not depend on the E3 ligase activity of BRCA1.