[PMID: 20232936]
Recent studies of genome-wide nucleosomal organization suggest that the DNA sequence is one of the major determinants of nucleosome positioning. Although the search for underlying patterns encoded in nucleosomal DNA has been going on for about 30 years, our knowledge of these patterns still remains limited. Based on our evaluations of DNA deformation energy, we developed new scoring functions to predict nucleosome positioning. There are three principal differences between our approach and earlier studies: (i) we assume that the length of nucleosomal DNA varies from 146 to 147 bp; (ii) we consider the anisotropic flexibility of pyrimidine-purine (YR) dimeric steps in the context of their neighbors (e.g., YYRR versus RYRY); (iii) we postulate that alternating AT-rich and GC-rich motifs reflect sequence-dependent interactions between histone arginines and DNA in the minor groove. Using these functions, we analyzed 20 nucleosome positions mapped in vitro at single nucleotide resolution (including clones 601, 603, 605, the pGUB plasmid, chicken beta-globin and three 5S rDNA genes). We predicted 15 of the 20 positions with 1-bp precision, and two positions with 2-bp precision. The predicted position of the '601' nucleosome (i.e., the optimum of the computed score) deviates from the experimentally determined unique position by no more than 1 bp - an accuracy exceeding that of earlier predictions. Our analysis reveals a clear heterogeneity of the nucleosomal sequences which can be divided into two groups based on the positioning 'rules' they follow. The sequences of one group are enriched by highly deformable YR/YYRR motifs at the minor-groove bending sites SHL+/- 3.5 and +/- 5.5, which is similar to the alpha-satellite sequence used in most crystallized nucleosomes. Apparently, the positioning of these nucleosomes is determined by the interactions between histones H2A/H2B and the terminal parts of nucleosomal DNA. In the other group (that includes the '601' clone) the same YR/YYRR motifs occur predominantly at the sites SHL +/- 1.5. The interaction between the H3/H4 tetramer and the central part of the nucleosomal DNA is likely to be responsible for the positioning of nucleosomes of this group, and the DNA trajectory in these nucleosomes may differ in detail from the published structures. Thus, from the stereochemical perspective, the in vitro nucleosomes studied here follow either an X-ray-like pattern (with strong deformations in the terminal parts of nucleosomal DNA), or an alternative pattern (with the deformations occurring predominantly in the central part of the nucleosomal DNA). The results presented here may be useful for genome-wide classification of nucleosomes, linking together structural and thermodynamic characteristics of nucleosomes with the underlying DNA sequence patterns guiding their positions.

[PMID: 19620965]
We assess the role of intrinsic histone-DNA interactions by mapping nucleosomes assembled in vitro on genomic DNA. Nucleosomes strongly prefer yeast DNA over Escherichia coli DNA, indicating that the yeast genome evolved to favor nucleosome formation. Many yeast promoter and terminator regions intrinsically disfavor nucleosome formation, and nucleosomes assembled in vitro show strong rotational positioning. Nucleosome arrays generated by the ACF assembly factor have fewer nucleosome-free regions, reduced rotational positioning and less translational positioning than obtained by intrinsic histone-DNA interactions. Notably, nucleosomes assembled in vitro have only a limited preference for specific translational positions and do not show the pattern observed in vivo. Our results argue against a genomic code for nucleosome positioning, and they suggest that the nucleosomal pattern in coding regions arises primarily from statistical positioning from a barrier near the promoter that involves some aspect of transcriptional initiation by RNA polymerase II.

[PMID: 21551148]
The intrinsic DNA sequence is an important determinant of nucleosome positioning. Some DNA sequence patterns can facilitate nucleosome formation, while others can inhibit nucleosome formation. Nucleosome positioning influences the overall rate of sequence evolution. However, its impacts on specific patterns of sequence evolution are still poorly understood. Here, we examined whether nucleosomal DNA and nucleosome-depleted DNA show distinct polymorphism patterns to maintain adequate nucleosome architecture on a genome scale in yeast. We found that sequence polymorphisms in nucleosomal DNA tend to facilitate nucleosome formation, whereas polymorphisms in nucleosome-depleted DNA tend to inhibit nucleosome formation, which is especially evident at nucleosome-disfavored sequences in nucleosome-free regions at both ends of genes. Sequence polymorphisms facilitating nucleosome positioning correspond to stable nucleosome positioning. These results reveal that sequence polymorphisms are under selective constraints to maintain nucleosome positioning. zhimdai@gmail.com; issdxh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

[PMID: 22435808]
A major question in chromatin biology is to what extent the sequence of DNA directly determines the genetic and chromatin organization of a eukaryotic genome? We consider two aspects to this question: the DNA sequence-specified positioning of nucleosomes and the determination of NDRs (nucleosome-depleted regions) or barriers. We argue that, in budding yeast, while DNA sequence-specified nucleosome positioning may contribute to positions flanking the regions lacking nucleosomes, DNA thermodynamic stability is a major component determinant of the genetic organization of this organism.

[PMID: 26305225]
The fundamental repeating unit of eukaryotic chromatin is the nucleosome. Besides being involved in packaging DNA, nucleosome organization plays an important role in transcriptional regulation and cellular identity. Currently, there is much debate about the major determinants of the nucleosome architecture of a genome and its significance with little being known about its role in stem cells. To address these questions, we performed ultra-deep sequencing of nucleosomal DNA in two human embryonic stem cell lines and integrated our data with numerous epigenomic maps. Our analyses have revealed that the genome is a determinant of nucleosome organization with transcriptionally inactive regions characterized by a "ground state" of nucleosome profiles driven by underlying DNA sequences. DNA sequence preferences are associated with heterogeneous chromatin organization around transcription start sites. Transcription, histone modifications, and DNA methylation alter this "ground state" by having distinct effects on both nucleosome positioning and occupancy. As the transcriptional rate increases, nucleosomes become better positioned. Exons transcribed and included in the final spliced mRNA have distinct nucleosome profiles in comparison to exons not included at exon-exon junctions. Genes marked by the active modification H3K4m3 are characterized by lower nucleosome occupancy before the transcription start site compared to genes marked by the inactive modification H3K27m3, while bivalent domains, genes associated with both marks, lie exactly in the middle. Combinatorial patterns of epigenetic marks (chromatin states) are associated with unique nucleosome profiles. Nucleosome organization varies around transcription factor binding in enhancers versus promoters. DNA methylation is associated with increasing nucleosome occupancy and different types of methylations have distinct location preferences within the nucleosome core particle. Finally, computational analysis of nucleosome organization alone is sufficient to elucidate much of the circuitry of pluripotency. Our results, suggest that nucleosome organization is associated with numerous genomic and epigenomic processes and can be used to elucidate cellular identity.

[PMID: 17038564]
Nucleosome positions within the chromatin landscape are known to serve as a major determinant of DNA accessibility to transcription factors and other interacting components. To delineate nucleosomal patterns in a model genetic organism, Caenorhabditis elegans, we have carried out a genome-wide analysis in which DNA fragments corresponding to nucleosome cores were liberated using an enzyme (micrococcal nuclease) with a strong preference for cleavage in non-nucleosomal regions. Sequence analysis of 284,091 putative nucleosome cores obtained in this manner from a mixed-stage population of C. elegans reveals a combined picture of flexibility and constraint in nucleosome positioning. As has previously been observed in studies of individual loci in diverse biological systems, we observe areas in the genome where nucleosomes can adopt a wide variety of positions in a given region, areas with little or no nucleosome coverage, and areas where nucleosomes reproducibly adopt a specific positional pattern. In addition to illuminating numerous aspects of chromatin structure for C. elegans, this analysis provides a reference from which to begin an investigation of relationships between the nucleosomal pattern, chromosomal architecture, and lineage-based gene activity on a genome-wide scale.

[PMID: 21206756]
Eukaryotic genomes are packed into chromatin, whose basic repeating unit is the nucleosome. Nucleosome positioning is a widely researched area. A common experimental procedure to determine nucleosome positions involves the use of micrococcal nuclease (MNase). Here, we show that the cutting preference of MNase in combination with size selection generates a sequence-dependent bias in the resulting fragments. This strongly affects nucleosome positioning data and especially sequence-dependent models for nucleosome positioning. As a consequence we see a need to re-evaluate whether the DNA sequence is a major determinant of nucleosome positioning in vivo. More generally, our results show that data generated after MNase digestion of chromatin requires a matched control experiment in order to determine nucleosome positions.

[PMID: 30113318]
Nucleosomes form the fundamental building blocks of eukaryotic chromatin, and previous attempts to understand the principles governing their genome-wide distribution have spurred much interest and debate in biology. In particular, the precise role of DNA sequence in shaping local chromatin structure has been controversial. This paper rigorously quantifies the contribution of hitherto-debated sequence features-including G+C content, 10.5 bp periodicity, and poly(dA:dT) tracts-to three distinct aspects of genome-wide nucleosome landscape: occupancy, translational positioning and rotational positioning. Our computational framework simultaneously learns nucleosome number and nucleosome-positioning energy from genome-wide nucleosome maps. In contrast to other previous studies, our model can predict both in vitro and in vivo nucleosome maps in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We find that although G+C content is the primary determinant of MNase-derived nucleosome occupancy, MNase digestion biases may substantially influence this GC dependence. By contrast, poly(dA:dT) tracts are seen to deter nucleosome formation, regardless of the experimental method used. We further show that the 10.5 bp nucleotide periodicity facilitates rotational but not translational positioning. Applying our method to in vivo nucleosome maps demonstrates that, for a subset of genes, the regularly-spaced nucleosome arrays observed around transcription start sites can be partially recapitulated by DNA sequence alone. Finally, in vivo nucleosome occupancy derived from MNase-seq experiments around transcription termination sites can be mostly explained by the genomic sequence. Implications of these results and potential extensions of the proposed computational framework are discussed.