[PMID: 16916274]
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) manifests as intermittent, painful attacks of submucosal oedema affecting the larynx, gastrointestinal tract or limbs. Currently, acute treatment is available in Europe but not USA, and requires intravenous administration of a pooled blood product. HAE is most likely caused by dysinhibition of the contact cascade, resulting in overproduction of bradykinin. DX-88 (ecallantide, Dyax Corp.) is a highly specific recombinant plasma kallikrein inhibitor that halts the production of bradykinin and can be dosed subcutaneously. In a placebo-controlled Phase II trial in patients with HAE, DX-88 resulted in significant improvement in symptoms compared with placebo. A Phase III trial is ongoing. This review explains the pathophysiology of HAE and the mechanism by which DX-88, a non-intravenous, nonplasma-derived therapy, might improve the disease, and discusses the clinical course of HAE and available treatments. Finally, it explores the potential value and efficacy of DX-88 in treating HAE.

[PMID: 19093699]
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of swelling that may involve multiple anatomical locations. In the majority of patients, it is caused by a functional or quantitative defect in the C1 inhibitor (C1-INH), which is an important regulator of the complement, fibrinolytic, kallikrein-kinin and coagulation systems. Standard treatments used for other types of angioedema are ineffective for HAE. Traditional therapies for HAE, including fresh frozen plasma, epsilon-aminocaproic acid and danazol, may be well tolerated and effective in some patients; however, there are limitations both in their safety and efficacy. Several novel therapies have completed phase III trials in the US, including: (i) plasma-derived C1-INH replacement therapies (Berinert P and Cinryze); (ii) a recombinant C1-INH replacement therapy (conestat alfa; Rhucin); (iii) a kallikrein inhibitor (ecallantide [DX-88]); and (iv) a bradykinin-2-receptor antagonist (icatibant). Both Berinert P and Cinryze are reported to have excellent efficacy and safety data from phase III trials. Currently, only Cinryze has been approved for prophylactic use in the US. US FDA approval for other novel agents to treat HAE and for the use of Cinryze in the treatment of acute attacks is pending.

[PMID: 18220151]
To provide an overview on the current status of emerging therapies for hereditary angioedema (HAE) in the United States. Summary statements were obtained from each pharmaceutical company regarding their agent. Each agent is undergoing or has completed phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Berinert P, a purified, virus-inactivated, human plasma-derived C1 inhibitor (C1-INH) concentrate, is being investigated in 2 international, multicenter, prospective trials. Experience with this agent in Europe and Canada indicates it is effective and safe. Cinryze is a nanofiltered C1-INH replacement therapy demonstrated to be effective and safe in acute and prophylactic arms of a phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Rhucin, a recombinant human C1-INH replacement therapy from transgenic rabbits, has been shown to be effective and safe in phase 2 and phase 2/3 studies, with an additional phase 3 study ongoing. DX-88 or ecallantide, a potent and specific inhibitor of plasma kallikrein, achieved all primary and secondary efficacy end points in a placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase 3 study, with a second phase 3 study ongoing. Icatibant, a potent and specific peptidomimetic bradykinin 2 receptor antagonist, was studied in 2 phase 3 trials: FAST 1 (For Angioedema Subcutaneous Treatment) did not achieve statistical significance for the primary end point but did so for secondary end points, whereas FAST 2 achieved statistical significance for primary and secondary end points. The future treatment of HAE in the United States appears promising based on progress being made in drug development for this orphan disease.

[PMID: 21481442]
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare disorder characterized by recurrent angioedema attacks. Ecallantide, a novel plasma kallikrein inhibitor, inhibits production of bradykinin, the key mediator of these angioedema attacks. We sought to further characterize the safety and efficacy of ecallantide for HAE attacks by performing an integrated analysis of pooled data from 2 phase 3 studies. An integrated analysis was conducted with data from 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies in which patients with HAE (age ≥10 years) received 30 mg of subcutaneous ecallantide or placebo within 8 hours of onset of a moderate-to-severe attack at any anatomic site. Efficacy was evaluated by using validated patient-reported outcome measures: the Mean Symptom Complex Severity (MSCS) score and the Treatment Outcome Score (TOS). Compared with placebo, ecallantide resulted in significantly greater reduction in MSCS scores from baseline to 4 hours after dosing (ecallantide [mean ± SD], -0.97 ± 0.78; placebo, -0.47 ± 0.71; P < .001) and a significantly greater increase in TOSs at 4 hours (ecallantide, 55.5 ± 46.5; placebo, 20.0 ± 58.9; P < .001). Significantly greater symptomatic improvement over placebo occurred through 24 hours after dosing (MSCS score, P = .028; TOS, P = .039). Ecallantide demonstrated efficacy at all attack sites. The incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events was similar between groups. This integrated analysis supports and expands on the results of the phase 3 studies. Ecallantide appears to be effective and well tolerated for the treatment of HAE attacks.

[PMID: 14572819]
Deficiency of C1 Inhibitor leads to unopposed activation of complement, with localized, unpredictable, and sometimes life-threatening attacks of angioedema. Treatment with plasma-derived C1 Inhibitor rapidly aborts attacks, and may be lifesaving, but is expensive, requires use of a pooled blood product, may need to be repeated and may not be effective in autoantibody mediated angioedema. The antifibrinolytic agents aprotinin, tranexamic acid, and epsilon-aminocaproic acid are useful for prophylaxis and treatment of angioedema, likely by inhibiting plasmin. Specific drugs to replace the deficient C1 Inh have not been reported. The kallikrein inhibitor DX-88 (Dyax) has received orphan drug status in Europe and is undergoing clinical trial in Europe and the USA.

[PMID: 21760740]
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) resulting from the deficiency of the C1 inhibitor protein is a rare disease, characterized by paroxysms of edema formation in the subcutis and in the submucosa. Edema can cause obstruction of the upper airway, which may lead to suffocation. Prompt elimination of edema is necessary to save patients from this life-threatening condition. Essentially, these edematous attacks are related to the activation of the kinin-kallikrein system and the consequent release of bradykinin. Ecallantide (known as DX-88 previously), a potent and specific inhibitor of plasma kallikrein is an innovative medicinal product. This is the only agent approved recently by the FDA for all localizations of edematous HAE attacks. Its advantages include no risk of viral contamination, high selectivity, very rapid onset of action, good tolerability, and straightforward subcutaneous administration. Owing to the risk of anaphylaxis, ecallantide should be administered by a health care professional. A postmarketing survey to improve risk-assessment and risk-minimization has been launched. The results of these studies may lead to the approval of ecallantide for self-administration.

[PMID: 18467921]
Hereditary angioedema (HAE), a rare genetic disorder caused by a deficiency of the C1 esterase inhibitor, leads to an episodic, self-limiting increase in vascular permeability. Related symptoms commonly include recurrent, intractable abdominal pain, vomiting, and/or diarrhea. DX-88 (ecallantide), a 60-amino acid recombinant protein discovered through phage display technology, is a highly specific, potent inhibitor of human plasma kallikrein that has been used successfully in the treatment of patients experiencing acute HAE attacks. This case study involves a 65-year-old woman who presented with severe abdominal pain, cramping, and nausea. The study describes the use of a video obtained by capsule endoscopy for the direct imaging of bowel occlusion in a patient with HAE that resolved upon treatment with DX-88. After administration of DX-88, 80 mg intravenously, abdominal pain and nausea resolved within 30 min. Capsule endoscopy demonstrated a coincident resolution of the bowel wall edema, with a return to normal within approximately 1.5 h of DX-88 administration. This case study demonstrates that DX-88 can produce dramatic clinical benefits in a patient with an acute abdominal HAE attack, resolving both symptoms and pathologic signs. Furthermore, it illustrates the usefulness of videos obtained from capsule endoscopy in identifying the presence of bowel occlusion and demonstrating its subsequent rapid resolution upon administration of DX-88.

[PMID: 18613770]
Plasma kallikrein plays a major role in the contact (kallikrein-kinin) cascade producing bradykinin. Bradykinin is a vasodilator, which increases vascular permeability, activates inflammation and produces pain. Plasma kallikrein is also crosslinked to the coagulation system and the complement cascade. Ecallantide (DX-88) is a potent and specific inhibitor of plasma kallikrein. Ecallantide is a recombinantly produced and engineered small protein based on the first Kunitz domain of human tissue factor pathway inhibitor. It was identified through phage display technology. The search terms 'ecallantide', 'DX-88' and 'hereditary angioedema' were entered into Pubmed/Medline, ClinicalTrials and Google. At present, the drug is being studied for two major indications. First, the results for the treatment of hereditary angioedema are promising. Second, a prospective randomised multi-centre trial for the reduction of blood loss during on-pump cardiothoracic surgery will be terminated in October 2008.