[PMID: 17386158]
To investigate the effect of a novel LMNA gene mutation E82K found in a Chinese family with dilated cardiomyopathy on cell cycle of HEK293 cells. (1) Human wild type full-length LMNA gene cDNA was subcloned into eukaryotic expression vector pTracer-CMV and point mutation was introduced into the cDNA. LMNA gene wild type and mutant E82K LMNA gene were transfected into HEK293 cells respectively and stable cell lines resistant to antibiotic were obtained 4 weeks later. (2) Cell cycle changes were analyzed by flow cytometry in HEK293 cells transfected with wild type and mutant E82K LMNA gene and empty vector in the presence of 0.8 mmol/L H(2)O(2). Cell circle was arrested at G0/G1 phase in the cells transfected with mutated E82K LMNA gene and at G2/M phase in other cell groups in the presence of H(2)O(2). Cell circle was arrested at G0/G1 phase in the cells transfected with E82K LMNA gene in the presence of H(2)O(2) in HEK293 cells.

[PMID: 9243088]
A major advance in the study of the pathogenesis of dilated cardiomyopathy (DC) has been the identification of a familial trait in a relevant proportion of cases (more than 25%), which indicates that, at least in these cases, a mutated gene is the cause of the disease. Familial dilated cardiomyopathy is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, most frequently with autosomal-dominant inheritance. Five different loci that cosegregate with the disease have been mapped so far; the identification of the disease genes is still in progress. The only disease gene known so far is the dystrophin gene, which causes X-linked DC. By analogy with dystrophin, it is believed that other cytoskeletal proteins could be involved in the pathogenesis of DC. Finally, in right ventricular cardiomyopathy, a peculiar form of cardiomyopathy that is frequently familial as well, several disease loci have been described. Also in this case, no disease gene has been yet identified. The advances in clinical and molecular genetics of DC have relevant clinical and therapeutic implications.

[PMID: 30342008]
The link between the cytoplasmic desmin intermediate filaments and those of nuclear lamins serves as a major integrator point for the intracellular communication between the nucleus and the cytoplasm in cardiac muscle. We investigated the involvement of desmin in the cardiomyopathy caused by the lamin A/C gene mutation using the Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup> mouse model of the disease. We demonstrate that in these mouse hearts desmin loses its normal Z disk and intercalated disc localization and presents aggregate formation along with mislocalization of basic intercalated disc protein components, as well as severe structural abnormalities of the intercalated discs and mitochondria. To address the extent by which the observed desmin network defects contribute to the progression of Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup> cardiomyopathy, we investigated the consequences of desmin-targeted approaches for the disease treatment. We showed that cardiac-specific overexpression of the small heat shock protein αΒ-Crystallin confers cardioprotection in Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup> mice by ameliorating desmin network defects and by attenuating the desmin-dependent mislocalization of basic intercalated disc protein components. In addition, αΒ-Crystallin overexpression rescues the intercalated disc, mitochondrial and nuclear defects of Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup> hearts, as well as the abnormal activation of ERK1/2. Consistent with that, by generating the Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup>Des+/- mice, we showed that the genetically decreased endogenous desmin levels have cardioprotective effects in Lmna<sup>H222P/H222P</sup> hearts since less desmin is available to form dysfunctional aggregates. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that desmin network disruption, disorganization of intercalated discs and mitochondrial defects are a major mechanism contributing to the progression of this LMNA cardiomyopathy and can be ameliorated by αΒ-Crystallin overexpression.

[PMID: 29800419]
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) frequently affects relatively young, economically, and socially active adults, and is an important cause of heart failure and transplantation. DCM is a complex disease and its pathological architecture encounters many genetic determinants interacting with environmental factors. The old perspective that every pathogenic gene mutation would lead to a diseased heart, is now being replaced by the novel observation that the phenotype depends not only on the penetrance-malignancy of the mutated gene-but also on epigenetics, age, toxic factors, pregnancy, and a diversity of acquired diseases. This review discusses how gene mutations will result in mutation-specific molecular alterations in the heart including increased mitochondrial oxidation (sarcomeric gene e.g. TTN), decreased calcium sensitivity (sarcomeric genes), fibrosis (e.g. LMNA and TTN), or inflammation. Therefore, getting a complete picture of the DCM patient will include genomic data, molecular assessment by preference from cardiac samples, stratification according to co-morbidities, and phenotypic description. Those data will help to better guide the heart failure and anti-arrhythmic treatment, predict response to therapy, develop novel siRNA-based gene silencing for malignant gene mutations, or intervene with mutation-specific altered gene pathways in the heart.This article is part of the Mini Review Series from the Varenna 2017 meeting of the Working Group of Myocardial Function of the European Society of Cardiology.

[PMID: 16266469]
To examine the function of the novel mutation E82K in LMNA gene identified in a Chinese family infected by dilated cardiomyopathy. (1) One Chinese family infected by dilated cardiomyopathy was chosen for the study. Exons 1-12 of the LMNA gene were screened with both PCR method and the cycle sequencing of the PCR products. (2) cDNA of the E82K mutation or wild type of LMNA gene was transfected into HEK293 cells and the apoptosis of the cells was detected after treatment with 0.8 mmol/L H2O2. (1) A new mutation E82K in LMNA gene was identified in this dilated cardiomyopathy family. (2) Apoptosis was more in the HEK293 cells transfected with E82K mutation than those with empty vector or wild type LMNA gene. The missense mutation E82K in LMNA gene changed the polar of the amino acid. It showed a malignant phenotype of severe clinical symptoms, early onset, poor survival prognosis and might be associated with atrioventricular conduction block (II degrees-III degrees), suggesting that the E82K mutation in LMNA gene may be a candidate for nosogenesis of dilated cardiomyopathy.

[PMID: 21689390]
The purpose of this study was to identify early features of lamin A/C gene mutation related dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). We characterise myocardial and functional findings in carriers of lamin A/C mutation to facilitate the recognition of these patients using this method. We also investigated the connection between myocardial fibrosis and conduction abnormalities. Seventeen lamin A/C mutation carriers underwent CMR. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) and cine images were performed to evaluate myocardial fibrosis, regional wall motion, longitudinal myocardial function, global function and volumetry of both ventricles. The location, pattern and extent of enhancement in the left ventricle (LV) myocardium were visually estimated. Patients had LV myocardial fibrosis in 88% of cases. Segmental wall motion abnormalities correlated strongly with the degree of enhancement. Myocardial enhancement was associated with conduction abnormalities. Sixty-nine percent of our asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients showed mild ventricular dilatation, systolic failure or both in global ventricular analysis. Decreased longitudinal systolic LV function was observed in 53% of patients. Cardiac conduction abnormalities, mildly dilated LV and depressed systolic dysfunction are common in DCM caused by a lamin A/C gene mutation. However, other cardiac diseases may produce similar symptoms. CMR is an accurate tool to determine the typical cardiac involvement in lamin A/C cardiomyopathy and may help to initiate early treatment in this malignant familiar form of DCM.

[PMID: 22773734]
We previously interrogated the transcriptome in heart tissue from Lmna(H222P/H222P) mice, a mouse model of cardiomyopathy caused by lamin A/C gene (LMNA) mutation, and found that the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and Jun N-terminal kinase branches of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathway were abnormally hyperactivated prior to the onset of significant cardiac impairment. We have now used an alternative gene expression analysis tool to reanalyze this transcriptome and identify hyperactivation of a third branch of the MAP kinase cascade, p38α signaling. Biochemical analysis of hearts from Lmna(H222P/H222P) mice showed enhanced p38α activation prior to and after the onset of heart disease as well as in hearts from human subjects with cardiomyopathy caused by LMNA mutations. Treatment of Lmna(H222P/H222P) mice with the p38α inhibitor ARRY-371797 prevented left ventricular dilatation and deterioration of fractional shortening compared with placebo-treated mice but did not block the expression of collagen genes involved in cardiac fibrosis. These results demonstrate that three different branches of the MAP kinase signaling pathway with overlapping consequences are involved in the pathogenesis of cardiomyopathy caused by LMNA mutations. They further suggest that pharmacological inhibition of p38α may be useful in the treatment of this disease.

[PMID: 20497714]
Mutations in the lamin A/C gene (LMNA) may cause familial dilated cardiomyopathy (dilated cardiomyopathy) characterized by early onset atrio-ventricular block (A-V block) before the manifestation of dilated cardiomyopathy and high risk of sudden death due to ventricular arrhythmia, which is very similar to the phenotype of gap junction related heart disease. This study aimed to determine the expression and localization of connexins in neonatal myocytes transfected with wild-type (WT) or mutant LMNA to elucidate how these mutations cause heart diseases. We studied the connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 40 (Cx40) expression in cultured neonatal myocytes transfected with wild-type (WT) or mutant LMNA (Glu82Lys (E82K) and Arg644Cys (R644C)) using confocal imaging and Western blotting analysis. Cx43 protein expression was reduced by 40% in cells transfected with LMNA E82K than that in cells transfected with WT LMNA cDNA. Confocal imaging showed that the Cx43 located inside the cells by LMNA E82K. By contrast, LMNA E82K mutation had no effect on expression and localization of Cx40. LMNA R644C transfection did not show any significant effects on gap junctions at all. Our findings suggest that LMNA E82K significantly reduced the Cx43 expression and altered its localization which may be one of the pathological mechanisms underlying LMNA-related heart disease.