[PMID: 23826567]
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare genetic disease, which is caused by defects in the NADPH oxidase complex (gp91(phox), p22(phox), p40(phox), p47(phox), and p67(phox)) of phagocytes. This defect results in impaired production of superoxide anions and other reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are necessary for killing bacterial and fungal microorganisms and leads to recurrent, life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections and granulomatous inflammation. The dihydrorhodamine (DHR) flow cytometry assay is a useful diagnostic tool for CGD that can detect absent or reduced NADPH oxidase activity in stimulated phagocytes. We report a patient with X-linked CGD carrying a novel mutation of the CYBB gene whose chimerism status following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been rapidly determined using the DHR assay. The level of DHR activity correlates well with short tandem repeat PCR analysis. Considering the advantages of this simple, rapid, and cost-effective procedure, serial measurement of DHR assay would facilitate the rapid determination of a patient's engraftment status, as a supplementary monitoring tool of chimerism status following HSCT.

[PMID: 26865172]
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is the most common symptomatic phagocytic defect. It is caused by mutations in genes encoding protein subunits of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase complex. CGD is characterized by a defective intracellular killing of phagocytosed organisms due to a defective oxidative burst in the neutrophils and macrophages. It is inherited in either X-linked recessive or autosomal recessive pattern. Staphylococcus aureus and Aspergillus species are the most common organisms reported. Infections with Burkholderia, Serratia, and Nocardia warrant a screen for CGD. Suppurative lymphadenitis, cutaneous abscesses, pneumonia and diarrhea constitute the most common problems in children with CGD. A small percentage of children develop autoimmune manifestations (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, colitis, autoimmune hepatitis) and warrant immunosuppression. X-linked carriers of CGD are at an increased risk of developing autoimmune diseases. Nitroblue-tetrazolium dye reduction test and dihydro-rhodamine assay by flow cytometry are the screening tests for this disorder. While most children do well on long term antibiotic and antifungal prophylaxis, those with severe forms warrant hematopoietic stem cell transplant. The role of regular interferon-γ injections is debatable. Evidence for white cell transfusions is sparse, and gene therapy is under trial.This current review highlights various aspects and studies in CGD. X-linked form of CGD has been noted to carry a poorer prognosis compared to autosomal recessive variants. However, recent evidence suggests that outcome in CGD is determined by the amount of residual NADPH oxidase activity irrespective of mode of inheritance.

[PMID: 19404956]
Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) is strongly associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies (ANCAs) directed against proteinase 3 (PR3). Recent studies have shown that membrane-bound PR3 (mPR3) is differentially expressed and colocalizes with CD177/NB1 on circulating neutrophils. We undertook this study to assess the differential expression of CD177 on neutrophils from patients with ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis (ASV) in comparison with patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and healthy individuals, and to investigate whether colocalization of mPR3 and CD177 affects anti-PR3-mediated neutrophil activation. Expression of CD177 and mPR3 was analyzed by flow cytometry on isolated neutrophils from patients with ASV (n=53), those with SLE (n=30), those with RA (n=26), and healthy controls (n=31). Neutrophil activation mediated by anti-PR3 antibodies was assessed by measuring the oxidative burst with a dihydrorhodamine assay. Percentages of CD177-expressing neutrophils were significantly higher in patients with ASV and those with SLE than in healthy controls. In 3 healthy donors, CD177 expression was not detected. After priming with tumor necrosis factor alpha, neutrophils remained negative for CD177 while mPR3 expression was induced. Neutrophils from CD177-negative donors or CD177- neutrophils sorted from donors with bimodal expression were susceptible to anti-PR3-mediated oxidative burst. Variation in the extent of anti-PR3-mediated neutrophil activation among different donors occurred independent of the percentage of CD177-expressing neutrophils. Membrane expression of CD177 on circulating neutrophils is increased in patients with ASV and in those with SLE, but not in RA patients. However, primed neutrophils from CD177-negative individuals also express mPR3 and are susceptible to anti-PR3-mediated oxidative burst, suggesting that recruitment of CD177-independent mPR3 is involved in anti-PR3-induced neutrophil activation.

[PMID: 15331626]
Antineutrophil cytoplasm autoantibodies with specificity for proteinase 3 (PR3) are thought to play a major role in the pathogenesis of Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), presumably by their potential to activate neutrophils. In patients with WG, high expression of PR3 on the surface of nonprimed neutrophils is associated with an increased incidence and rate of relapse. In this study, we analyzed the functional significance of constitutive PR3 expression for neutrophil activation as induced by anti-PR3 antibody. Therefore, primed and nonprimed neutrophils were stimulated with the monoclonal anti-PR3 antibody PR3G-3. Activation was measured as actin polymerization by the phalloidin assay as an early, detectable activation event and oxidative burst by the dihydrorhodamine assay, as a late, detectable activation event. In contrast to the oxidative burst, we found that anti-PR3 antibody-induced actin polymerization could be triggered in neutrophils without priming with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). In addition, a correlation was found between the level of PR3 expression on the surface of these nonprimed neutrophils and the degree of actin polymerization. However, after priming with TNF-alpha, no correlation was found between membrane expression of PR3 and the level of actin polymerization or respiratory burst as induced by anti-PR3 antibody. These data suggest that the presence of PR3 on the surface of nonprimed neutrophils has consequences for their susceptibility to the initial activation step by anti-PR3 antibodies. These data may be relevant in view of the observed relation between membrane expression of PR3 on nonprimed neutrophils of patients with WG and their susceptibility for relapses.

[PMID: 25262961]
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) induces selective cell death of neoplastic tissue and connecting vasculature by combining photosensitizers with light. We have previously reported that PDT induces apoptotic cell death in glioma cells when the photosensitizer talaporfin sodium (NPe6) is used. Here, we investigated the combined effect of NPe6-PDT with temozolomide, a DNA-alkylating drug used in glioma therapy. Human glioblastoma T98G cells and human glioma U251 cells were used as glioma cells. Cell viability was evaluated by WST-8 assay. Apoptosis was evaluated by measurement of caspase-3 activity and DNA-fragmentation. Intracellular reactive oxygen species were evaluated by dihydrorhodamine assay. While the degree of NPe6-PDT induced cell death unchanged in T98G and U251 cells when temozolomide treatment was adjuvant, it was dose-dependently increased by concomitant treatment with temozolomide. Further, concomitantly administered temozolomide dose-dependently increased caspase-3 activity and DNA-fragmentation, while adjuvant-temozolomide did not. These results are suggesting that concomitantly administered temozolomide potentiates the effect of NPe6-PDT to facilitate apoptotic cell death. Additionally, concomitantly administered temozolomide increased intracellular NPe6-fluorescence and reactive oxygen species, suggesting that the augmentation effect of combined treatment may be due to increased intracellular accumulation of NPe6. These results suggest that concomitant treatment with NPe6-PDT and temozolomide is a potentially useful therapy for glioma.

[PMID: 24890515]
There are two inheritance patterns, the X-linked recessive (XL) pattern and the autosomal recessive pattern. There is no information on the predominant inheritance pattern of male patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) in Mexico. The aim of this study was to determine the inheritance pattern in a cohort of Mexican male patients with CGD by means of the detection of an XL status carrier among their female relatives, and to describe the frequency of discoid lupus (DL) among carriers. We detected the female relatives within the families of male patients with CGD, and carried out the 123 dihydrorhodamine (DHR) assay in all female participants. All carriers were questioned for current or past established DL diagnosis. We detected 33 families with one or more CGD male patients; we found an XL-CGD in 79% of the relatives from at least one female relative with a bimodal pattern. For the remaining seven relatives we were not able to confirm a carrier status by means of a DHR assay. Moreover, we detected one mother with CGD secondary to skewed X-chromosome inactivation. We also found 47 carriers, and only one carrier with DL among them. We concluded that XL-CGD is the most frequent form of CGD in a cohort of CGD male patients in Mexico. DHR assay is a fast and practical tool to determine the CGD form in the Latin-American countries. Finally, DL frequency in Mexico is lower than that reported in the literature for other regions of the world.

[PMID: 19859718]
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is an uncommon congenital phagocyte disorder characterized by recurrent life-threatening infections. CGD generally present with recurrent suppurative infections, however, intracranial fungal abscess complicating CGD may cause a diagnostic problem to anyone unfamiliar with its clinical and radiological features. We report the case of a 16-year-old boy who was consulted with a differential diagnosis of an intracranial tumor. The clues of his medical history and physical examination made us consider the diagnosis of CGD. Cytometric dihydrorhodamine assay and genotyping confirmed an autosomal recessive CGD. He was successfully treated without any complication or sequel for 18 months follow-up period with surgery and interferon-gamma, in addition with, liposomal amphotericin B and voriconazole that were found to be sensitive to the Aspergillus fumigates, which had been grown from the culture of the abscess cavity. We discuss the pathogenesis, radiological techniques, and management of cerebral Aspergillus abscess in a patient with CGD. Presentation of CGD with a cerebral Aspergillus abscess, mimicking a brain tumor is extremely rare in children; clinicians and neurosurgeons must be aware. The best management modality for cerebral Aspergillus abscess is to be vigilant about the disease, whereas adjuvant surgical and medical therapy with a close follow-up must be warranted for all cases.

[PMID: 20856225]
Tight junction has a crucial role in regulating paracellular transports (as a barrier) and in separating apical from basolateral compartments to maintain cell polarity (as a fence). Tight junction can be disrupted by various stimuli, including oxidative stress, pathogens and proinflammatory cytokines. However, association of defective tight junction with kidney stone pathogenesis remains unknown. We therefore examined whether calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) crystals, which are the major crystalline composition in kidney stones, have any effects on expression and function of tight junction of polarized renal tubular epithelial cells. Western blot analysis revealed marked decrease in levels of occludin and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in COM-treated polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. Immunofluorescence staining revealed not only the decline of these tight junction proteins but also their redistribution and dissociation in COM-treated cells. Additionally, transepithelial resistance was significantly decreased, indicating impaired tight junction barrier and increased paracellular permeability in COM-treated cells. Subcellular fractionation followed by western blot analysis of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase-α1 revealed that this basolateral membrane marker was also detectable in apical membrane fraction of COM-treated cells, but not in apical membrane fraction of control cells. Immunofluorescence study confirmed the translocation of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase-α1 (from basolateral to apical membranes) in COM-treated cells, indicating impaired fence function of the tight junction. Moreover, dihydrorhodamine assay using flow cytometry revealed the significantly higher level of hydrogen peroxide in the COM-treated cells. These data provide the first evidence to demonstrate decreased expression and defective barrier and fence functions of the tight junction of renal tubular epithelial cells exposed to COM crystals that may be fundamental for subsequent renal tubulointerstitial injury, which in turn enhances the stone pathogenesis.