[PMID: 21554040]
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents a distinct disease entity whose molecular phenotype predicts exquisite sensitivity to the reversible EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib or erlotinib. However, primary or acquired resistance to these agents remains a major clinical problem. Afatinib is a novel dual irreversible EGFR/HER2 TKI that has been shown in preclinical studies to potentially prevent, delay or overcome resistance to reversible EGFR-TKIs. On this basis, the LUX-Lung clinical trial program has been recently launched for testing this molecule in advanced NSCLC patients. Notably, early results from the randomized LUX-Lung 1 trial indicate that afatinib significantly prolongs progression-free survival compared with placebo in pretreated patients with clinically acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. On the other hand, the LUX-Lung 2 trial shows that afatinib is highly active in the EGFR-mutant subgroup of patients. While these preliminary data open a new exciting scenario for the future development of anti-EGFR therapies in NSCLC, ongoing afatinib trials will definitively establish a role for this molecule in the treatment of advanced NSCLC.

[PMID: 22452896]
Afatinib, an irreversible ErbB-family blocker, has shown preclinical activity when tested in EGFR mutant models with mutations that confer resistance to EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors. We aimed to assess its efficacy in patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma with previous treatment failure on EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors. In this phase 2b/3 trial, we enrolled patients with stage IIIB or IV adenocarcinoma and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance (ECOG) performance score of 0-2 who had received one or two previous chemotherapy regimens and had disease progression after at least 12 weeks of treatment with erlotinib or gefitinib. We used a computer-generated sequence to randomly allocate patients (2:1) to either afatinib (50 mg per day) or placebo; all patients received best supportive care. Randomisation was done in blocks of three and was stratified by sex and baseline ECOG performance status (0-1 vs 2). Investigators, patients, and the trial sponsor were masked to treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was overall survival (from date of randomisation to death), analysed on an intention-to-treat basis. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00656136. Between May 26, 2008, and Sept 21, 2009, we identified 697 patients, 585 of whom were randomly allocated to treatment (390 to afatinib, 195 to placebo). Median overall survival was 10·8 months (95% CI 10·0-12·0) in the afatinib group and 12·0 months (10·2-14·3) in the placebo group (hazard ratio 1·08, 95% CI 0·86-1·35; p=0·74). Median progression-free survival was longer in the afatinib group (3·3 months, 95% CI 2·79-4·40) than it was in the placebo group (1·1 months, 0·95-1·68; hazard ratio 0·38, 95% CI 0·31-0·48; p<0·0001). No complete responses to treatment were noted; 29 (7%) patients had a partial response in the afatinib group, as did one patient in the placebo group. Subsequent cancer treatment was given to 257 (68%) patients in the afatinib group and 153 (79%) patients in the placebo group. The most common adverse events in the afatinib group were diarrhoea (339 [87%] of 390 patients; 66 [17%] were grade 3) and rash or acne (305 [78%] patients; 56 [14%] were grade 3). These events occurred less often in the placebo group (18 [9%] of 195 patients had diarrhoea; 31 [16%] had rash or acne), all being grade 1 or 2. Drug-related serious adverse events occurred in 39 (10%) patients in the afatinib group and one (<1%) patient in the placebo group. We recorded two possibly treatment-related deaths in the afatinib group. Although we recorded no benefit in terms of overall survival with afatinib (which might have been affected by cancer treatments given after progression in both groups), our findings for progression-free survival and response to treatment suggest that afatinib could be of some benefit to patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma who have failed at least 12 weeks of previous EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor treatment. Boehringer Ingelheim Inc.

[PMID: 24086949]
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are valuable treatments for EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Anti-EGFR antibodies are widely used in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and in KRAS wild-type colorectal cancer. The first-generation, reversible EGFR inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib in the first-line setting provide superior progression-free survival and quality of life compared to conventional chemotherapy in NSCLC harboring activating EGFR mutations. However, these therapies eventually fail and new options are needed. Afatinib is a novel irreversible inhibitor of the ErbB family members EGFR, tyrosine kinase-type cell surface receptors HER2 and HER4. It shows preclinical efficacy in NSCLC with common EGFR-activating mutations and the T790M mutation typically associated with EGFR TKI resistance. Preclinical activity is seen in other tumor types as well, including HNSCC. Clinically, afatinib has been evaluated in the broad-reaching LUX Lung trial program, with significant activity seen in the first and later-line settings. It is also under investigation in multiple other tumor types. This review will stress on afatinib's preclinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and clinical activity with a focus on NSCLC.

[PMID: 18408761]
Genetic alterations in the kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients are associated with sensitivity to treatment with small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Although first-generation reversible, ATP-competitive inhibitors showed encouraging clinical responses in lung adenocarcinoma tumors harboring such EGFR mutations, almost all patients developed resistance to these inhibitors over time. Such resistance to first-generation EGFR inhibitors was frequently linked to an acquired T790M point mutation in the kinase domain of EGFR, or upregulation of signaling pathways downstream of HER3. Overcoming these mechanisms of resistance, as well as primary resistance to reversible EGFR inhibitors driven by a subset of EGFR mutations, will be necessary for development of an effective targeted therapy regimen. Here, we show that BIBW2992, an anilino-quinazoline designed to irreversibly bind EGFR and HER2, potently suppresses the kinase activity of wild-type and activated EGFR and HER2 mutants, including erlotinib-resistant isoforms. Consistent with this activity, BIBW2992 suppresses transformation in isogenic cell-based assays, inhibits survival of cancer cell lines and induces tumor regression in xenograft and transgenic lung cancer models, with superior activity over erlotinib. These findings encourage further testing of BIBW2992 in lung cancer patients harboring EGFR or HER2 oncogenes.

[PMID: 23664448]
Reversible ATP-competitive inhibitors targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been established as the most effective treatment of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring "activating" mutations in exons 19 and 21 of the EGFR gene. However, clinical activity is limited by acquired resistance which on average develops within 10 months of continued treatment. The mechanisms for acquired resistance include selection of the EGFR T790M mutation in approximately 50% of cases, and MET gene amplification, PIK3CA gene mutation, transdifferentiation into small-cell lung cancer and additional rare or unkown mechanisms. Afatinib is a small molecule covalently binding and inhibiting the EGFR, HER2 and HER4 receptor tyrosine kinases. In preclinical studies, afatinib not only inhibited the growth of models with common activating EGFR mutations, but was also active in lung cancer models harboring wild-type EGFR or the EGFR L858R/T790M double mutant. Clinical efficacy of afatinib has been extensively studied in the LUX-Lung study program. These trials showed promising efficacy in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC or enriched for clinical benefit from EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib or erlotinib. Here we review the current status of clinical application of afatinib in NSCLC. We also discuss clinical aspects of resistance to afatinib and strategies for its circumvention.

[PMID: 18520300]
Approximately 10 to 15% of patients with non-small cell lung cancer have tumors that depend on activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), as evidenced by mutations in EGFR. In these patients, there is often an initial dramatic response to treatment with the first-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib or gefitinib. A small number of patients with EGFR mutations have primary resistance to erlotinib and gefitinib, and most patients who initially respond to treatment with erlotinib or gefitinib will develop resistance to first-generation EGFR TKIs. The problems with both primary and acquired resistance to erlotinib and gefitinib support the need for development of additional agents that inhibit EGFR signaling in such patients. This is an overview of three representative second-generation EGFR TKIs. HKI-272, a second-generation irreversible EGFR TKI that also inhibits HER2, has completed accrual of a phase II trial in both untreated patients and patients with acquired resistance to erlotinib or gefitinib. XL647 is a reversible inhibitor of EGFR, HER2, and vascular epidermal growth factor receptor. Preclinical work shows that XL647 can inhibit cell lines bearing mutated forms of EGFR that have been associated with acquired resistance. BIBW2992 is an irreversible EGFR TKI that also inhibits HER2 and vascular epidermal growth factor receptors. In vitro work shows that this compound inhibits wild-type EGFR, EGFR exon 19 deletion, EGFR L858R, and EGFR T790M, the mutation associated with acquired resistance. The preliminary results from phase I and phase II trials for BIBW-2992 and XL647 are discussed.

[PMID: 22071596]
This Phase I study determined the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) of afatinib (Afatinib is an investigational compound and its safety and efficacy have not yet been established) (BIBW 2992; trade name not yet approved by FDA), an irreversible inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)1 and 2, up to a dose of 50 mg/day in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), to establish the recommended dose for Phase II. Patients with advanced NSCLC who had received prior platinum-doublet chemotherapy and/or erlotinib/gefitinib therapy, or who were ineligible for, or not amenable to, treatment with established therapies, received oral afatinib once daily. The MTD was determined based on dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs); other assessments included safety, pharmacokinetic profile, antitumour activity according to response evaluation criteria in solid tumours and EGFR/HER1 mutation analysis where possible. Twelve evaluable patients were treated at doses of 20-50 mg/day. One DLT was observed at 50 mg/day in Course 1 (Grade 3 mucositis). The most frequent drug-related adverse events were diarrhoea, dry skin, stomatitis, rash, paronychia and anorexia; most were Grade 1 or 2. Six out of 12 patients had tumour size reductions; durable stable disease was achieved in three patients including one with EGFR/HER1 exon 19 and T790 M mutations. Peak plasma concentrations of afatinib were reached 3-4 h after administration and declined with a half-life of 30-40 h. Afatinib 50 mg/day was well tolerated with an acceptable safety profile during Phase I. Recommended dose for Phase II was defined as 50 mg/day for Japanese patients; the same as for non-Japanese patients.

[PMID: 23683257]
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death in the world. Prior to the era of targeted therapy, platinum-based doublet chemotherapy was the first-line therapy of choice for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The availability of agents that target epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase, as well as inhibitors against anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangement or ROS-1 gene rearrangement product, has provided promising clinical benefits in specific subpopulations of NSCLC. At present, only first-generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) (erlotinib and gefitinib) are available for clinical use. Second-generation irreversible EGFR-TKIs, such as afatinib, are still in clinical trials. In current clinical practice, EGFR-TKI is the first-line treatment of choice for metastatic NSCLC patients with tumor EGFR mutation or as salvage therapy in NSCLC patients who received systemic chemotherapy previously. Platinum-based doublet chemotherapy continues to be the standard of care for those treatment-naïve patients with EGFR wild -type tumor or unknown EGFR status. Even though all investigators agree with the use of EGFR-TKI as the first-line treatment in tumor EGFR-mutated patients, only 10-30% of NSCLC patients have mutated EGFR, and there was no obvious survival difference when EGFR-TKIs were used in a second-line setting versus a first-line treatment in EGFR-mutated patients. Thus, the molecular complexity of lung cancer emphasizes the need for optimizing treatment by seeking a more personalized approach to care, including searching for driver oncogenes, managing the emergence of resistance and overcoming that resistance, and optimizing the sequence of treatment. Numerous other novel targeted agents are now in clinical development, including new agents targeting novel pathways and those that may have the potential to overcome the limitations or resistance associated with currently available EGFR-TKIs. In this report, we review the clinical data of EGFR-TKIs as molecular-targeted therapies in NSCLC.