[PMID: 21423663]
The ubiquitous tandem kinase JIL-1 is essential for Drosophila development. Its role in defining decondensed domains of larval polytene chromosomes is well established, but its involvement in transcription regulation has remained controversial. For a first comprehensive molecular characterisation of JIL-1, we generated a high-resolution, chromosome-wide interaction profile of the kinase in Drosophila cells and determined its role in transcription. JIL-1 binds active genes along their entire length. The presence of the kinase is not proportional to average transcription levels or polymerase density. Comparison of JIL-1 association with elongating RNA polymerase and a variety of histone modifications suggests two distinct targeting principles. A basal level of JIL-1 binding can be defined that correlates best with the methylation of histone H3 at lysine 36, a mark that is placed co-transcriptionally. The additional acetylation of H4K16 defines a second state characterised by approximately twofold elevated JIL-1 levels, which is particularly prominent on the dosage-compensated male X chromosome. Phosphorylation of the histone H3 N-terminus by JIL-1 in vitro is compatible with other tail modifications. In vivo, phosphorylation of H3 at serine 10, together with acetylation at lysine 14, creates a composite histone mark that is enriched at JIL-1 binding regions. Its depletion by RNA interference leads to a modest, but significant, decrease of transcription from the male X chromosome. Collectively, the results suggest that JIL-1 participates in a complex histone modification network that characterises active, decondensed chromatin. We hypothesise that one specific role of JIL-1 may be to reinforce, rather than to establish, the status of active chromatin through the phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10.

[PMID: 17046836]
Histone acetylation has been shown to be required for the proper regulation of many cellular processes including transcription, DNA repair, and chromatin assembly. Acetylation of histone H3 on lysine 56 (H3K56) occurs both during the premeiotic and mitotic S phase and persists throughout DNA damage repair. To learn more about the molecular mechanism of H3K56 acetylation and factors required for this process, we surveyed the genome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to identify genes necessary for this process. A comparative global proteomic screen identified several factors required for global H3K56 acetylation, which included histone chaperone Asf1 and a protein of an unknown function Rtt109 but not Spt10. Our results indicate that the loss of Rtt109 results in the loss of H3K56 acetylation, both on bulk histone and on chromatin, similar to that of asf1Delta or the K56Q mutation. RTT109 deletion exhibits sensitivity to DNA damaging agents similar to that of asf1Delta and H3K56Q mutants. Furthermore, Rtt109 and H3K56 acetylation appear to correlate with actively transcribed genes and associate with the elongating form of polymerase II in yeast. This histone modification is also associated with some of the transcriptionally active puff sites in Drosophila. Our results indicate a new role for the Rtt109 protein in the proper regulation of H3K56 acetylation.

[PMID: 23209427]
The expansion of CAG/CTG repeats is responsible for many diseases, including Huntington's disease (HD) and myotonic dystrophy 1. CAG/CTG expansions are unstable in selective somatic tissues, which accelerates disease progression. The mechanisms underlying repeat instability are complex, and it remains unclear whether chromatin structure and/or transcription contribute to somatic CAG/CTG instability in vivo. To address these issues, we investigated the relationship between CAG instability, chromatin structure, and transcription at the HD locus using the R6/1 and R6/2 HD transgenic mouse lines. These mice express a similar transgene, albeit integrated at a different site, and recapitulate HD tissue-specific instability. We show that instability rates are increased in R6/2 tissues as compared to R6/1 matched-samples. High transgene expression levels and chromatin accessibility correlated with the increased CAG instability of R6/2 mice. Transgene mRNA and H3K4 trimethylation at the HD locus were increased, whereas H3K9 dimethylation was reduced in R6/2 tissues relative to R6/1 matched-tissues. However, the levels of transgene expression and these specific histone marks were similar in the striatum and cerebellum, two tissues showing very different CAG instability levels, irrespective of mouse line. Interestingly, the levels of elongating RNA Pol II at the HD locus, but not the initiating form of RNA Pol II, were tissue-specific and correlated with CAG instability levels. Similarly, H3K36 trimethylation, a mark associated with transcription elongation, was specifically increased at the HD locus in the striatum and not in the cerebellum. Together, our data support the view that transcription modulates somatic CAG instability in vivo. More specifically, our results suggest for the first time that transcription elongation is regulated in a tissue-dependent manner, contributing to tissue-selective CAG instability.

[PMID: 17346757]
Chromatin structure exerts vital control over gene expression, DNA replication, recombination, and repair. In addition to altering RNA polymerase II's (Pol II) accessibility to DNA, histones are involved in the recruitment of activator and repressor complex(es) to regulate gene expression. Histone deacetylase Rpd3 exists in two distinct forms, Rpd3S and Rpd3L. Several recent studies demonstrated that the Eaf3 chromodomain, an Rpd3S subunit, recognizes Set2-methylated histone H3K36, initiating Rpd3 deacetylase activity in the wake of transcribing Pol II. Eaf3 and Set2 inhibit internal initiation within mRNA coding regions, similar to the transcription elongation factor and histone chaperone, FACT. Recent studies reviewed here demonstrate that histone deacetylation on the body of a transcribed gene is regulated via Set2-mediated methylation of histone H3-K36. These modifications provide restoration of normal chromatin structure in the wake of elongating Pol II and prevent inappropriate initiation within protein-coding regions masked by chromatin.

[PMID: 17510366]
Nucleosomes must be deacetylated behind elongating RNA polymerase II to prevent cryptic initiation of transcription within the coding region. RNA polymerase II signals for deacetylation through the methylation of histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36), which provides the recruitment signal for the Rpd3S histone deacetylase complex (HDAC). The recognition of methyl H3K36 by Rpd3S requires the chromodomain of its Eaf3 subunit. Paradoxically, Eaf3 is also a subunit of the NuA4 acetyltransferase complex, yet NuA4 does not recognize methyl H3K36 nucleosomes. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we found that methyl H3K36 nucleosome recognition by Rpd3S also requires the plant homeobox domain (PHD) of its Rco1 subunit. Thus, the coupled chromo and PHD domains of Rpd3S specify recognition of the methyl H3K36 mark, demonstrating the first combinatorial domain requirement within a protein complex to read a specific histone code.

[PMID: 12667453]
Set1, the yeast histone H3-lysine 4 (H3-K4) methylase, is recruited by the Pol II elongation machinery to a highly localized domain at the 5' portion of active mRNA coding regions. Set1 association depends upon the TFIIH-associated kinase that phosphorylates the Pol II C-terminal domain (CTD) and mediates the transition between initiation and elongation, and Set1 interacts with the form of Pol II whose CTD is phosphorylated at serine 5 but not serine 2. The Rtf1 and Paf1 components of the Pol II-associated Paf1 complex are also important for Set1 recruitment. Although the level of dimethylated H3-K4 is fairly uniform throughout the genome, the pattern of trimethylated H3-K4 strongly correlates with Set1 occupancy. Hypermethylated H3-K4 within the mRNA coding region persists for considerable time after transcriptional inactivation and Set1 dissociation from the chromatin, indicating that H3-K4 hypermethylation provides a molecular memory of recent transcriptional activity.

[PMID: 22184065]
Myc family members are critical to maintain embryonic stem cells (ESC) in the undifferentiated state. However, the mechanism by which they perform this task has not yet been elucidated. Here we show that Myc directly upregulates the transcription of all core components of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) as well as the ESC-specific PRC2-associated factors. By expressing Myc protein fused with the estrogen receptor (Myc-ER) in fibroblasts, we observed that Myc, binding to the regulatory elements of Suz12, Ezh2, and Eed, induces the acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and the recruitment of elongating RNA polymerase II at their promoters. The silencing of both c-Myc and N-Myc in ESC results in reduced expression of PRC2 and H3K27me3 at Polycomb target developmental regulators and upregulation of genes involved in primitive endoderm differentiation. The ectopic expression of PRC2 in ESC, either silenced for c-Myc and N-Myc or induced to differentiate by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal, is sufficient to maintain the H3K27me3 mark at genes with bivalent histone modifications and keep repressed the genes involved in ESC differentiation. Thus, Myc proteins control the expression of developmental regulators via the upregulation of the Polycomb PRC2 complex.

[PMID: 16503129]
The elongation phase of transcription by RNA polymerase II involves a complex choreography of events besides the polymerization of RNA. In addition to coordinating the processing of the nascent transcript, elongating RNA polymerase II recruits histone methyltransferases to methylate lysines 4 and 36 of histone H3 in nucleosomes in the body of actively transcribed genes. Methylation at these sites is genetically implicated in marking actively transcribed genes. Recent studies link transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II to H3K9 methylation and the recruitment of the HP1 family protein HP1gamma. These findings expand the role for RNA polymerase II elongation in targeting chromatin modifications to include a histone methyl mark more commonly associated with gene silencing.