[PMID: 21893969]
Hypospadias is rarely reported in dogs. In this study we pre-sent 2 novel cases of this disorder of sexual development and, in addition, a case of hereditary sex reversal in a female with an enlarged clitoris. The first case was a male Moscow watchdog with a normal karyotype (78,XY) and the presence of the SRY gene. In this dog, perineal hypospadias, bilateral inguinal cryptorchidism and testes were observed. The second case, representing the Cocker spaniel breed, had a small penis with a hypospadic orifice of the urethra, bilateral cryptorchidism, testis and a rudimentary gonad inside an ovarian bursa, a normal female karyotype (78,XX) and a lack of the SRY gene. This animal was classified as a compound sex reversal (78,XX, SRY-negative) with the hypospadias syndrome. The third case was a Cocker spaniel female with an enlarged clitoris and internally located ovotestes. Cytogenetic and molecular analyses revealed a normal female karyotype (78,XX) and a lack of the SRY gene, while histology of the gonads showed an ovotesticular structure. This case was classified as a typical hereditary sex reversal syndrome (78,XX, SRY-negative). Molecular studies were focused on coding sequences of the SRY gene (case 1) and 2 candidates for monogenic hypospadias, namely MAMLD1 (mastermind-like domain containing 1) and SRD5A2 (steroid-5-alpha-reductase, alpha polypeptide 2). Sequencing of the entire SRY gene, including 5'- and 3'-flanking regions, did not reveal any mutation. The entire coding sequence of MAMLD1 and SRD5A2 was analyzed in all the intersexes, as well as in 4 phenotypically normal control dogs (3 females and 1 male). In MAMLD1 2 SNPs, including 1 missense substitution in exon 1 (c.128A>G, Asp43Ser), were identified, whereas in SRD5A2 7 polymorphisms, including 1 missense SNP (c.358G>A, Ala120Thr), were found. None of the identified polymorphisms cosegregated with the intersexual phenotype, thus, we cannot confirm that hypospadias may be associated with polymorphism in the coding sequence of the studied genes.

[PMID: 31981690]
In 1974, a lack of 5α-dihydrotestosterone (5α-DHT), the most potent androgen across species except for fish, was shown to be the origin of a type of pseudohermaphrodism in which boys have female-like external genitalia. This human intersex condition is linked to a mutation in the steroid-5α-reductase type 2 (SRD5α2) gene, which usually produces an important enzyme capable of reducing the Δ<sup>4</sup>-ene of steroid C-19 and C-21 into a 5α-stereoisomer. Seeing the potential of SRD5α2 as a target for androgen synthesis, pharmaceutical companies developed 5α-reductase inhibitors (5ARIs), such as finasteride (FIN) and dutasteride (DUT) to target SRD5α2 in benign prostatic hyperplasia and androgenic alopecia. In addition to human treatment, the development of 5ARIs also enabled further research of SRD5α functions. Therefore, this review details the morphological, physiological, and molecular effects of the lack of SRD5α activity induced by both SRD5α mutations and inhibitor exposures across species. More specifically, data highlights 1) the role of 5α-DHT in the development of male secondary sexual organs in vertebrates and sex determination in non-mammalian vertebrates, 2) the role of SRD5α1 in the synthesis of the neurosteroid allopregnanolone (ALLO) and 5α-androstane-3α,17β-diol (3α-diol), which are involved in anxiety and sexual behavior, respectively, and 3) the role of SRD5α3 in N-glycosylation. This review also features the lesser known functions of SRD5αs in steroid degradation in the uterus during pregnancy and glucocorticoid clearance in the liver. Additionally, the review describes the regulation of SRD5αs by the receptors of androgens, progesterone, estrogen, and thyroid hormones, as well as their differential DNA methylation. Factors known to be involved in their differential methylation are age, inflammation, and mental stimulation. Overall, this review helps shed light on the various essential functions of SRD5αs across species.

[PMID: 9247984]
Between 1986 and 1995, a pedigree of six Arabs with male pseudohermaphroditism due to 5 alpha reductase-2 deficiency have been identified. All, were raised as girls since birth. At the time of diagnosis, three were post-pubertal, one pubertal and two pre-pubertal. The external genitalia of 'pseudo-vaginal perineoscrotal hypospadias' was identical in these subjects. Although these individuals were a homogeneous group in terms of their sex of upbringing, phenotypic appearance, endocrinological profile and socio-cultural background, the development of the gender identity and role was not uniform in these six cases. Their psycho-sexual make-up was closely related to the transaction of their life experiences. These cases provide further insight into the interaction between various factors involved in the development of gender identity and role in male pseudohermaphrodites in an Eastern culture.

[PMID: 24383016]
Steroid 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency is a rare disorder leading to male pseudohermaphroditism, a condition characterized by incomplete differentiation of male genitalia in 46,XY patients. Here, we report a case of a 21-year-old woman from Ardabil who presented with primary amenorrhea, ambiguous genitalia, and lack of breast development. All of the serum hormone profiles were normal except for raised serum total testosterone. Testosterone to DHT ratio (T/DHT) was elevated before (15.72) and further increased after hCG stimulation (32.46). A chromosomal study revealed a 46,XY karyotype. A bilateral gonadectomy, recessive cliteroplasty, urethroplasty, and vaginoplasty were performed and hormonal replacement therapy using estrogen was started. In conclusion, the diagnosis of 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency may be suspected in infants with ambiguous genitalia or in adolescents or young adults with the characteristic phenotype and serum hormone profiles.

[PMID: 11392378]
Virilization of the external genitalia in the male fetus requires testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), which is formed from testosterone by the action of the enzyme, 5alpha-reductase type 2 (5alphaR-2). Mediation of the effects of both testosterone and DHT requires a functional androgen receptor (AR) located in the cytoplasmic compartment of target cells. DHT (or testosterone) binding induces a conformational change which facilitates AR nuclear transport, phosphorylation and dimerization, ultimately regulating of the rate of transcription of androgen-dependent genes. Any event which impairs DHT formation (mutation within the 5alphaR-2 gene or 5alphaR-2 inhibitors) or normal function of the AR (mutation in the AR gene, antiandrogens) may result in insufficient androgen action in the male fetus and in subsequent undervirilization in the newborn. Hypospadias may be due to a defect in androgen action due to mutation of the 5alphaR-2 or of the AR gene. Mutation of unidentified genes is likely to underlie this displacement of the urethral meatus from the tip to the ventral side of the phallus. An aetiological role for environmental chemical products has been postulated, since ethnic as well as geographical differences in the incidence of hypospadias have been noted. Increasing evidence has been gathered indicating that widely used industrial and agricultural chemicals have deleterious effects on normal male sexual differentiation. Cryptorchidism and micropenis may represent an intersex phenotype, even if they are isolated. Aetiological factors include 5alphaR-2 gene mutation, AR gene mutation or environmental hormonal disruptors. In conclusion, several phenotypes have been attributed to insufficient androgen action during fetal life. Whereas mutations in the 5alphaR-2 gene and AR gene are natural, attention should be focused on environmental endocrine disruptors that are able to mimic steroid 5alpha-reductase deficiency or partial androgen insensitivity syndrome.

[PMID: 25077171]
Inactivating mutations of the 5α-steroid reductase type-2 (SRD5A2) gene result in a broad spectrum of masculinization defects, ranging from a male phenotype with hypospadias to a female phenotype with Wolffian structures. Molecular studies of the SRD5A2 revealed a new heterozygous gene variant within the coding region that results in phenotypic expression. A c.92C>T transition changing serine to phenylalanine at codon 31 of exon 1 (p.Ser31Phe) was identified in a patient with 46,XY disorder of sexual development who displayed glandular hypospadias with micropenis and bilateral cryptorchidism. The restoration of the p.Ser31Phe mutation by site-directed mutagenesis and transient expression assays using cultured HEK-293 cells showed that this novel substitution does not abolish but does deregulate the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme. Thus, the maximum velocity (V max) value was higher for the mutant enzyme (22.5 ± 6.9 nmol DHT mg protein(-1) h(-1)) than for the wild-type enzyme (9.8 ± 2.0 nmol DHT mg protein(-1) h(-1)). Increased in vitro activity of the p.Ser31Phe mutant suggested an activating effect. This case provides evidence that heterozygous missense mutations in SRD5A2 may induce the abnormal development of male external genitalia.

[PMID: 21714467]
Steroid 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder with clinical spectrum ranges from a male phenotype with hypospadia to a female phenotype with normal wolffian structures. Over 50 different mutations of SRD5A2 gene has been described in affected patients and several mutations were detected in specific populations. DNAs of two 46,XY DSD Indonesian siblings, aged 13 and 18 years old, with clinically suspected of 5-alpha-reductase deficiency and their mother were analysed for molecular defects of SRD5A2 gene. Different from other reports, in our series three mutations were found in each patient. Two novel mutations were detected in these patients and their mother, which are p.Gly34fs and c.699-1G>T. The other mutation detected was c.680G>A or p.Arg227Gln, which commonly described in Far East Asian population. Whether the p.Arg227Gln mutation is considered a polymorphism or a mutation in Indonesian population warrants further study.

[PMID: 8723114]
Conversion of testosterone (T) to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in genital tissue is catalysed by the enzyme 5 alpha-reductase 2, which is encoded by the SRD5A2 gene. The potent androgen DHT is required for full masculinization of the external genitalia. Mutations of the SRD5A2 gene inhibit enzyme activity, diminish DHT formation, and hence cause masculinization defects of varying degree. The classical syndrome, formerly described as pseudovaginal perineoscrotal hypospadias, is characterized by a predominantly female phenotype at birth and significant virilization without gynecomastia at puberty. We investigated nine patients with steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2 deficiency (SRD). Phenotypes, which were classified according to the severity of the masculinization defect, varied between completely female (SRD type 5), predominantly female (SRD type 4), ambiguous (SRD type 3), predominantly male with micropenis and hypospadias (SRD type 2), and completely male without overt signs of undermasculinization (SRD type 1). T/DHT-ratios were highly increased ( > 50) in the classical syndrome (SRD type 5), but variable in the less severe affected patients (SRD types 1-4) (14-35). Mutations in the SRD5A2 gene had been characterized using PCR-SSCP analysis and direct DNA sequencing. A small deletion was encountered in two patients, while all other patients had single base mutations which result in amino acid substitutions. We conclude that phenotypes may vary widely in patients with SRD5A2 gene mutations spanning the whole range from completely female to normal male without distinctive clinical signs of the disease. Hence, steroid 5 alpha-reductase deficiency should be considered not only in sex reversed patients with female or ambiguous phenotypes, but also in those with mild symptoms of undermasculinization as encountered in patients with hypospadias and/or micropenis. A classification based on the severity of the masculinization defect may be used for correlation of phenotypes with enzyme activities and genotypes, and for comparisons of phenotypes between different patients as the basis for clinical decisions to be made in patients with pseudohermaphroditism due to steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2 deficiency.

[PMID: 8262007]
In the 20 yr since it was established that impairment of dihydrotestosterone formation is the cause of a rare form of human intersex, a wealth of information has accumulated about the genetics, endocrinology, and variable phenotypic manifestations, culminating in the cloning of cDNAs encoding two 5 alpha-reductase genes and documentation that mutations in the steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2 gene are the cause of 5 alpha-reductase deficiency. Perplexing and difficult problems remain unresolved, e.g. whether the variability in manifestations is due to variable expressions of steroid 5 alpha-reductase 1 or to effects of testosterone itself. It is also imperative to establish whether defects in steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2, perhaps in the heterozygous state, are responsible for a portion of cases of sporadic hypospadias, to determine whether 5 alpha-reductase plays a role in progesterone action in women, and to elucidate the relation between androgen action and gender role behavior.