[PMID: 9345098]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked cardiomyopathy with neutropenia and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Recently, mutations in the G4.5 gene, located in Xq28, have been described in four probands with Barth syndrome. We have now evaluated 14 Barth syndrome pedigrees for mutations in G4.5 and have identified unique mutations in all, including four splice-site mutations, three deletions, one insertion, five missense mutations, and one nonsense mutation. Nine of the 14 mutations are predicted to significantly disrupt the protein products of G4.5. The occurrence of missense mutations in exons 3 and 8 suggests that these exons encode essential portions of the G4. 5 proteins, whose functions remain unknown. We found no correlation between the location or type of mutation and any of the clinical or laboratory abnormalities of Barth syndrome, which suggests that additional factors modify the expression of the Barth phenotype. The characterization of mutations of the G4.5 gene will be useful for carrier detection, genetic counseling, and the identification of patients with Barth syndrome who do not manifest all of the cardinal features of this disorder.

[PMID: 25118650]
Tafazzin (EC 2.3.1.23) is a Phospholipid Transacylase involved in Cardiolipin remodeling on mitochondrial membrane and coded by TAZ gene (Cytogenetic Location: Xq28) in human. Its mutations cause Barth syndrome (MIM ID: #302060)/3-Methyl Glutaconyl Aciduria Type II, an inborn error of metabolism often leading to foetal or infantile fatality. Nevertheless, some mis-sense mutations result in mild clinical symptoms. To evaluate the rationale of mild symptoms and for an insight of Tafazzin active site, sequence based and structure based ramifications of wild and mutant Tafazzins were compared in-silico. Sequence based domain predictions, surface accessibilities on substitution & conserved catalytic sites with statistical drifts, as well as thermal stability changes for the mutations and the interaction analysis of Tafazzin were performed. Crystal structure of Tafazzin is not yet resolved experimentally, therefore 3D coordinates of Tafazzin and its mutants were spawned through homology modeling. Energetically minimized and structurally validated models were used for comparative docking simulations. We analyzed active site geometry of the models in addition to calculating overall substrate binding efficiencies for each of the enzyme-ligand complex deduced from binding energies instead of comparing only the docking scores. Also, individual binding energies of catalytic residues on conserved HX4D motif of Acyltransferase superfamily present in Tafazzins were estimated. This work elucidates the basis of mild symptoms in patients with mis-sense mutations, identifies the most pathogenic mutant among others in the study and also divulges the critical role of HX4D domain towards successful transacylation by Taffazin. The in-silico observations are in complete agreement with clinical findings reported for the patients with mutations.

[PMID: 23398819]
First described in 1983, Barth syndrome (BTHS) is widely regarded as a rare X-linked genetic disease characterised by cardiomyopathy (CM), skeletal myopathy, growth delay, neutropenia and increased urinary excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid (3-MGCA). Fewer than 200 living males are known worldwide, but evidence is accumulating that the disorder is substantially under-diagnosed. Clinical features include variable combinations of the following wide spectrum: dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE), left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC), ventricular arrhythmia, sudden cardiac death, prolonged QTc interval, delayed motor milestones, proximal myopathy, lethargy and fatigue, neutropenia (absent to severe; persistent, intermittent or perfectly cyclical), compensatory monocytosis, recurrent bacterial infection, hypoglycaemia, lactic acidosis, growth and pubertal delay, feeding problems, failure to thrive, episodic diarrhoea, characteristic facies, and X-linked family history. Historically regarded as a cardiac disease, BTHS is now considered a multi-system disorder which may be first seen by many different specialists or generalists. Phenotypic breadth and variability present a major challenge to the diagnostician: some children with BTHS have never been neutropenic, whereas others lack increased 3-MGCA and a minority has occult or absent CM. Furthermore, BTHS was first described in 2010 as an unrecognised cause of fetal death. Disabling mutations or deletions of the tafazzin (TAZ) gene, located at Xq28, cause the disorder by reducing remodeling of cardiolipin, a principal phospholipid of the inner mitochondrial membrane. A definitive biochemical test, based on detecting abnormal ratios of different cardiolipin species, was first described in 2008. Key areas of differential diagnosis include metabolic and viral cardiomyopathies, mitochondrial diseases, and many causes of neutropenia and recurrent male miscarriage and stillbirth. Cardiolipin testing and TAZ sequencing now provide relatively rapid diagnostic testing, both prospectively and retrospectively, from a range of fresh or stored tissues, blood or neonatal bloodspots. TAZ sequencing also allows female carrier detection and antenatal screening. Management of BTHS includes medical therapy of CM, cardiac transplantation (in 14% of patients), antibiotic prophylaxis and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) therapy. Multidisciplinary teams/clinics are essential for minimising hospital attendances and allowing many more individuals with BTHS to live into adulthood.

[PMID: 12032589]
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by cardiomyopathy, short stature, neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Mutations have been identified in the TAZ ( G4.5) gene in patients with BTHS. This article presents a mutation analysis of this gene in a Japanese boy with cardiomyopathy with abnormal mitochondria, cyclic neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (type 2). The analysis revealed a novel missense mutation (R94S) caused by a single nucleotide substitution (C-to-A) in this patient.

[PMID: 23606313]
Barth syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, abnormal mitochondria, variably expressed skeletal myopathy, and growth delay. The disorder is caused by mutations in the tafazzin (TAZ/G4.5) gene located on Xq28. We report a novel exonic splicing mutation in the TAZ gene in a patient with atypical Barth syndrome. The 4-month-old proband presented with respiratory distress, neutropenia, and dilated cardiomyopathy with reduced ejection fraction of 10%. No 3-methylglutaconic aciduria was detected on repeated urine organic acid analyses. Family history indicated that his maternal uncle died of endocardial fibroelastosis and dilated cardiomyopathy at 26 months. TAZ DNA sequencing, mRNA analysis, and cardiolipin analysis were performed. A novel nucleotide substitution c.553A>G in exon 7 of the TAZ gene was identified in the proband, predicting an amino acid substitution p.Met185Val. However, this mutation created a new splice donor signal within exon 7 causing mis-splicing of the message, producing two messages that only differ in the presence/absence of exon 5; these retain intron 6 and have only 11 bases of exon 7. Cardiolipin analysis confirmed the loss of tafazzin activity. The proband's mother, maternal aunt, and grandmother carry the same mutation. The identification of a TAZ gene mutation, mRNA analysis, and monolysocardiolipin/cardiolipin ratio determination were important for the diagnosis and genetic counseling in this family with atypical Barth syndrome that was not found to be associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.

[PMID: 19261493]
Barth Syndrome (BTHS) is a rare X-linked recessive inborn error of metabolism, which is characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy and short stature. Barth Syndrome is associated with mutations in the tafazzin (TAZ) gene at Xq28 that result in cardiolipin deficiency and abnormal mitochondria. Here we report a 5.5-month old boy with BTHS phenotype who carries a novel missense T43P mutation in exon 2 of the TAZ gene.

[PMID: 11735032]
Mutation analysis of the TAZ ( G4.5) gene was performed on a patient with Barth syndrome. The reverse transcription/polymerase chain reaction procedure showed aberrant splicing and elongation of exon 3 because of the insertion of 106 bases (IVS3+1 to +106) between exons 3 and 4. The genomic DNA revealed an intronic mutation four bases downstream from the new cleavage site (IVS3+110G-->A). The IVS3+110G-->A mutation created a novel 5' splice site that showed GC but not GT, and the additional splice site was used preferentially over the upstream authentic slice site. This is a new type of splicing mutation responsible for a human genetic disease.

[PMID: 23031367]
The tafazzin gene (TAZ) is located at Xq28 and encodes a protein involved in the transacylation of cardiolipin, an essential mitochondrial phospholipid. Mutations in TAZ are associated with Barth syndrome (BTHS), the X-linked recessive condition with dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, growth retardation, neutropenia and organic aciduria. TAZ mutations also contribute to left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC), a cardiomyopathy characterized by loose, trabeculated myocardium. We report a family with a novel TAZ mutation and the clinical spectrum from severe BTHS in an infant to skeletal myopathy with LVNC in an adult, the oldest individual with BTHS reported. The proband is a 51-year-old male with muscle weakness since early childhood. He remained stable until the age of 43. His initial evaluations found LVNC and borderline neutropenia with no elevation of urine 3-methylglutaconic acid. The proband's great nephew is a 3-year-old who presented at birth with poor feeding, hypotonia, lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. At three months he was admitted with failure to thrive, lethargy and respiratory distress due to heart failure. Cardiac studies revealed dilated cardiomyopathy with a spongiform trabeculated pattern of the left ventricle. Laboratory studies showed cyclic neutropenia and elevated urine 3-methylglutaconic and 3-methylglutaric acids. At age 11months the patient had a heart transplant. We conducted sequence analysis of the TAZ gene for two affected individuals, the proband first and then his great-nephew. A novel, hemizygous nonsense mutation in TAZ exon 7 (c.583G>T, p.Gly195X) was detected. At his current age of 51years-old, the proband is the oldest surviving individual reported with a confirmed molecular diagnosis and features of Barth syndrome. Further studies will be conducted to identify the genetic modifying factor(s) associated with the wide phenotypic range seen in this family.

[PMID: 10407787]
X-linked cardioskeletal myopathy, neutropenia and abnormal mitochondria (MIM 302060) (synonyms: Barth syndrome, 3-methylglutaconic acid-uria type II, endocardial fibroelastosis type 2) has been reported in patients and families from Europe, North America and Australia. Previous studies characterized the main components of the disease: dilated cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, neutropenia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and diminished statural growth. Respiratory chain impairments have been found in several studies, without pinpointing a single enzyme complex. 3-Methylglutaconic aciduria is shared with several other disorders that affect the respiratory chain. Previous studies excluded a block in the major pathway of leucine catabolism. We performed leucine loading, accompanied by fasting, in patients and observed a significant rise of 3-methylglutaconic acid and 3-methylglutaric acid. Taken together with the absence of an enzymatic block in the major leucine catabolic route, the possibility remains that the increased basal excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid and other products of branched-chain amino acids is the result of overload of this pathway or--more likely--mitochondrial leakage. Linkage studies have localized the gene to the Xq28 region. The associated tafazzin gene (TAZ), has been fully characterized recently, and mutations located in conserved regions have been reported. Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis have now become possible through mutation analysis. Sequence homology of the TAZ gene to a highly conserved superclass of acyltransferases (Neuwald's hypothesis) predicts a glycerophospholipid as the missing end product. This points to the (lipid) structure of the inner mitochondrial membrane as a promising new area of research.