[PMID: 20451171]
We present an autosomal-recessive frontonasal dysplasia (FND) characterized by bilateral extreme microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft, complete cleft palate, hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge with hypoplasia of the ala nasi, and low-set, posteriorly rotated ears in two distinct families. Using Affymetrix 250K SNP array genotyping and homozygosity mapping, we mapped this clinical entity to chromosome 12q21. In one of the families, three siblings were affected, and CNV analysis of the critical region showed a homozygous 3.7 Mb deletion containing the ALX1 (CART1) gene, which encodes the aristaless-like homeobox 1 transcription factor. In the second family we identified a homozygous donor-splice-site mutation (c.531+1G > A) in the ALX1 gene, providing evidence that complete loss of function of ALX1 protein causes severe disruption of early craniofacial development. Unlike loss of its murine ortholog, loss of human ALX1 does not result in neural-tube defects; however, it does severely affect the orchestrated fusion between frontonasal, nasomedial, nasolateral, and maxillary processes during early-stage embryogenesis. This study further expands the spectrum of the recently recognized autosomal-recessive ALX-related FND phenotype in humans.

[PMID: 20627960]
The genetic pathways underlying shoulder blade development are largely unknown, as gene networks controlling limb morphogenesis have limited influence on scapula formation. Analysis of mouse mutants for Pbx and Emx2 genes has suggested their potential roles in girdle development. In this study, by generating compound mutant mice, we examined the genetic control of scapula development by Pbx genes and their functional relationship with Emx2. Analyses of Pbx and Pbx1;Emx2 compound mutants revealed that Pbx genes share overlapping functions in shoulder development and that Pbx1 genetically interacts with Emx2 in this process. Here, we provide a biochemical basis for Pbx1;Emx2 genetic interaction by showing that Pbx1 and Emx2 can bind specific DNA sequences as heterodimers. Moreover, the expression of genes crucial for scapula development is altered in these mutants, indicating that Pbx genes act upstream of essential pathways for scapula formation. In particular, expression of Alx1, an effector of scapula blade patterning, is absent in all compound mutants. We demonstrate that Pbx1 and Emx2 bind in vivo to a conserved sequence upstream of Alx1 and cooperatively activate its transcription via this potential regulatory element. Our results establish an essential role for Pbx1 in genetic interactions with its family members and with Emx2 and delineate novel regulatory networks in shoulder girdle development.

[PMID: 8673125]
The paired-class homeobox-containing gene, Cart1, is expressed in forebrain mesenchyme, branchial arches, limb buds and cartilages during embryogenesis. Here, we show that Cart1-homozygous mutant mice are born alive with acrania and meroanencephaly but die soon after birth-a phenotype that strikingly resembles a corresponding human syndrome caused by a neural tube closure defect. Developmental studies suggest that Cart1 is required for forebrain mesenchyme survival and that its absence disrupts cranial neural tube morphogenesis by blocking the initiation of closure in the midbrain region that ultimately leads to the generation of lethal craniofacial defects. Prenatal treatment of Cart1 homozygous mutants with folic acid suppresses the development of the acrania/meroanencephaly phenotype.

[PMID: 15728667]
The diverse cellular contributions to the skeletal elements of the vertebrate shoulder and pelvic girdles during embryonic development complicate the study of their patterning. Research in avian embryos has recently clarified part of the embryological basis of shoulder formation. Although dermomyotomal cells provide the progenitors of the scapular blade, local signals appear to have an essential guiding role in this process. These signals differ from those that are known to pattern the more distal appendicular skeleton. We have studied the impact of Tbx15, Gli3, Alx4 and related genes on formation of the skeletal elements of the mouse shoulder and pelvic girdles. We observed severe reduction of the scapula in double and triple mutants of these genes. Analyses of a range of complex genotypes revealed aspects of their genetic relationship, as well as functions that had been previously masked due to functional redundancy. Tbx15 and Gli3 appear to have synergistic functions in formation of the scapular blade. Scapular truncation in triple mutants of Tbx15, Alx4 and Cart1 indicates essential functions for Alx4 and Cart1 in the anterior part of the scapula, as opposed to Gli3 function being linked to the posterior part. Especially in Alx4/Cart1 mutants, the expression of markers such as Pax1, Pax3 and Scleraxis is altered prior to stages when anatomical aberrations are visible in the shoulder region. This suggests a disorganization of the proximal limb bud and adjacent flank mesoderm, and is likely to reflect the disruption of a mechanism providing positional cues to guide progenitor cells to their destination in the pectoral girdle.

[PMID: 12390248]
Cart1 encodes the paired-like homeodomain in the central portion of the gene, and plays a crucial role in the developmental lineage of bone and cartilage, especially in head formation. However, its transactivation mechanism is still poorly understood, including the target gene. Here, we report biochemical dissections of Cart1 functional domains and a relationship between dimerization and transcription activity. Deletion studies of GAL4-fused Cart1 indicated that the transactivation domain is located in the middle portion of the C-terminal domain, but the N-terminal is also required for a full activation of the consensus palindromic binding site (TAATNNNATTA). Analysis of the basic amino acid residues at both ends of the homeodomain revealed that both sides act as nuclear localization signals, and are necessary for the cooperative binding to the palindromic sequence. In this study, two additional Cart1 isoforms that behave as dominant negatives were identified from rat chondrosarcoma cells. These isoforms suppressed the transcription activity of the wild-type, despite loss of DNA binding ability, and could interact with the wild-type in yeast. Finally, we demonstrated that wild-type Cart1 forms a DNA-independent homodimer in in vivo conditions, and that the transactivation of wild-type Cart1 was suppressed by the N- or C-terminal domain which was expressed in the nucleus. These results revealed that homodimerization through direct interaction is necessary for the potent transcription activity of Cart1.

[PMID: 24376213]
Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) is a genetically heterogeneous malformation spectrum with marked hypertelorism, broad nasal tip and bifid nose. Only a small number of genes have been associated with FND phenotypes until now, the first gene being EFNB1, related to craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) with craniosynostosis in addition, and more recently the aristaless-like homeobox genes ALX3, ALX4, and ALX1, which have been related with distinct phenotypes named FND1, FND2, and FND3 respectively. We here report on a female patient presenting with severe FND features along with partial alopecia, hypogonadism and intellectual disability. While molecular investigations did not reveal mutations in any of the known genes, ALX4, ALX3, ALX1 and EFNB1, comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) techniques showed a large heterozygous de novo deletion at 11p11.12p12, encompassing the ALX4 gene. Deletions in this region have been described in patients with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), characterized by biparietal foramina, multiple exostoses, and intellectual disability. Although the patient reported herein manifests some overlapping features of FND and PPS, it is likely that the observed phenotype maybe due to a second unidentified mutation in the ALX4 gene. The phenotype will be discussed in view of the deleted region encompassing the ALX4 gene.

[PMID: 12559496]
Aristaless-related genes encode a structurally defined group of homeoproteins that share a C-terminal stretch of amino acids known as the OAR- or aristaless domain. Many aristaless-related genes have been linked to major developmental functions, but the function of the aristaless domain itself is poorly understood. Expression and functional studies have shown that a subgroup of these genes, including Prx1, Prx2, Alx3, Alx4 and Cart1, is essential for correct morphogenesis of the limbs and cranium. We now demonstrate the function of the aristaless domain in vivo by ectopically expressing normal and mutated forms of Cart1 and Alx3. Ectopic expression of Cart1 in transgenic mice does not disturb development, whereas expression of a Cart1 form from which the aristaless domain has been deleted results in severe cranial and vertebral malformations. The Alx3 protein contains a divergent aristaless domain that appears not to be functional, as ectopic expression of Alx3 results in an altered phenotype irrespective of the presence of this aristaless domain. Linking the Cart1 aristaless domain to Alx3 extinguishes teratogenicity. We show that, at the molecular level, the most important consequence of deleting the aristaless domain is increased DNA binding to its palindromic target sequence. This demonstrates that the aristaless domain functions as an intra-molecular switch to contain the activity of the transcription factor that it is part of.

[PMID: 25686609]
Darwin's finches, inhabiting the Galápagos archipelago and Cocos Island, constitute an iconic model for studies of speciation and adaptive evolution. Here we report the results of whole-genome re-sequencing of 120 individuals representing all of the Darwin's finch species and two close relatives. Phylogenetic analysis reveals important discrepancies with the phenotype-based taxonomy. We find extensive evidence for interspecific gene flow throughout the radiation. Hybridization has given rise to species of mixed ancestry. A 240 kilobase haplotype encompassing the ALX1 gene that encodes a transcription factor affecting craniofacial development is strongly associated with beak shape diversity across Darwin's finch species as well as within the medium ground finch (Geospiza fortis), a species that has undergone rapid evolution of beak shape in response to environmental changes. The ALX1 haplotype has contributed to diversification of beak shapes among the Darwin's finches and, thereby, to an expanded utilization of food resources.

[PMID: 19598128]
Mutations in each of the transcriptional co-activator genes - CBP, p300, Cited2, Cart1 and Carm1 - result in neural tube defects in mice. The present study thus furnishes a complete and comparative temporal and spatial expression map of CBP/p300 and associated transcriptional co-activators, Cited2, Cart1 and Carm1 during the period of murine neural tube development (embryonic days 8.5 to 10.5). Each co-activator except Cart1 was expressed in the dorsal neural folds on E8.5. Although CBP and p300 are functionally interchangeable in vitro, their respective expression patterns diverge during embryogenesis before neural fold fusion is complete. CBP gene expression was lost from the neural folds by E8.75 and was thereafter weakly expressed in the maxillary region and limb buds, while p300 exhibited strong expression in the first branchial arch, limb bud and telencephalic regions on E9.5. Cart1 exhibited strong expression in the forebrain mesenchyme from E9.0 through E10.5. Although CBP, p300, Carm1 and Cited2 share temporal expression on E8.5, these co-activators have different spatial expression in mesenchyme and/or the neuroepithelium. Nevertheless, co-localization to the dorsal neural folds on E8.5 suggests a functional role in elevation and/or fusion of the neural folds. Target genes, and pathways that promote cranial neural tube fusion that are activated by CBP/p300/Carm1/Cited2/Cart1-containing transcriptional complexes await elucidation.