[PMID: 26934530]
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extra cranial solid tumor of childhood, with 60% of patients presenting with high risk (HR) NB by means of clinical, pathological and biological features. The 5-year survival rate for HR-NB remains below 40%, with the majority of patients suffering relapse from chemorefractory tumor. Immunotherapy is the main strategy against minimal residual disease and clinical experience has mostly focused on monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) against the glycolipid disialoganglioside GD2. Three anti-GD2 antibodies have been tested in the clinic including murine 14G2a, human-mouse chimeric ch14.18 and 3F8. Anti-GD2 MoAb induces cellular cytoxicity against NB and is most effective when effector cells like natural killer cells, granulocytes and macrophages are amplified by cytokines. The combination of cytokines IL-2 and GM-CSF with the anti-GD2 MoAb ch14.18 (Dinutuximab) has shown a significant improvement in outcome for HR-NB. The FDA and EMA approved dinutuximab (Unituxin(R)) in 2015 for the treatment of patients with HR-NB who achieved at least a partial response after multimodality therapy.

[PMID: 26917818]
To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety, dosage and administration, and formulary considerations for dinutuximab. MEDLINE was searched (1964 to January 2016) using the terms ch14.18, dinutuximab, immunotherapy, and neuroblastoma. Other information was identified from package insert, Biologics License Application, abstracts, news releases, and ClinicalTrials.gov. Identified English-language articles were reviewed. Selected studies included phase I through III. High-risk neuroblastoma is primarily a childhood cancer with 5-year survival rates of 40% to 50%. Treatment for high-risk neuroblastoma includes induction chemotherapy, surgery, myeloablative chemotherapy with autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant, and radiation therapy. For patients achieving clinical remission, limited treatments exist for preventing relapse. Dinutuximab is a chimeric, human-murine, anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody approved in combination with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), aldesleukin (interleukin-2 [IL-2]), and isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid [RA]) for maintenance treatment of pediatric patients with high-risk neuroblastoma who achieve at least a partial response to first-line multiagent, multimodality therapy. In phase III trials, dinutuximab increased 2-year event-free survival and overall survival when compared to standard treatment. Severe adverse effects of dinutuximab include pain, hypersensitivity reactions, capillary leak syndrome, and hypotension. Dinutuximab is the first anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody approved in combination with GM-CSF, IL-2, and RA for maintenance treatment of pediatric patients with high-risk neuroblastoma who achieve at least a partial response to first-line multiagent, multimodality therapy. Ongoing research will determine if dinutuximab could be used earlier in treatment, in nonresponders to initial therapies, in combination with chemotherapy, or in other cancers.

[PMID: 27756784]
Immunotherapy of high-risk neuroblastoma using the anti-GD2 antibody dinutuximab induces antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). Galunisertib, an inhibitor of TGFβR1, was examined for its ability to enhance the efficacy of dinutuximab in combination with human ex vivo activated NK (aNK) cells against neuroblastoma. TGFB1 and TGFBR1 mRNA expression was determined for 249 primary neuroblastoma tumors by microarray analysis. The ability of galunisertib to inhibit SMAD activity induced by neuroblastoma patient blood and bone marrow plasmas in neuroblastoma cells was tested. The impact of galunisertib on TGFβ1-induced inhibition of aNK cytotoxicity and ADCC in vitro and on anti-neuroblastoma activity in NOD-scid gamma (NSG) mice was determined. Neuroblastomas express TGFB1 and TGFBR1 mRNA. Galunisertib suppressed SMAD activation in neuroblastoma cells induced by exogenous TGFβ1 or by patient blood and bone marrow plasma, and suppressed SMAD2 phosphorylation in human neuroblastoma cells growing in NSG mice. In NK cells treated in vitro with exogenous TGFβ1, galunisertib suppressed SMAD2 phosphorylation and restored the expression of DNAM-1, NKp30, and NKG2D cytotoxicity receptors and the TRAIL death ligand, the release of perforin and granzyme A, and the direct cytotoxicity and ADCC of aNK cells against neuroblastoma cells. Addition of galunisertib to adoptive cell therapy with aNK cells plus dinutuximab reduced tumor growth and increased survival of mice injected with two neuroblastoma cell lines or a patient-derived xenograft. Galunisertib suppresses activation of SMAD2 in neuroblastomas and aNK cells, restores NK cytotoxic mechanisms, and increases the efficacy of dinutuximab with aNK cells against neuroblastoma tumors. Clin Cancer Res; 23(3); 804-13. ©2016 AACRSee related commentary by Zenarruzabeitia et al., p. 615.

[PMID: 26791869]
Dinutuximab (Unituxin™; ch14.18), a monoclonal antibody against disialoganglioside, improved survival as part of post-consolidation therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma. United Therapeutics Corporation (UTC) assumed ch14.18 production from the National Cancer Institute (NCI); this study evaluates pharmacokinetic comparability, safety, and tolerability of UTC and NCI products. In this randomized, two-sequence crossover study, 28 patients aged ≤8 years with high-risk neuroblastoma received equivalent ch14.18-UTC or ch14.18-NCI doses. Despite comparable protein content, nominal doses differed: 17.5 mg/m(2)/day (ch14.18-UTC) and 25 mg/m(2)/day (ch14.18-NCI). Patients received one product during therapy cycles 1 and 2, the other during cycles 3-5. Ch14.18 pharmacokinetic profile characterization used population modeling (NONMEM(®) version 7.2). A two-compartment model with first-order distribution and elimination processes described pharmacokinetic data. Estimated product parameters were normalized to UTC nominal dose. For pharmacokinetic comparability, the final model was used to estimate exposure ratios (UTC/NCI) and associated 90 % confidence intervals (CIs) for area under the curve from time zero to infinity (AUCinf) and maximum concentration (C max). All comparisons were based on a standardized single-dose regimen (17.5 mg/m(2) over 10 h). Final-model pharmacokinetic parameters were similar to previously published ch14.18-NCI parameters and comparable for UTC and NCI products. Products' systemic exposures were comparable, with 90 % CIs around ratios for AUCinf (0.96; 90 % CI 0.88-1.04) and C max (1.04; 90 % CI 0.98-1.11) within standard bioequivalence bounds (90 % CI 0.80-1.25). Products' adverse events were similar and consistent with those previously reported. Equivalent actual ch14.18-UTC and ch14.18-NCI doses produced comparable exposures, with no notable safety or tolerability differences.

[PMID: 28748630]
Immunotherapy with the anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody ch14.18, or dinutuximab, represents an important therapeutic advance in the treatment of pediatric high-risk neuroblastoma and is now considered part of standard of care in this patient population. To date, transverse myelitis as a result of dinutuximab therapy has not been reported in clinical trials or in the published literature. We describe three patients with clinical symptoms of transverse myelitis, confirmed via magnetic resonance imaging, shortly following initiation of dinutuximab. All patients were discontinued from dinutuximab treatment and received urgent treatment, with rapid improvement in symptoms and resultant functional recovery.

[PMID: 28061552]
Neuroblastoma, an embryonic cancer of the sympathetic nervous system, is the most common extracranial solid tumor in childhood. Dinutuximab (formerly called ch14.18), a monoclonal antibody targeting the disialoganglioside GD2, has been shown to significantly improve survival rates in patients with high-risk neuroblastoma. However, the safe and effective use of dinutuximab therapy in these high-risk patients requires medical expertise in patient selection, treatment administration, and the monitoring and management of adverse events. Findings of the randomized phase III study (ANBL0032) led to the approval of dinutuximab for the treatment of children with high-risk neuroblastoma. Multi-institutional nursing approaches to implementing standard protocols ensure the effective management of high-risk neuroblastoma patients receiving dinutuximab immunotherapy. Understanding and implementing recommendations for the management of the clinically important and most common adverse events are essential to ensuring patient continuation of therapy and improving patient outcomes.

[PMID: 25940913]
United Therapeutics Corporation and the National Cancer Institute are developing dinutuximab (Unituxin™; ch14.18), a monoclonal antibody targeting GD2, for the treatment of neuroblastoma. GD2 is a glycolipid found on the surface of tumour cells, which is overexpressed in neuroblastoma. Dinutuximab, an IgG1 human/mouse chimeric switch variant of murine monoclonal antibody 14G2a, binds to GD2 and induces antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and complement-dependent cytotoxicity. The US FDA has recently approved the use of dinutuximab combination therapy for the treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma in paediatric patients. The marketing authorization application for dinutuximab is under regulatory review in the EU, and phase I-III development is underway in several other countries. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of dinutuximab leading to this first approval for use (in combination with granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-2 and 13-cis retinoic acid) in the treatment of paediatric patients with high-risk neuroblastoma who achieve at least partial response to prior first-line multiagent, multimodality therapy.

[PMID: 26891967]
Dinutuximab (ch14.18; Unituxin™) is a chimeric human-mouse monoclonal antibody that binds to the glycolipid antigen disialoganglioside, which is highly expressed on the surface of neuroblastoma cells. This intravenous drug is approved in the EU and USA as combination therapy with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin (IL)-2 and isotretinoin for the postconsolidation treatment of patients with high-risk neuroblastoma. In a multinational, phase III study in this patient population, event-free survival (EFS) benefits with the dinutuximab-containing regimen versus isotretinoin alone were observed at the time of the primary (p = 0.0115) and confirmatory (p = 0.0330) efficacy analyses, although the observed p-value for the between-group difference in EFS for the primary efficacy analysis did not cross the prespecified boundary for statistical significance (p < 0.0108). Significant and sustained (5 years) overall survival benefits were seen with the dinutuximab-containing regimen versus isotretinoin alone. Despite pretreatment with analgesics, antihistamines and antipyretics, serious adverse reactions have been reported with the dinutuximab-containing regimen, with infusion reactions and neuropathy prompting the US FDA to issue boxed warnings. Dinutuximab administered in combination with GM-CSF, IL-2 and isotretinoin represents an important advance in the postconsolidation treatment of patients with high-risk neuroblastoma, with its benefits outweighing its risks in a patient population with a poor prognosis and limited therapeutic options.

[PMID: 28389455]
The pharmacology, clinical efficacy, safety, dosage and administration, and role in therapy of dinutuximab for the treatment of high-risk pediatric neuroblastoma are reviewed. Dinutuximab (Unituxin, United Therapeutics) is a novel monoclonal antibody recently approved for use in combination with granulocyte- macrophage colony-stimulating factor, interleukin-2, and isotretinoin for the treatment of pediatric patients with high-risk neuroblastoma. Its approval has led to the first major change in standard recommended first-line maintenance therapy for high-risk pediatric neuroblastoma in over a decade. Dinutuximab causes antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and complement-dependent cytotoxicity by binding to GD2, a tumor-associated antigen. The recommended dosage of dinutuximab is 17.5 mg/m<sup>2</sup>/day for 4 consecutive days of each 24- or 32-day cycle, for a maximum of 5 cycles. In a Phase III trial, patients who received dinutuximab as part of combination immunotherapy in addition to standard maintenance therapy had significantly improved 2-year event-free survival relative to those who received standard maintenance therapy alone (66% versus 46%, <i>p</i> < 0.01). Dinutuximab has a unique adverse-effect profile that includes infusion reactions, neuropathic pain, and electrolyte abnormalities; the most common adverse effects observed with dinutuximab use in clinical trials were pain, pyrexia, myelosuppression, infusion reactions, and electrolyte abnormalities. Dinutuximab is a novel monoclonal antibody that is efficacious as part of combination immunotherapy in pediatric patients with high-risk neuroblastoma.