[PMID: 20581311]
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) mediates "emergency" granulopoiesis during infection, a process that is mimicked by clinical G-CSF use, yet we understand little about the intracellular signaling cascades that control demand-driven neutrophil production. Using a murine model with conditional deletion of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in bone marrow, we investigated the cellular and molecular mechanisms of STAT3 function in the emergency granulopoiesis response to G-CSF administration or infection with Listeria monocytogenes, a pathogen that is restrained by G-CSF signaling in vivo. Our results show that STAT3 deficiency renders hematopoietic progenitor cells and myeloid precursors refractory to the growth-promoting functions of G-CSF or L monocytogenes infection. STAT3 is necessary for accelerating granulocyte cell-cycle progression and maturation in response to G-CSF. STAT3 directly controls G-CSF-dependent expression of CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein β (C/EBPβ), a crucial factor in the emergency granulopoiesis response. Moreover, STAT3 and C/EBPβ coregulate c-Myc through interactions with the c-myc promoter that control the duration of C/EBPα occupancy during demand-driven granulopoiesis. These results place STAT3 as an essential mediator of emergency granulopoiesis by its regulation of transcription factors that direct G-CSF-responsive myeloid progenitor expansion.

[PMID: 19796237]
Severe congenital neutropenia (CN) is a heterogeneous hematopoietic syndrome with a typical "maturation arrest" of granulocytic precursors at the promyelocytic stage, inherited in an autosomal dominant or recessive manner. Intriguingly, CN patients have the same bone marrow and blood phenotypes irrespective of inheritance. This suggests that mutations in various genes may lead to the dysregulation of the common myeloid transcription factor(s) in CN. To the extensively studied myeloid-specific transcription factors belong CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) (-alpha, -beta, -epsilon) and PU.1. The relative levels of PU.1 and C/EBPalpha in granulocytic-macrophage progenitors have been suggested to regulate monocyte versus neutrophil cell-fate choice. In CN patients, the myelopoietic maturation program is sharply shifted toward monocytopoiesis, with increased levels of monocytes and no granulocytes in the peripheral blood. We found that in myeloid cells from CN patients C/EBPalpha and its target gene inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) are abrogated due to a lack of lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 (LEF-1) expression but PU.1 is slightly upregulated. Based on these findings, we conclude that in LEF-1-deficient myeloid cells from CN patients misbalanced C/EBPalpha/Id1:PU.1 ratio with a strong shift toward PU.1 could play a decisive role in the improper regulation of myelopoiesis with defective granulocytopoiesis and elevated monocytic differentiation. Recently, we identified nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), also known as pre-B cell colony enhancing factor (PBEF), as an essential enzyme mediating granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-triggered granulopoiesis in healthy individuals and in individuals with CN. Since CN patients respond to G-CSF treatment even in the absence of LEF-1 and C/EBPalpha, we conclude that treatment of CN patients with pharmacological doses of G-CSF activates NAMPT/NAD(+)/SIRT1-dependent "emergency" granulopoiesis via C/EBPbeta.

[PMID: 23024276]
Granulopoiesis is tightly regulated to meet host demands during both "steady-state" and "emergency" situations, such as infections. The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein β (C/EBPβ) plays critical roles in emergency granulopoiesis, but the precise developmental stages in which C/EBPβ is required are unknown. In this study, a novel flow cytometric method was developed that successfully dissected mouse bone marrow cells undergoing granulopoiesis into five distinct subpopulations (#1-5) according to their levels of c-Kit and Ly-6G expression. After the induction of candidemia, rapid mobilization of mature granulocytes and an increase in early granulocyte precursors accompanied by cell cycle acceleration was followed by a gradual increase in granulocytes originating from the immature populations. Upon infection, C/EBPβ was upregulated at the protein level in all the granulopoietic subpopulations. The rapid increase in immature subpopulations #1 and #2 observed in C/EBPβ knockout mice at 1 d postinfection was attenuated. Candidemia-induced cell cycle acceleration and proliferation of hematopoietic stem/progenitors were also impaired. Taken together, these data suggest that C/EBPβ is involved in the efficient amplification of early granulocyte precursors during candidemia-induced emergency granulopoiesis.

[PMID: 23382991]
In contrast to the definitive role of the transcription factor, CCAAT/Enhancer binding protein α (C/EBPα), in steady-state granulopoiesis, previous findings have suggested that granulopoiesis during emergency situations, such as infection, is dependent on C/EBPβ. In this study, a novel lentivirus-based reporter system was developed to elucidate the molecular switch required for C/EBPβ-dependency. The results demonstrated that two cyclic AMP responsive elements (CREs) in the proximal promoter region of C/EBPβ were involved in the positive regulation of C/EBPβ transcription during granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced differentiation of bone marrow cells. In addition, the transcripts of CRE binding (CREB) family proteins were readily detected in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. CREB was upregulated, phosphorylated and bound to the CREs in response to GM-CSF stimulation. Retroviral transduction of a dominant negative CREB mutant reduced C/EBPβ mRNA levels and significantly impaired the proliferation/differentiation of granulocyte precursors, while a constitutively active form of CREB facilitated C/EBPβ transcription. These data suggest that CREB proteins are involved in the regulation of granulopoiesis via C/EBPβ upregulation.

[PMID: 25940801]
Steady-state hematopoiesis responds to extracellular stimuli to meet changing demands and also to pathologically altered intracellular signaling. Granulocyte production increases following infection or in response to cytokine stimulation, and activation of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein β (C/EBPβ) transcription factor is required for such stress-induced granulopoiesis, whereas C/EBPα plays a critical role in maintaining steady-state granulopoiesis. Different roles of these C/EBP transcription factors in different modes of hematopoiesis are evolutionally conserved from zebrafish to humans. In addition to reactions against infections, C/EBPβ is responsible for cancer-driven myelopoiesis, which promotes cancer progression, at least in part, by abrogating the immune response in the cancer microenvironment. The BCR-ABL fusion protein activates emergency-specific pathway of granulopoiesis by upregulating C/EBPβ. This in turn causes chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia, which is characterized by myeloid expansion. The C/EBPβ transcription factor also plays a role in other hematological malignancies of both myeloid and lymphoid lineage origin. Thus, elucidation of the upstream and downstream networks surrounding C/EBPβ will lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies for diseases mediated by non-steady-state hematopoiesis.

[PMID: 29973462]
Under stress conditions such as infection, inflammation, and hematopoietic recovery following chemotherapy or transplantation, the hematopoietic system is required to meet the increasing demands, especially from myeloid cells. Therefore, an understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying stress hematopoiesis is clinically imperative. We previously showed that C/EBPβ, which is a transcription factor required for emergency granulopoiesis, plays a pivotal role at the level of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells under stress conditions. Upon exposure to stress, the C/EBPβ protein is upregulated in the hematopoietic stem cells. A close examination of C/EBPβ knockout mice revealed that C/EBPβ regulates the proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells at the cost of the self-renewing activity. Further elucidation of the functions and regulation of C/EBPβ in hematopoietic stem cells will facilitate an understanding of stress hematopoiesis.

[PMID: 26267538]
Cancer-driven granulo-monocytopoiesis stimulates expansion of tumor promoting myeloid populations, mostly myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). We identified subsets of MDSCs and TAMs based on the expression of retinoic-acid-related orphan receptor (RORC1/RORγ) in human and mouse tumor bearers. RORC1 orchestrates myelopoiesis by suppressing negative (Socs3 and Bcl3) and promoting positive (C/EBPβ) regulators of granulopoiesis, as well as the key transcriptional mediators of myeloid progenitor commitment and differentiation to the monocytic/macrophage lineage (IRF8 and PU.1). RORC1 supported tumor-promoting innate immunity by protecting MDSCs from apoptosis, mediating TAM differentiation and M2 polarization, and limiting tumor infiltration by mature neutrophils. Accordingly, ablation of RORC1 in the hematopoietic compartment prevented cancer-driven myelopoiesis, resulting in inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis.

[PMID: 29382715]
Interferon consensus sequence-binding protein (Icsbp) is required for terminating emergency granulopoiesis, an episodic event responsible for granulocyte production in response to infections and a key component of the innate immune response. Icsbp inhibits the expression of Stat3 and C/ebpβ, transcription factors essential for initiating and sustaining granulopoiesis, and activates transcription of Fanconi C (<i>FANCC</i>), a DNA repair protein. In prior studies, we noted accelerated bone marrow failure in Fancc<sup>-/-</sup> mice undergoing multiple episodes of emergency granulopoiesis, associated with apoptosis of bone marrow cells with unrepaired DNA damage. Additionally, we found increased expression of Fanconi C and F proteins during emergency granulopoiesis. These findings suggest that Icsbp protects the bone marrow from DNA damage by increasing activity of the Fanconi DNA repair pathway, but the mechanisms for <i>FANCC</i> activation during initiation of emergency granulopoiesis are unclear. In this study, we observed that Stat3 and C/ebpβ activate <i>FANCC</i> transcription and contribute to DNA repair. Our findings indicate that FancC expression is increased during Stat3- and C/ebpβ-induced initiation of emergency granulopoiesis by these transcription factors and is maintained through termination by Icsbp. Our work reveals that Stat3- and C/ebpβ-mediated FancC expression is a critical component for initiating and sustaining key innate immune responses.

[PMID: 16751774]
During 'emergency' situations such as infections, host defense requires rapid mobilization of bone marrow granulocyte progenitors. 'Steady-state' granulopoiesis is absolutely dependent on the C/EBPalpha transcription factor, but the transcriptional mechanisms underlying emergency granulopoiesis remain unclear. Here we show that large numbers of granulocytes were generated from C/EBPalpha-deficient progenitors after cytokine stimulation in vivo. Cytokine treatment or fungal infection induced upregulation of C/EBPbeta but not C/EBPalpha or C/EBPepsilon transcripts in granulocyte progenitors, and C/EBPbeta-deficient progenitors showed decreased emergency-induced granulopoiesis in vitro and in vivo. C/EBPbeta inhibited proliferation less severely than did C/EBPalpha. These data suggest a critical function for C/EBPbeta in emergency granulopoiesis, which demands both differentiation and proliferation of granulocyte precursors.