[PMID: 1432387]
The synthesis and the photobiological activity of two new derivatives of psoralen (3,4'-dimethylpsoralen and 3,4',8-trimethylpsoralen) has been described. They are congeners of the monofunctional linear furocoumarin 3,4'-dimethyl-8-methoxypsoralen. Both compounds bind very efficiently to DNA, the extent of this process being modulated by the nature of substituents at position 8. The number of photolesions is linearly related to adenine-thymine content of the nucleic acid which indicates lack of specificity for particular sequences of the nucleic acid. The structural arrangement of DNA (single stranded, double stranded, nucleosomes and chromatin) plays an additional role in affecting the photobinding process. Unlike their 8-methoxy congener the new derivatives cross-link DNA to a substantial extent. Their photobiological properties, including erythema formation, reflect very closely those of 8-methoxypsoralen (8-MOP). The conclusion can be drawn that 3,4'-dimethyl-8-MOP represents a unique derivative in its family.

[PMID: 23416947]
Transcription has the capacity to mechanically modify DNA topology, DNA structure and nucleosome arrangement. Resulting from ongoing transcription, these modifications in turn may provide instant feedback to the transcription machinery. To substantiate the connection between transcription and DNA dynamics, we charted an ENCODE map of transcription-dependent dynamic supercoiling in human Burkitt's lymphoma cells by using psoralen photobinding to probe DNA topology in vivo. Dynamic supercoils spread ~1.5 kilobases upstream of the start sites of active genes. Low- and high-output promoters handled this torsional stress differently, as shown by using inhibitors of transcription and topoisomerases and by chromatin immunoprecipation of RNA polymerase and topoisomerases I and II. Whereas lower outputs are managed adequately by topoisomerase I, high-output promoters additionally require topoisomerase II. The genome-wide coupling between transcription and DNA topology emphasizes the importance of dynamic supercoiling for gene regulation.

[PMID: 10075890]
DNA within a cell is organized with unrestrained torsional tension, and each molecule is divided into multiple individual topological domains. Psoralen photobinding can be used as an assay for supercoiling and topological domain size in living cells. Psoralen photobinds to DNA at a rate nearly linearly proportional to superhelical density. Comparison of the rate of photobinding to supercoiled and relaxed DNA in cells provides a measure of superhelical density. For this, in vivo superhelical tension is relaxed by the introduction of nicks by either ionizing radiation or photolysis of bromodeoxyuridine in the DNA. Since nicks are introduced in a random fashion, the distribution of nicks is described by a Poisson distribution. Thus, after nicking, the fraction of topological domains containing no nicks is described by the zero term of the Poisson distribution. From measurement of the number of nicks introduced in the DNA and the fraction of torsional tension remaining, an average topological domain size can be estimated. Using this logic, procedures were designed and described for measuring supercoiling and domain size at specific sites in eukaryotic genomes.

[PMID: 1821628]
New bioisoters of psoralen, obtained by replacing carbon 8 of the central benzene ring with a nitrogen, were studied from the photochemical, photobiological and phototherapeutic points of view. In particular, 4,4'-, 4',5'-dimetyl, 4,4',5'-trimethyl and 3,4,4',5'-tetramethylazapsoralen were studied. The crystal and molecular structure of 4,4',5'-trimethylazapsoralen, obtained by X ray diffraction, was also reported. Like psoralen, these compounds form a molecular complex with DNA, undergoing intercalation inside the double helix of the macromolecule. When irridiated with long ultraviolet light (365 nm), the intercalated drug photoconjugates covalently to the macromolecule, forming mono- and diadducts. The photobinding rate show the following order of magnitude: 4,4',5'-trimetylazapsoralen (4,4',5'-TMAP) = 3,4,4',5'-tetramethylazapsoralen (3,4,4',5'-TMAP) greater than 4',5'-dimethylazapsoralen (4',5'-DMAP) = 4,4'-dimethylazapsoralen (4,4'-DMAP). The DNA photobinding rate of 8-methoxypsoralen (8-MOP), taken as reference compound, is similar to that of the two dimetylazapsoralens but lower than tri- and tetramethyl derivatives. The ability of azapsoralens to form cross-links in DNA is lower than that of 8-MOP. However, capacity to induce cross-links does not parallel the DNA photobinding rate; it is higher for trimethyl derivate and lower for tetramethylazapsoralen. Azapsoralens show evident antiproliferative activity. The trimethyl derivative is the most active, followed by tetrametyl, both these compounds showing activity slightly higher than that of 8-MOP. The two dimethylderivatives are less active. The mautagenic activity of azapsoralens on E. coli WP2 TM6 is lower than that of 8-MOP in the same conditions. The new compounds do not show any skin phototoxicity on guinea pig skin. On the basis of its DNA photobinding, antiproliferative activity, mutagenicity and lack of skin phototoxicity, 4,4',5'-TMAP was chosen for clinical evaluation. Clinical results obtained by topical treatment of psoriatic plaques reveal evident therapeutic effectiveness and clearing is between good and moderate, although 8-MOP, used as reference compound, is more effective.

[PMID: 20685815]
The helical tension of chromosomal DNA is one of the epigenetic landmarks most difficult to examine experimentally. The occurrence of DNA crosslinks mediated by psoralen photobinding (PB) stands as the only suitable probe for assessing this problem. PB is affected by chromatin structure when is done to saturation; but it is mainly determined by DNA helical tension when it is done to very low hit conditions. Hence, we developed a method for genome-wide analysis of DNA helical tension based on PB. We adjusted in vitro PB conditions that discern DNA helical tension and applied them to Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. We selected the in vivo cross-linked DNA sequences and identified them on DNA arrays. The entire procedure was robust. Comparison of PB obtained in vivo with that obtained in vitro with naked DNA revealed that numerous chromosomal regions had deviated PB values. Similar analyses in yeast topoisomerase mutants uncovered further PB alterations across specific chromosomal domains. These results suggest that distinct chromosome compartments might confine different levels of DNA helical tension in yeast. Genome-wide analysis of psoralen-DNA PB can be, therefore, a useful approach to uncover a trait of the chromosome architecture not amenable to other techniques.

[PMID: 3273186]
We have described an exonuclease III/photoreversal procedure to map, with base pair resolution, the bases which have photoreacted with 4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen (Me3-psoralen) forming either monoadducts or interstrand cross-links in DNA (20). This assay allows quantitation of relative rates of Me3-psoralen photobinding to bases in DNA at levels as low as one cross-link per 8,000 base pairs. This assay should be useful for a wide variety of applications of Me3-psoralen photobinding to DNA. Here, we demonstrate the applicability of the Me3-psoralen exo III assay for analysis of the conformation of the Z forming sequences (GT)12ATGT and GAATTC(TG)6TA(TG)6. We have shown previously that Me3-psoralen forms crosslinks in the 5'TA within the (CG)6TA(CG)6 sequence when it exists in the B conformation but not when it exists in the Z conformation (34). More recently we have confirmed this result with the exo III assay and have shown at least a hundred fold increase in Me3-psoralen photoreactivity at the 5'AT sequence within the EcoR I sites (GAATTC) which presumably represent B-Z junctions flanking (CG)6TA(CG)6 (20). Here we demonstrate both the characteristic decrease in psoralen photobinding to 5'TAs within (GT)12ATGT and (TG)6TA(TG)6 and the hyperreactivity of B-Z junctions. These characteristic properties of Me3-psoralen photobinding provide an assay for Z-DNA that is applicable in vivo. The general applicability of this approach for assaying Z-DNA in vivo is discussed.

[PMID: 1445915]
The effects of different DNA sequences on the photoreaction of various furocoumarin derivatives was investigated from a quantitative point of view using a number of self-complementary oligonucleotides. These contained 5'-TA and 5'-AT residues, having various flanking sequences. The furocoumarins included classical bifunctional derivatives, such as 8-methoxy- and 5-methoxypsoralen, as well as monofunctional compounds, such as angelicin and benzopsoralen. Taking into an account the thermodynamic constant for noncovalent binding of each psoralen to each DNA sequence, the rate constants for the photobinding process to each fragment were evaluated. The extent of photoreaction is greatly affected by the DNA sequence examined. While sequences of the type 5'-(GTAC)n are quite reactive towards all furocoumarins, 5'-TATA exhibited a reduced rate of photobinding using monofunctional psoralens. In addition terminal 5'-TA groups were the least reactive with 5- and 8-methoxypsoralen, but not with angelicin or benzopsoralen. Also 5'-AT-containing fragments exhibited remarkably variable responses toward monofunctional or bifunctional psoralen derivatives. As a general trend the photoreactivity rate of the former is less sequence-sensitive, the ratio between maximum and minimum being less than 2 for the examined fragments. The same ratio is about 3.4 for 8-methoxypsoralen and 6.2 for 5-methoxypsoralen. This approach, in combination with footprinting studies, appears to be quite useful for a quantitative investigation of the process of covalent binding of psoralens to specific sites in DNA.

[PMID: 6504703]
The interaction of two water-soluble furocoumarins, 8-(omega-diethyl aminopropyloxy)psoralen hydrochloride (I) and its 5-isomer (II), with DNA has been investigated by spectroscopic, equilibrium dialysis, hydrodynamic and chiroptical techniques. Both compounds intercalate into the polynucleotide double helix. From the dependence of the binding on ionic strength, ion release and binding free energy corrected for counterion release have been quantitatively estimated. It is shown that the differences in DNA-affinity observed for compounds I and II arise primarily from non electrostatic contributions. The binding process is exothermic, with slightly different van't Hoff enthalpies for the examined furocoumarins. Helix lengthening and dichroic effects indicate different intercalation geometries for the isomeric compounds. These studies allow a possible explanation for the finding that isomer I exhibits largely better DNA-photobinding properties, while isomer II is by far more effective as an antiviral agent.

[PMID: 367436]
Photoreaction of 4,5',8-trimethylpsoralen with superhelical ColE1 and ColE1amp DNA was studied. Changes in mobilities in agarose gels, formation of interstrand cross-links, and DNA strand breaks were determined. Psoralen and light treatment removed negative superhelical turns, and extensive treatments failed to produce positive superhelical turns in covalently closed plasmid DNA. The rate of relaxation of superhelical turns by psoralen Photobinding appeared to be directly proportional to the number of superhelical turns remaining. A unique reaction mechanism is presented to explain these results. By this interpretation the initial rate of psoralen photobinding to superhelical DNA was estimated to be 3 times that for linear DNA, and the ratio of cross-linking to monofuctional adducts appears to be dependent on the superhelical conformation of the DNA. The estimated ratio of psoralen molecules bound to DNA strand breaks was 1.7 . 10(4):1, and 70% of this breakage is caused by the light alone.