[PMID: 24194526]
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is a proinflammatory cytokine that is implicated in many autoinflammatory disorders, but is also important in defense against pathogens. Thus, there is a need to safely and effectively modulate IL-1β activity to reduce pathology while maintaining function. Gevokizumab is a potent anti-IL-1β antibody being developed as a treatment for diseases in which IL-1β has been associated with pathogenesis. Previous data indicated that gevokizumab negatively modulates IL-1β signaling through an allosteric mechanism. Because IL-1β signaling is a complex, dynamic process involving multiple components, it is important to understand the kinetics of IL-1β signaling and the impact of gevokizumab on this process. In the present study, we measured the impact of gevokizumab on the IL-1β system using Schild analysis and surface plasmon resonance studies, both of which demonstrated that gevokizumab decreases the binding affinity of IL-1β for the IL-1 receptor type I (IL-1RI) signaling receptor, but not the IL-1 counter-regulatory decoy receptor (IL-1 receptor type II). Gevokizumab inhibits both the binding of IL-1β to IL-1RI and the subsequent recruitment of IL-1 accessory protein primarily by reducing the association rates of these interactions. Based on this information and recently published structural data, we propose that gevokizumab decreases the association rate for binding of IL-1β to its receptor by altering the electrostatic surface potential of IL-1β, thus reducing the contribution of electrostatic steering to the rapid association rate. These data indicate, therefore, that gevokizumab is a unique inhibitor of IL-1β signaling that may offer an alternative to current therapies for IL-1β-associated autoinflammatory diseases.

[PMID: 25108619]
Excessive neointima formation often occurs after arterial injury. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is a potent pleiotropic cytokine that has been shown to regulate neointimal proliferation. We investigated the effects of the IL-1β modulator gevokizumab in a rat carotid denudation model. Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to balloon denudation of the right carotid artery and were then randomized to receive a single subcutaneous infusion immediately after balloon injury of saline (control group, n = 13) or gevokizumab (gevokizumab groups, n = 15 in each group: 1, 10 and 50 mg/kg). We evaluated the treatment effects on carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) using ultrasonography, on endothelial regrowth using Evans Blue staining and on inflammatory response using histology. We also assessed the effects of IL-1β and gevokizumab on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and rat smooth muscle cells. We found that carotid IMT, in the proximal part of the denuded artery at day 28, was decreased by gevokizumab 1 mg/kg compared with controls. Neointima area and the intima/media area ratio were both reduced in the gevokizumab 1 mg/kg-treated group. Gevokizumab at the 1 mg/kg dose also improved endothelial regrowth. No effect was observed with gevokizumab 10 or 50 mg/kg. Gevokizumab also decreased the inflammatory effect of IL-1β in in vitro cell experiments and protected HUVECs from IL-1β's deleterious effects on cell migration, apoptosis and proliferation. A single administration of gevokizumab 1 mg/kg improves endothelial regrowth and reduces neointima formation in rats following carotid denudation, at least in part through its beneficial effects on endothelial cells.

[PMID: 25079039]
Insulin is the cornerstone of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) therapy. However, it cannot achieve a delay in the onset or evolution of this condition, while cardiovascular morbidity remains an unquestionable threat. In this review, the authors discuss gevokizumab (XOMA 052), a recombinant monoclonal antibody that can neutralize human IL-1β by binding to it. This is relevant, because this IL has been associated with β-cell toxicity in both diabetes types. Moreover, gevokizumab presents two major advantages: it spares IL-1α and it exhibits favorable pharmacokinetic properties. Gevokizumab has already proven its safety and efficacy in improving glycemic control, β cell function and inflammation markers in clinical trials in diabetic patients. Despite the very promising characteristics of gevokizumab, important questions remain to be answered. One important question is what to expect from a combination of this agent with insulin and if there is a subset of patients that might respond more favorably to treatment. We also need to know at what stage in the natural history of T1DM could gevokizumab be most efficacious, as well as its potential effects on cardiovascular outcomes.

[PMID: 22084392]
Uveitis and retinal vasculitis are sight-threatening manifestations of Behçet's disease with limited treatment options. This pilot study aimed to evaluate the safety, pharmacokinetics and clinical activity of XOMA 052 (gevokizumab), a recombinant humanised anti-interleukin 1β antibody, in Behçet's disease patients with uveitis. Patients with acute posterior or panuveitis, and/or retinal vasculitis, resistant to azathioprine and/or ciclosporin, and receiving 10 mg/day or less of prednisolone, were enrolled into the 98-day study. Immunosuppressive agents were discontinued at baseline. Patients received a single infusion of XOMA 052 (0.3 mg/kg). The safety and uveitis status and pharmacokinetics of XOMA 052 were evaluated. Seven patients enrolled and completed the study. No treatment-related adverse event was observed. XOMA 052 treatment was associated with rapid and durable clinical response in all patients. Complete resolution of intraocular inflammation was achieved in 4-21 days (median 14 days), with a median duration of response of 49 days (range 21-97 days); one patient remained exacerbation free throughout the study. Well tolerated, XOMA 052 resulted in a rapid onset and sustained reduction in intraocular inflammation in patients with resistant uveitis and retinal vasculitis. Moreover, the effect was observed despite discontinuation of immunosuppressive agents and without the need to increase corticosteroid dosages.

[PMID: 21048425]
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is a potent mediator of inflammatory responses and plays a role in the differentiation of a number of lymphoid cells. In several inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, serum levels of IL-1β are elevated and correlate with disease development and severity. The central role of the IL-1 pathway in several diseases has been validated by inhibitors currently in clinical development or approved by the FDA. However, the need to effectively modulate IL-1β-mediated local inflammation with the systemic delivery of an efficacious, safe and convenient drug still exists. To meet these challenges, we developed XOMA 052 (gevokizumab), a potent anti-IL-1β neutralizing antibody that was designed in silico and humanized using Human Engineering™ technology. XOMA 052 has a 300 femtomolar binding affinity for human IL-1β and an in vitro potency in the low picomolar range. XOMA 052 binds to a unique IL-1β epitope where residues critical for binding have been identified. We have previously reported that XOMA 052 is efficacious in vivo in a diet-induced obesity mouse model thought to be driven by low levels of chronic inflammation. We report here that XOMA 052 also reduces acute inflammation in vivo, neutralizing the effect of exogenously administered human IL-1β and blocking peritonitis in a mouse model of acute gout. Based on its high potency, novel mechanism of action, long half-life, and high affinity, XOMA 052 provides a new strategy for the treatment of a number of inflammatory, autoimmune and metabolic diseases in which the role of IL-1β is central to pathogenesis.

[PMID: 21154167]
The inflammatory cytokine IL-1β has an essential role in the innate immune response. High levels of IL-1β have been implicated in the development of many diseases, including type 1 and 2 diabetes (T1D and T2D), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and cardiovascular disease. XOMA is developing gevokizumab (XOMA-052), an IgG2 humanized mAb against human IL-1β, for the potential treatment of these diseases. Gevokizumab has a high affinity for IL-1β and a long t1/2, which would allow for once-monthly dosing and offer a considerable advantage for patients over agents requiring more frequent dosing. Data from preclinical studies and clinical trials suggest that gevokizumab is a potentially effective and well-tolerated treatment for the indicated diseases. At the time of publication, phase II clinical trials were ongoing in patients with T1D, T2D and RA, with the T2D trials assessing key cardiovascular markers. Following promising data from a recent pilot trial, XOMA was also planning a phase I/II trial of gevokizumab for the potential treatment of uveitis in patients with the vasculitic inflammatory disorder Behçet's disease and the autoinflammatory conditions familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome.

[PMID: 23041424]
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is a key orchestrator in inflammatory and several immune responses. IL-1β exerts its effects through interleukin-1 receptor type I (IL-1RI) and interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP), which together form a heterotrimeric signaling-competent complex. Canakinumab and gevokizumab are highly specific IL-1β monoclonal antibodies. Canakinumab is known to neutralize IL-1β by competing for binding to IL-1R and therefore blocking signaling by the antigen:antibody complex. Gevokizumab is claimed to be a regulatory therapeutic antibody that modulates IL-1β bioactivity by reducing the affinity for its IL-1RI:IL-1RAcP signaling complex. How IL-1β signaling is affected by both canakinumab and gevokizumab was not yet experimentally determined. We have analyzed the crystal structures of canakinumab and gevokizumab antibody binding fragment (Fab) as well as of their binary complexes with IL-1β. Furthermore, we characterized the epitopes on IL-1β employed by the antibodies by NMR epitope mapping studies. The direct comparison of NMR and X-ray data shows that the epitope defined by the crystal structure encompasses predominantly those residues whose NMR resonances are severely perturbed upon complex formation. The antigen:Fab co-structures confirm the previously identified key contact residues on IL-1β and provide insight into the mechanisms leading to their distinct modulation of IL-1β signaling. A significant steric overlap of the binding interfaces of IL-1R and canakinumab on IL-1β causes competitive inhibition of the association of IL-1β and its receptor. In contrast, gevokizumab occupies an allosteric site on IL-1β and complex formation results in a minor reduction of binding affinity to IL-1RI. This suggests two different mechanisms of IL-1β pathway attenuation.

[PMID: 22699287]
Metabolic activation of the innate immune system governed by interleukin (IL)-1β contributes to β-cell failure in type 2 diabetes. Gevokizumab is a novel, human-engineered monoclonal anti-IL-1β antibody. We evaluated the safety and biological activity of gevokizumab in patients with type 2 diabetes. In a placebo-controlled, dose-escalation study, a total of 98 patients were randomly assigned to placebo (17 subjects) or gevokizumab (81 subjects) at increasing doses and dosing schedules. The primary objective of the study was to evaluate the safety profile of gevokizumab in type 2 diabetes. The secondary objectives were to assess pharmacokinetics for different dose levels, routes of administration, and regimens and to assess biological activity. The study drug was well tolerated with no serious adverse events. There was one hypoglycemic event whereupon concomitant insulin treatment had to be reduced. Clearance of gevokizumab was consistent with that for a human IgG(2), with a half-life of 22 days. In the combined intermediate-dose group (single doses of 0.03 and 0.1 mg/kg), the mean placebo-corrected decrease in glycated hemoglobin was 0.11, 0.44, and 0.85% after 1, 2 (P = 0.017), and 3 (P = 0.049) months, respectively, along with enhanced C-peptide secretion, increased insulin sensitivity, and a reduction in C-reactive protein and spontaneous and inducible cytokines. This novel IL-1β-neutralizing antibody improved glycemia, possibly via restored insulin production and action, and reduced inflammation in patients with type 2 diabetes. This therapeutic agent may be able to be used on a once-every-month or longer schedule.

[PMID: 23729309]
Behçet's disease (BD) is a multisystem inflammatory disorder of uncertain origin, although it remains defined within the spectrum of systemic immune-mediated vasculitic disorders and also represents a spectrum of putative autoimmune disease. Major symptoms include oral aphthous ulcers, genital ulcerations, skin lesions, and ocular lesions. Despite afflicting many systems, ocular complications of BD are some of the more devastating for the patient and their quality of life. Eye involvement, which affects 60-80 % of BD patients, is characterized in its more severe form by posterior or panuveitis including occlusive retinal vasculitis. While pathogenesis of BD remains complex, association with Class I MHC (HLA-B*51) predisposing to inflammation with engagement of the innate-immune system (neutrophils, NK cells), and perpetuated by the adaptive T cell responses against infectious- and/or auto-antigens. Despite the choice of conventional immunosuppressive therapies available, only recently with the advent of biologic therapy has visual prognosis and outcomes been substantially and favorably altered. For example, both interferon-α (IFN-α) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists deliver promising results and for the first time improve prognosis. With IFN-α therapy, durable remissions of uveitis can be achieved and lead to drug-free remission. Similarly, anti-TNF therapy with infliximab is reported to be rapidly effective in inducing and maintaining remission. Most recently, rising evidence reports on the use of adalimumab, etanercept, and golimumab, while use of anti-interleukin (IL)-1 agents (anakinra, canakinumab, gevokizumab), IL-6 blockers (tocilizumab), and rituximab (depleting anti-CD20 antibody) is also increasing. The aim of this review is to provide evidence for the role of conventional therapies combined with evidence for advantages and disadvantages of biologic therapies in the treatment of ocular BD. Although randomized controlled trials remain sparse, evidence remains strong and enticing that biologic agents are invaluable for the treatment of sight-threatening Behçet's uveitis and makes it an exciting time for Behçet's specialists worldwide.