[PMID: 16221495]
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS) is a human autoimmune disease characterized by the loss of exocrine function as a result of a chronic immune attack directed primarily against the salivary and lacrimal glands leading to xerostomia (dry mouth) and xerophthalmia (dry eyes). NOD.B10-H2b mice manifest many features of SjS, exhibiting exocrine gland dysfunction concomitant with leukocyte infiltration of the salivary and lacrimal glands. Recent studies have shown that both SjS patients and NOD.B10-H2b mice exhibit increased B lymphocyte survival, B cell hyper-reactivity and hyper-gammaglobulinemia with high production of autoantibodies. To study the possible influence of complement on the development and expression of SjS-like disease of the NOD.B10-H2b, we have utilized a prophylactic treatment with CVF known to interfere with the action of complement C3 factor. NOD.B10-H2b mice, injected with CVF starting at 10 weeks of age, a time when leukocyte infiltration is expected to begin, failed to develop salivary dysfunction out to 24 weeks of age, a time when reduced salivary flow rates are known to occur in non-treated animals. Concomitant with retention of salivary exocrine function, CVF-treated mice showed reduced levels of leukocytic infiltration, reduction of anti-nuclear autoantibodies and major alterations in the B lymphocyte profiles while maintaining general pathophysiological measures of disease. These data suggest that C3 plays a significant role in development and onset of SjS-like disease, yet additional studies need to be carried out to identify the precise mode of action.

[PMID: 21777618]
In Sjögren's syndrome, like in most other autoimmune diseases, the enigma leading to a pathogenic attack against self has not yet been solved. By definition, the disease must be mediated by specific immune reactions against endogenous tissues to qualify as an autoimmune disease. In Sjögren's syndrome the autoimmune response is directed against the exocrine glands, which, as histopathological hallmark of the disease, display persistent and progressive focal mononuclear cell infiltrates. Clinically, the disease in most patients is manifested by two severe symptoms: dryness of the mouth (xerostomia) and the eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca). A number of systemic features have also been described and the presence of autoantibodies against the ubiquitously expressed ribonucleoprotein particles Ro (Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A - SSA) and La (SSB) further underline the systemic nature of Sjögren's syndrome. The original explanatory concept for the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome proposed a specific, self-perpetuating, immune mediated loss of acinar and ductal cells as the principal cause of salivary gland hypofunction. Although straightforward and plausible, the hypothesis, however, falls short of accommodating several Sjögren's syndrome-related phenomena and experimental findings. Consequently, researchers considered immune-mediated salivary gland dysfunction prior to glandular destruction and atrophy as potential molecular mechanisms underlying the symptoms of dryness in Sjögren's syndrome. Accordingly, apoptosis, fibrosis and atrophy of the salivary glands would represent consequences of salivary gland hypofunction. The emergence of advanced bio-analytical platforms further enabled the identification of potential biomarkers with the intent to improve Sjögren's syndrome diagnosis, promote the development of prognostic tools for Sjögren's syndrome and the long-term goal to identify possible processes for therapeutic treatment interventions. In addition, such approaches allowed us to glimpse at the apparent complexity of Sjögren's syndrome.

[PMID: 11439159]
NOD mice manifest many features of autoimmune exocrinopathy (Sjögren's syndrome), a disease generally characterized by a chronic, progressive immunological attack against the exocrine tissues of the salivary and lacrimal glands. Previous studies using the NOD congenic partner strain, NOD.Igmu(null), defined an important role for B lymphocytes in the development of xerostomia, implicating autoantibodies reactive with the acetylcholine muscarinic receptor (M3R) as the possible effector mechanism. In the present study, we have examined the impact of the cytokine, interleukin (IL)-4, on autoimmune exocrinopathy by using the IL-4 gene knockout (KO) NOD mouse strain, NOD.IL-4-/-. Despite manifesting the physiological aberrations and marked leukocytic infiltration of the salivary glands characteristic of autoimmune xerostomia in NOD mice, the NOD.IL-4-/- mice do not develop xerostomia. However, NOD.IL-4-/- mice that received adoptively transferred T lymphocytes derived from NOD.Igmu-/- mice progress to xerostomia, thereby reversing the defect. While progression or lack of progression to xerostomia correlated with the ability of the NOD.IL-4-/- mice to express detectable anti-M3R autoantibodies, the precise mechanism of how IL-4 influences the development of autoimmune xerostomia remains speculative.

[PMID: 20408860]
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by clonal B cell attack of the exocrine glands and dysregulated expression of B cell-activating factor (BAFF). Based upon the current data of increased rates of lymphoid malignancy, as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is associated with SS, we propose the detection of clonal rearrangements of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene in those patients as a predictor of malignant clonal expansion. To test our proposal, we examined the IgH clonal rearrangements in SS patients (60) and healthy control subjects (42) having chronic non-specific sialadenitis, to determine the presence of clonal B cells in minor labial salivary glands (MSG) of SS patients. Clonal B cell expansion was assessed by two polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays: (i) semi-nested PCR, against sequences encoding framework regions FR3, FR2 and FR1c of the variable chain IgH gene in B cells present in the MSG infiltrate; and (ii) the PCR-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technique, against the major and minor breakpoint regions of the Bcl-2 oncogene coupled with a variable segment of the IgH to assess the Bcl-2/JH translocation. When FR3, FR2 and FR1c primers were employed, we detected B cell monoclonality in 87% of the SS patients and 19% of the control subjects. The association between inflammation severity of the MSG pattern and the presence of B cell clonality was found to be statistically significant (P<0.01). We concluded that the presence of B cell clonality in MSG can be used as a index of an altered microenvironment favouring the development of lymphoma in SS patients.

[PMID: 16761498]
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is a chronic autoimmune disease affecting epithelial tissues. Exocrine glands are the primary target and their functional impairment comes as a result of immune attack of epithelial cells of the affected organs (autoimmune epithelitis). In this interplay, the role of the epithelial cell is pivotal. Extensive data point to an intrinsically activated status. Moreover, the epithelial cells possess all the features needed in order to act as non-professional antigen presenting cells. Through apoptosis and exosomes release endocellular antigens contributing to tolerance breakdown. In addition, produce cytokines and chemokines that recruit lymphocytes in the immunopathogenic lesion. Herein, we review all the aforementioned aspects of the epithelial activity that lead to the perpetuation of the lesion as well as the probable viral factors for the intrinsic activation. Finally, we propose a model for SS pathogenesis that integrates the knowledge accumulated during the last decade.

[PMID: 17472721]
Sjögren's syndrome is an autoimmune disease in which immune cells chronically attack the lachrymal and salivary glands. The Id3 knockout mouse is a newly established animal model for primary Sjögren's syndrome. To address the role of B cells in Sjögren's syndrome and autoimmune disease, we studied the effect of CD20 monoclonal antibody treatment on the disease in Id3 knockout mice. Antibody treatment at 2-month intervals led to efficient and sustained B-cell depletion in Id3 knockout mice. A significant improvement of histopathology was observed accompanied by the recovery of saliva secretory function after CD20 antibody treatment. We further show that serum immunoglobulin G3, which is abnormally high in untreated Id3 knockout mice, was reduced after CD20 antibody treatment. This study establishes a new animal model for immunotherapy of Sjögren's symptoms and suggests a possible link between immunoglobulin G3 and disease pathology in Id3 knockout mice.

[PMID: 17823290]
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS) is a human autoimmune disease characterized by exocrine dysfunction resulting from chronic autoimmune attack primarily against the lacrimal and/or salivary glands. Although, we previously established a good correlation between SjS in humans and autoimmune exocrinopathy in NOD/LtJ mice an in-depth evaluation of lacrimal gland disease in the NOD/LtJ mouse has remained limited. This leaves a major gap in our understanding of the dacryoadenitis/keratoconjunctivitis sicca in this model. Here we characterize the development of the autoimmune dacryoadenitis in NOD/LtJ and NOD.B10-H2(b) mice in comparison with age- and sex-matched nonautoimmune CD1 mice. We observed a decline in tear production beginning at 8 weeks of age in both NOD/LtJ and NOD.B10-H2(b) mice, continuing throughout the 40 to 46 weeks studied. This correlated with a quantifiable increase in mixed T- and B-lymphocyte infiltrations in the extraorbital lacrimal glands. In addition, temporal differences in tear protein expression between NOD/LtJ and CD1 mice were identified using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and tandem mass spectrometry. Thus, using this model we can identify potentially important pathophysiological mechanisms of the autoimmune attack and possible diagnostic markers for development of SjS-associated dacryoadenitis.

[PMID: 11464341]
The purpose of this qualitative research was to explore the lived experiences of women with Sjogren's Syndrome (SS), a chronic autoimmune syndrome in which invading lymphocytes attack moisture-producing glands of the body. This syndrome, affecting 4 million Americans, involves extreme dryness of the eyes and mouth and other systemic complications such as fatigue and muscle and joint pain. Ten women, ranging in age from 27 to 83, with SS were interviewed to understand their coping strategies and attitudes. This study used Strauss' framework to view the quality of life of the chronically ill-specifically, those with SS. Nine questions were asked to elicit information on limitations with daily living, relationships, emotions about lifestyle changes, and comparisons with others living with chronic disease. In addition to SS, 8 of the 10 women also had fibromyalgia, and 4 had other conditions such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis (secondary Sjogren's). Their responses were categorized into four groups: helping, hindering, hoping, and hurting. This led to the development of the 4H Model of Chronic Autoimmune Disease with subcategories such as: supporting, joining, comparing, coping, health promoting, fearing, becoming a chronic sufferer, feeling, wishing, appearing, impeding, restricting, isolating, suffering, doctoring, and diagnosing. J Prof Nurs 17:194-202, 2001.

[PMID: 17127420]
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS) is a systemic autoimmune disease in which an immunological attack against the salivary and lacrimal glands results, respectively, in severe dry mouth and dry eye diseases. Although a CD4+ T lymphocyte population is an integral component in the pathogenesis of SjS, recent studies have focused on the importance the B lymphocyte plays in both the pre-clinical and clinical phases of the disease process. To understand the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in SjS, numerous mouse models that mimic major clinical manifestations of the human disease have been developed. Studies have begun to define the genetics, the nature of the autoimmune response towards the salivary and lacrimal glands, as well as the possible mechanisms for effecting glandular dysfunction, thereby establishing insights to new intervention therapies. Not surprising, the B cell is taking center stage. Here, we present an in-depth discussion of how B cell populations may be involved in orchestrating or determining exocrine gland dysfunction.