[PMID: 22955980]
CTCF is a ubiquitously expressed regulator of fundamental genomic processes including transcription, intra- and interchromosomal interactions, and chromatin structure. Because of its critical role in genome function, CTCF binding patterns have long been assumed to be largely invariant across different cellular environments. Here we analyze genome-wide occupancy patterns of CTCF by ChIP-seq in 19 diverse human cell types, including normal primary cells and immortal lines. We observed highly reproducible yet surprisingly plastic genomic binding landscapes, indicative of strong cell-selective regulation of CTCF occupancy. Comparison with massively parallel bisulfite sequencing data indicates that 41% of variable CTCF binding is linked to differential DNA methylation, concentrated at two critical positions within the CTCF recognition sequence. Unexpectedly, CTCF binding patterns were markedly different in normal versus immortal cells, with the latter showing widespread disruption of CTCF binding associated with increased methylation. Strikingly, this disruption is accompanied by up-regulation of CTCF expression, with the result that both normal and immortal cells maintain the same average number of CTCF occupancy sites genome-wide. These results reveal a tight linkage between DNA methylation and the global occupancy patterns of a major sequence-specific regulatory factor.

[PMID: 22829947]
Chromatin insulators are DNA elements that regulate the level of gene expression either by preventing gene silencing through the maintenance of heterochromatin boundaries or by preventing gene activation by blocking interactions between enhancers and promoters. CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a ubiquitously expressed 11-zinc-finger DNA-binding protein, is the only protein implicated in the establishment of insulators in vertebrates. While CTCF has been implicated in diverse regulatory functions, CTCF has only been studied in a limited number of cell types across human genome. Thus, it is not clear whether the identified cell type-specific differences in CTCF-binding sites are functionally significant. Here, we identify and characterize cell type-specific and ubiquitous CTCF-binding sites in the human genome across 38 cell types designated by the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) consortium. These cell type-specific and ubiquitous CTCF-binding sites show uniquely versatile transcriptional functions and characteristic chromatin features. In addition, we confirm the insulator barrier function of CTCF-binding and explore the novel function of CTCF in DNA replication. These results represent a critical step toward the comprehensive and systematic understanding of CTCF-dependent insulators and their versatile roles in the human genome.

[PMID: 15229244]
The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene contains a variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) domain within intron 2 that is often associated with a number of neurological conditions, including affective disorders. The implications of this polymorphism are not yet understood, however, we have previously demonstrated that the 5-HTT VNTR is a transcriptional regulatory domain, and the allelic variation supports differential reporter gene expression in vivo and in vitro. The aim of this study was to identify transcription factors responsible for the regulation of this VNTR. Using a yeast one-hybrid screen, we found the transcription factor Y box binding protein 1 (YB-1) interacts with the 5-HTT VNTR. Consistent with this, we demonstrate in a reporter gene assay that the polymorphic VNTR domains differentially respond to exogenous YB-1 and that YB-1 will bind to the VNTR in vitro in a sequence-specific manner. Interestingly, the transcription factor CCTC-binding factor (CTCF), previously shown to interact with YB-1, interferes with the ability of the VNTR to support YB-1-directed reporter gene expression. In addition, CTCF blocks the binding of YB-1 to its DNA recognition sequences in vitro, thus providing a possible mechanism of regulation of YB-1 activation of the VNTR by CTCF. Therefore, we have identified YB-1 and CTCF as transcription factors responsible, at least in part, for modulation of VNTR function as a transcriptional regulatory domain. Our data suggest a novel mechanism that explains, in part, the ability of the distinct VNTR copy numbers to support differential reporter gene expression based on YB-1 binding sites.

[PMID: 15670593]
Immune responses to invading pathogens are mediated largely through a family of transmembrane Toll-like receptors and modulated by a number of downstream effectors. In particular, a family of four interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAK) regulates responsiveness to bacterial endotoxins. Pharmacological targeting of particular IRAK components may be beneficial for treatment of bacterial infections. Here, we studied transcriptional regulation of the human IRAK2 gene. Analysis of the IRAK2 promoter region reveals putative binding sites for several transcriptional factors, including ZIP (EGR1 and SP1), CTCF and AP-2beta. Deletion of the ZIP or AP-2 sites did not significantly affect IRAK2 promoter activity in naive and endotoxin-treated mononuclear cells, in dormant and activated Jurkat T-cells, in lung and kidney cells. In contrast, we found that CTCF plays a major role in IRAK2 transcription. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay of the DNA fragments containing the IRAK2 CpG island, revealed a single high-affinity binding site for the transcriptional regulator and a chromatin insulator protein, CTCF. This assay revealed a CTCF-binding site within the mouse Irak2 promoter. The presence of the CTCF protein in human IRAK2 promoter was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Specific residues that interacted with the CTCF protein, were identified by methylation interference assay. In all cell lines analyzed, including cells of lung, renal, monocytic and T-cell origin, the IRAK2 luciferase reporter construct, containing an intact CTCF-binding site, showed strong promoter activity. However, IRAK2 promoter activity was decreased dramatically for the constructs with a mutated CTCF-binding site.

[PMID: 8034708]
The molecular basis for commitment of progenitors to the eosinophil lineage and mechanisms by which eosinophil-specific genes are expressed and regulated during differentiation is unknown. Expression of eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) is restricted to the eosinophil lineage. To understand the mechanisms involved in transcriptional regulation of EPO gene expression, we clone the region of the EPO gene upstream of the transcriptional start site and analyzed the cis-acting elements required for EPO promoter activity in an eosinophil-inducible leukemic cell line, HL-60-C15. The 5'-flanking region of the EPO gene containing 1.5 kilobases of sequence upstream of the transcriptional start site was subcloned into the promoterless pXP2-luciferase vector. The EPO-pXP2 construct and 5' deletion mutants were electroporated into HL-60-C15 cells and luciferase reporter activity assessed. The -1.5-kilobase EPO-pXP2 promoter construct reproducibly expressed > 120-fold more luciferase activity than did promoterless pXP2, and a 12-fold (90%) decrease in promoter activity was obtained when sequences between -122 and -45 base pairs (bp) were deleted. The specificity of the EPO promoter for the eosinophil lineage was analyzed by transfecting the EPO-pXP2 constructs and deletion mutants into HL-60-C15 cells and the parental HL-60 line; EPO promoter activity was 8-10-fold less in the HL-60 parental line, suggesting lineage specific elements in the -122 to -45 bp region. To further characterize regulatory sequences important for promoter activity, we performed linker-scanning analysis on the -122 to -45 bp region and identified a number of positively and negatively acting elements in the promoter. DNase I footprinting was performed with HL-60-C15, HL-60, and HeLa nuclear extracts to identify nuclear proteins that may bind to the functional elements; these experiments identified three protected regions of the EPO promoter which correspond to the functional segments defined by linker-scanning analysis and which contain consensus, potential binding sites for Egr-1, H4TF-1, PuF, CTCF, UBP-1, and GaEII transcription factors. Further study of EPO promoter regulation should elucidate unique transcriptional features of eosinophil gene regulation in granulocyte development.

[PMID: 11854173]
Genomic imprinting, the differential expression of autosomal genes based on their parent of origin, is observed in all eutherian mammals that have been examined. In most instances the genes that are imprinted in one species are imprinted in others as well, suggesting that imprinting predated eutherian radiation. For example, the RNA-coding H19 gene is repressed upon paternal inheritance in all species examined to date. Thus, it is surprising that there is remarkably little sequence conservation among the cis-acting DNA regulatory elements that are required for imprinting of H19 and the tightly linked Igf2 gene. The most conserved characteristic in the imprinting control region (ICR) is the presence of multiple binding sites for the zinc finger protein CTCF, raising the possibility that CTCF binding might be sufficient for the reciprocal imprinting of H19 and Igf2. To investigate whether a human H19 transgene, harboring seven CTCF sites, is correctly recognized and imprinted in the mouse, a 100 kb transgene containing the human H19 gene was introduced into the mouse germline. The human transgene was specifically methylated after passage through the male germline in a copy number-dependent manner, but the methylation was unstable, undergoing progressive loss during development. Consequently, the transgene was highly expressed upon both maternal and paternal inheritance. These results argue that the signals for both the acquisition and maintenance of methylation imprinting are diverging rapidly.

[PMID: 23707059]
The "CTCF code" hypothesis posits that CTCF pleiotropic functions are driven by recognition of diverse sequences through combinatorial use of its 11 zinc fingers (ZFs). This model, however, is supported by in vitro binding studies of a limited number of sequences. To study CTCF multivalency in vivo, we define ZF binding requirements at ∼50,000 genomic sites in primary lymphocytes. We find that CTCF reads sequence diversity through ZF clustering. ZFs 4-7 anchor CTCF to ∼80% of targets containing the core motif. Nonconserved flanking sequences are recognized by ZFs 1-2 and ZFs 8-11 clusters, which also stabilize CTCF broadly. Alternatively, ZFs 9-11 associate with a second phylogenetically conserved upstream motif at ∼15% of its sites. Individually, ZFs increase overall binding and chromatin residence time. Unexpectedly, we also uncovered a conserved downstream DNA motif that destabilizes CTCF occupancy. Thus, CTCF associates with a wide array of DNA modules via combinatorial clustering of its 11 ZFs.

[PMID: 11076856]
The evolution of genomic imprinting in mammals occurred more than 100 million years ago, and resulted in the formation of genes that are functionally haploid because of parent-of-origin-dependent expression. Despite ample evidence from studies in a number of species suggesting the presence of imprinted genes on human chromosome 14, their identity has remained elusive. Here we report the identification of two reciprocally imprinted genes, GTL2 and DLK1, which together define a novel imprinting cluster on human chromosome 14q32. The maternally expressed GTL2 (gene trap locus 2) gene encodes for a nontranslated RNA. DLK1 (delta, Drosophila, homolog-like 1) is a paternally expressed gene that encodes for a transmembrane protein containing six epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat motifs closely related to those present in the delta/notch/serrate family of signaling molecules. The paternal expression, chromosomal localization, and biological function of DLK1 also make it a likely candidate gene for the callipyge phenotype in sheep. Many of the predicted structural and regulatory features of the DLK1/GTL2 domain are highly analogous to those implicated in IGF2/H19 imprint regulation, including two hemimethylated consensus binding sites for the vertebrate enhancer blocking protein, CTCF. These results provide evidence that a common mechanism and domain organization may be used for juxtapositioned, reciprocally imprinted genes.

[PMID: 22709888]
CTCF is a highly conserved and essential zinc finger protein expressed in virtually all cell types. In conjunction with cohesin, it organizes chromatin into loops, thereby regulating gene expression and epigenetic events. The function of CTCFL or BORIS, the testis-specific paralog of CTCF, is less clear. Using immunohistochemistry on testis sections and fluorescence-based microscopy on intact live seminiferous tubules, we show that CTCFL is only transiently present during spermatogenesis, prior to the onset of meiosis, when the protein co-localizes in nuclei with ubiquitously expressed CTCF. CTCFL distribution overlaps completely with that of Stra8, a retinoic acid-inducible protein essential for the propagation of meiosis. We find that absence of CTCFL in mice causes sub-fertility because of a partially penetrant testicular atrophy. CTCFL deficiency affects the expression of a number of testis-specific genes, including Gal3st1 and Prss50. Combined, these data indicate that CTCFL has a unique role in spermatogenesis. Genome-wide RNA expression studies in ES cells expressing a V5- and GFP-tagged form of CTCFL show that genes that are downregulated in CTCFL-deficient testis are upregulated in ES cells. These data indicate that CTCFL is a male germ cell gene regulator. Furthermore, genome-wide DNA-binding analysis shows that CTCFL binds a consensus sequence that is very similar to that of CTCF. However, only ~3,700 out of the ~5,700 CTCFL- and ~31,000 CTCF-binding sites overlap. CTCFL binds promoters with loosely assembled nucleosomes, whereas CTCF favors consensus sites surrounded by phased nucleosomes. Finally, an ES cell-based rescue assay shows that CTCFL is functionally different from CTCF. Our data suggest that nucleosome composition specifies the genome-wide binding of CTCFL and CTCF. We propose that the transient expression of CTCFL in spermatogonia and preleptotene spermatocytes serves to occupy a subset of promoters and maintain the expression of male germ cell genes.