[PMID: 10692426]
Most selenoproteins contain a single selenocysteine residue per polypeptide chain, encoded by an in-frame UGA codon. Selenoprotein P is unique in that its mRNA encodes 10-12 selenocysteine residues, depending on species. In addition to the high number of selenocysteines, the protein is cysteine- and histidine-rich. The function of selenoprotein P has remained elusive, in part due to the inability to express the recombinant protein. This has been attributed to presumed inefficient translation through the selenocysteine/stop codons. Herein, we report for the first time the expression of recombinant rat selenoprotein P in a transiently transfected human epithelial kidney cell line, as well as the endogenously expressed protein from HepG2 and Chinese hamster ovary cells. The majority of the expressed protein migrates with the predicted 57-kDa size of full-length glycosylated selenoprotein P. Based on the histidine-rich nature of selenoprotein P, we have purified the recombinant and endogenously expressed proteins using nickel-agarose affinity chromatography. We show that the recombinant rat and endogenous human proteins react in Western blotting and immunoprecipitation assays with commercial anti-histidine antibodies. The ability to express, purify, and immunochemically detect the recombinant protein provides a foundation for investigating the functions and efficiency of expression of this intriguing protein.

[PMID: 15777501]
Human selenoprotein P (HSelP) is unique protein that contains 10 selenocysteines encoded by 10 inframe UGA, which typically function as stop codon. The function of HSelP remains unclear, in part due to the inability to express it by gene recombinant technique. This study is to investigate expression and purification of recombinant HSelP in prokaryotic expression system, and its activity to induce apoptosis in vitro. The shorter HSelP isoform was cloned. After the selenocysteine (SeCys) at 40th position from N terminus of the HSelP shorter isoform was mutated into cysteine by PCR, it was expressed in E. coli. The expressed product was purified with DEAE column and identified by Western blot. Subsequently, its function on induction of mitochondrial apoptotic activity was studied. The mutant HSelP shorter isoform expressed in prokaryotic system was purified by DEAE column to 90% homogeneity. The purified product, HSelP280m, induced the opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) and decreased the transmembrane potential in a dose-dependent manner. These events could be abolished by PTP specific inhibitors. HSelP280m can induce the opening of mitochondrial PTP, which provides a basis for investigating the structure and function of recombinant HSelP.

[PMID: 11122377]
Selenoprotein P is a protein of considerable intrigue, due to its unusual composition and requirements for its biosynthesis. Whereas most selenoproteins contain a single selenocysteine residue, the human, bovine and rodent selenoprotein P genes encode proteins containing 10-12 selenocysteines. Selenoprotein P genes have, to date, only been reported in mammals, and the function of the protein remains elusive. Herein, we report the identification and characterization of nonmammalian selenoprotein P in the zebrafish Danio rerio. Sequencing of the cDNA revealed the presence of 17 selenocysteine codons, the highest number reported in any protein. Two histidine-rich regions present in the mammalian selenoprotein P sequences are conserved in the zebrafish protein, and two SECIS elements are present in the 3' untranslated region. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of zebrafish embryos revealed high levels of expression of selenoprotein P mRNA in fertilized eggs and in the yolk sac of developing embryos. Transient transfection of the cDNA in mammalian cells resulted in efficient expression of the full-length secreted selenoprotein. A single N-glycosylation site is predicted, and shown to be utilized. Discovery of selenoprotein P in the zebrafish opens a previously unavailable avenue for genetic investigation of the functions of this unusual protein.

[PMID: 7637580]
When cDNA containing proteins enriched in the bovine cerebellar cortex were cloned, a clone which seemed to encode a selenoprotein P-like protein was isolated. The coding nucleotide sequence of its cDNA insert displayed high homology to rat and human selenoprotein P cDNA but contained 12 rather than 10 TGAs (12 rather than 10 selenocysteines in deduced amino acids), a tandem repeat of one CACTCC (His-Ser) and seven CATCCCs (His-Pro), and a 3' untranslated region approximately 890 bases shorter than that of rat liver selenoprotein P. RT-PCR using a set of primers flanking to the repeat displayed the existence of mRNA without the repeat. The tandem repeat and its adjacent region consisted of a similar motif of CAC/TCC/AC/T. Thus, these proteins included a (His-Pro) rich domain with a slightly negative free energy change irrespective of having the tandem repeat or not. Such His-Pro repeats reportedly exist in the segmentation gene paired or homeobox protein Om(1D) of Drosophila. Moreover, both this selenoprotein P-like protein mRNA and selenoprotein P mRNA were expressed in all the areas of the brain but most prominently in the cerebellar cortex, hippocampus, and olfactory bulb. These findings suggest the possibility that these selenoproteins are major selenium carriers in the brain and play a role in the morphological response of nerve or glial cells.

[PMID: 19345254]
Selenoprotein P (Sepp1) is a secreted protein that is made up of 2 domains. The larger N-terminal domain contains 1 selenocysteine residue in a redox motif and the smaller C-terminal domain contains the other 9 selenocysteines. Sepp1 isoforms of varying lengths occur but quantitation of them has not been achieved. Hepatic synthesis of Sepp1 affects whole-body selenium content and the liver is the source of most plasma Sepp1. ApoER2, a member of the lipoprotein receptor family, binds Sepp1 and facilitates its uptake into the testis and retention of its selenium by the brain. Megalin, another lipoprotein receptor, facilitates uptake of filtered Sepp1 into proximal tubule cells of the kidney. Thus, Sepp1 serves in homeostasis and distribution of selenium. Mice with deletion of Sepp1 suffer greater morbidity and mortality from infection with Trypanosoma congolense than do wild-type mice. Mice that express only the N-terminal domain of Sepp1 have the same severity of illness as wild-type mice, indicating that the protective function of Sepp1 against the infection resides in the N-terminal (redox) domain. Thus, Sepp1 has several functions. In addition, plasma Sepp1 concentration falls in selenium deficiency and, therefore, it can be used as an index of selenium nutritional status.

[PMID: 20417644]
Selenoproteins are a family of proteins that share the common feature of containing selenocysteine, the "twenty-first" amino acid. Selenocysteine incorporation occurs during translation of selenoprotein messages by redefinition of UGA codons, which normally specify termination of translation. Studies of the eukaryotic selenocysteine incorporation mechanism suggest that selenocysteine insertion is inefficient compared with termination. Nevertheless, selenoprotein P and several other selenoproteins are known to contain multiple selenocysteines. The production of full-length (FL) protein from these messages would seem to demand highly efficient selenocysteine incorporation due to the compounding effect of termination at each UGA codon. We present data demonstrating that efficient incorporation of multiple selenocysteines can be reconstituted in rabbit reticulocyte lysate translation reactions. Selenocysteine incorporation at the first UGA codon is inefficient but increases by approximately 10-fold at subsequent downstream UGA codons. We found that ribosomes in the "processive" phase of selenocysteine incorporation (i.e., after decoding the first UGA codon as selenocysteine) are fully competent to terminate translation at UAG and UAA codons, that ribosomes become less efficient at selenocysteine incorporation as the distance between UGA codons is increased, and that efficient selenocysteine incorporation is not dependent on cis-acting elements unique to selenoprotein P. Furthermore, we found that the percentage of ribosomes decoding a UGA codon as selenocysteine rather than termination can be increased by 3- to 5-fold by placing the murine leukemia virus UAG read-through element upstream of the first UGA codon or by providing a competing messenger RNA in trans. The mechanisms of selenocysteine incorporation and selenoprotein synthesis are discussed in light of these results.

[PMID: 17000762]
Selenocysteine is incorporated into proteins via "recoding" of UGA from a stop codon to a sense codon, a process that requires specific secondary structures in the 3' untranslated region, termed selenocysteine incorporation sequence (SECIS) elements, and the protein factors that they recruit. Whereas most selenoprotein mRNAs contain a single UGA codon and a single SECIS element, selenoprotein P genes encode multiple UGAs and two SECIS elements. We have identified evolutionary adaptations in selenoprotein P genes that contribute to the efficiency of incorporating multiple selenocysteine residues in this protein. The first is a conserved, inefficiently decoded UGA codon in the N-terminal region, which appears to serve both as a checkpoint for the presence of factors required for selenocysteine incorporation and as a "bottleneck," slowing down the progress of elongating ribosomes. The second adaptation involves the presence of introns downstream of this inefficiently decoded UGA which confer the potential for nonsense-mediated decay when factors required for selenocysteine incorporation are limiting. Third, the two SECIS elements in selenoprotein P mRNA function with differing efficiencies, affecting both the rate and the efficiency of decoding different UGAs. The implications for how these factors contribute to the decoding of multiple selenocysteine residues are discussed.

[PMID: 9288402]
An 11-day embryonic Swiss Webster/NIH mouse cDNA library was screened with a partial murine selenoprotein P cDNA probe and a murine selenoprotein-P-type cDNA clone of 2075 bp length was obtained. The clone contained a 5'-leader sequence of 132 bp length, the selenoprotein P coding frame, and 803 base pairs in the 3' untranslated region. Alignment and RNA folding studies revealed the presence of two well conserved selenocysteine inserting motifs in the 3' flanking region. The deduced polypeptide sequence comprises 380 residues including ten selenocysteines. Identical amino acid residues in homologous positions are 86%, 71%, and 64% when compared to the previously reported selenoprotein P sequences of rat, man, and cattle, respectively. The comparatively low similarity between the selenoprotein P sequences reported so far leaves open the question whether they belong to the same molecular clade.

[PMID: 15104205]
Selenoprotein P (SeP) is an extracellular glycoprotein with 8-10 selenocysteines per molecule, containing approximately 50% of total selenium in human serum. An antioxidant function of SeP has been postulated. In the present study, we show that SeP protects low-density lipoproteins (LDL) against oxidation in a cell-free in-vitro system. LDL were isolated from human blood plasma and oxidized with CuCl2, 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) (AAPH) or peroxynitrite in the presence or absence of SeP, using the formation of conjugated dienes as parameter for lipid peroxidation. SeP delayed the CuCl2- and AAPH-induced LDL oxidation significantly and more efficiently than bovine serum albumin used as control. In contrast, SeP was not capable of inhibiting peroxynitrite-induced LDL oxidation. The protection of LDL against CuCl2- and AAPH-induced oxidation provides evidence for the antioxidant capacity of SeP. Because SeP associates with endothelial membranes, it may act in vivo as a protective factor inhibiting the oxidation of LDL by reactive oxygen species.