[PMID: 7585697]
Molecular weights of heparin-derived oligosaccharides ranging from disaccharides to hexadecasaccharides have been determined by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. While these compounds ionize poorly or not at all when used as such, a strong signal can be obtained of their ionic complexes formed with a basic peptide or protein. The molecular weight of the sulfated oligosaccharide is determined by subtracting the mass of the basic component from that of the complex. Optimization of the experimental conditions resulted in sub-picomole sensitivity, in the elimination of sulfate loss and of the interference from attachment of inorganic cations. Synthetic peptides (Arg-Gly)10 and (Arg-Gly)15 were specifically designed as complexing agents for synthetic and natural heparin fragments up to decasaccharides. Accurate molecular weight determination on chemically homogeneous oligosaccharides (+/- 0.05%) unambiguously identified the number of saccharide units, and the number of O,N-sulfate and N-acetyl groups. For oligosaccharides larger than decasaccharides, a small basic protein, angiogenin (M(r) = 14,120), was used to form the complex (an inhomogeneous hexadecasaccharide fraction was the largest available for this study). For inhomogeneous samples larger than decasaccharides, the mass accuracy is lower (+/- 0.2-0.3%) but still suffices to determine the number of saccharide units present and to estimate the number of sulfate groups, except it is no longer possible to differentiate one sulfate from two N-acetyl groups (delta = 4 Da). However, taking into account known regularities of sulfation and acetylation, the specificity of heparin lyases and chemical degradation steps, the method promises to contribute significantly to the determination of the primary structure of heparin and other sulfated glycosaminoglycans.

[PMID: 1723310]
Angiogenin is a potent blood-vessel-inducing polypeptide with a molecular weight of 14,000 that has a unique ribonucleolytic activity. First isolated from the conditioned medium of tumour cells, angiogenin has since been purified from normal plasma, which suggested that its propensity to induce neovascularization should be strictly controlled. Modulation of that activity might involve interaction of angiogenin with cell-surface receptors and extracellular matrix of endothelial cells, tight-binding inhibition of both its ribonucleolytic activity and cell binding property by ribonuclease inhibitor, as well as the overall influence of divalent copper, a modulator of angiogenesis.

[PMID: 18055286]
We identified, for the first time, the factor responsible for inhibiting osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in the basic protein fraction of bovine milk (milk basic protein, MBP). The protein was purified by a combination of ion and gel column chromatography from MBP, based on its activity to prevent unfractionated rabbit bone cells from forming pits on dentine slices. It was found to have a molecular weight of 15 kDa on SDS-PAGE, and the sequence of the N-terminal 25 amino acid residues was identical to that of bovine angiogenin. The purified bovine angiogenin inhibited the pit-forming activity of both unfractionated bone cells and purified osteoclasts in a dose-dependent manner, and the inhibitory activity was markedly suppressed by treatment with anti-bovine angiogenin antibody. The inhibitory activity was confirmed in mice both in vitro and in vivo. Treatment of osteoclasts with bovine angiogenin resulted in an impairment of the formation F-actin ring and a reduction in the mRNA levels of TRAP and cathepsin K, both known to be essential for the bone resorption activity of osteoclasts. These results suggest that bovine angiogenin is the substance mainly responsible for the inhibitory effect of bovine milk on osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, and that it exerts its activity by acting directly on the osteoclasts.

[PMID: 2775757]
The amino acid sequence and disulfide bridges of bovine plasma derived angiogenin were determined by sequencer analysis of the intact protein and fragments derived by enzymatic and chemical digestion. Bovine angiogenin is a single-chain protein of 125 amino acids; it contains six cysteines and has a calculated molecular weight of 14,595. In contrast to the human protein its amino terminus is unblocked. It has the following sequence: H2N-Ala1-Gln-Asp-Asp-Tyr-Arg-Tyr-Ile-His-Phe10-Leu-Thr-Gln-His-Tyr -Asp-Ala-Lys- Pro-Lys20-Gly-Arg-Asn-Asp-Glu-Tyr-Cys-Phe-Asn-Met30-Met-Lys- Asn-Arg-Arg-Leu-Thr - Arg-Pro-Cys40-Lys-Asp-Arg-Asn-Thr-Phe-Ile-His-Gly-Asn50-Lys- Asn-Asp-Ile-Lys-Ala - Ile-Cys-Glu-Asp60-Arg-Asn-Gly-Gln-Pro-Tyr-Arg-Gly-Asp-Leu70- Arg-Ile-Ser-Lys-Ser - Glu-Phe-Gln-Ile-Thr80-Ile-Cys-Lys-His-Lys-Gly-Ser-Ser-Arg90- Pro-Pro-Cys-Arg-Tyr - Gly-Ala-Thr-Glu-Asp100-Ser-Arg-Val-Ile-Val-Val-Gly-Cys-Glu-Asn1 10-Gly-Leu-Pro- Val-His-Phe-Asp-Glu-Ser-Phe120-Ile-Thr-Pro-Arg-His-OH. Disulfide bonds link Cys(27)-Cys(82), Cys(40)-Cys(93), and Cys(58)-Cys(108). Bovine angiogenin is 64% identical with human angiogenin; like the human protein, it is homologous to the pancreatic ribonucleases, with conservation of active site residues. Two regions, 6-22 and 65-75, are highly conserved between the angiogenins but are significantly different from those of the ribonucleases, suggesting a possible role in the molecules' biological activity.

[PMID: 10486275]
This paper reports the isolation and characterization from bovine milk of two proteins: angiogenin-1, a recently discovered angiogenin, and lactogenin, a novel protein. Both proteins were adsorbed on and eluted closely from CM-Sepharose and Mono S. Lactogenin possessed a molecular weight (17 kDa) slightly higher than that of angiogenin-1 (15 kDa). Lactogenin had a higher ribonucleolytic (RNase) activity than angiogenin-1 towards yeast transfer RNA (tRNA). The Km values estimated for the RNase activities of angiogenin-1 and lactogenin were 51 microM and 40 microM respectively. Both were specific for poly C. The optimal pH for the RNase activities of angiogenin-1 and lactogenin was 7.75 and 7.5 respectively. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of cyanogen bromide fragments and the pyroglutaminase-treated N-terminal fragment of lactogenin with the sequence of bovine liver RNase (RNase BL4) revealed identity in residues 3-22, 24, 26-27, 37, 41-44, 46-50, 54, 56, 63, 72-80, and 83. Considerable similarity to the N-terminal sequence of angiogenin-2 was also noted. Both lactogenin and angiogenin-1 inhibited cell-free translation in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system with an IC(50) below 100 nM.

[PMID: 8574597]
Infectious complications are frequent and often lethal in patients with uremia. Serious alterations in neutrophil function, e.g., phagocytosis, mononuclear cell activation, cytokine production, complement activation, T-cell function, and adhesion molecule expression, have been documented in uremic patients. Uremia per se is a cause of some of these derangements, but much evidence now exists that blood-membrane interaction during dialysis is responsible for many of these abnormalities. This is particularly true when bio-incompatible cellulose-based membranes are used. In many of these patients, newly described granulocyte inhibitory proteins (GIP) can be demonstrated. These two proteins, GIP I and II (28 kD and 9.5 kD, respectively, in molecular weight), block effective bacterial killing, chemotaxis, and oxygen metabolism. It appears that GIP I is a member of the lightchain family, and GIP II is the advanced glycosilation end product of beta 2-microglobulin. Another inhibitory protein, degranulation inhibitory protein (DIP), has been isolated. This protein is 14 kD in molecular weight, and is identical to the angioplastic factor angiogenin. DIP levels are significantly elevated in patients undergoing dialysis. Much still needs to be learned about the interactions of these inhibitory proteins with other soluble inflammatory mediators and, in particular, cytokines. It is clear, however, that profound derangements in immune function take place during uremia and dialytic therapy. Such derangements are likely to play an important role in determining the rate of recovery of renal function and the patient's ability to respond to septic insults. Further insights into the pathogenesis of uremic-dialytic immune dysfunction are already yielding improved patient management and decreased infection rates.

[PMID: 10673358]
Human angiogenin is a 14-kDa plasma protein with angiogenic and ribonucleolytic activities. Angiogenin binds specifically to aortic smooth muscle cells, activates second messenger pathways, and inhibits their proliferation. Human and bovine aortic smooth muscle cells were used to study the internalization and intracellular fate of human angiogenin at 37 degrees C. Using a specific antibody against angiogenin, we found that the internalized native protein was localized in the perinuclear region at 30 min and then dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. In conditions favoring receptor-mediated endocytosis, internalization of iodinated angiogenin showed a first peak at 5 min and then further increased for up to 24 h. The half-life of the molecule, calculated as 12 h in chase experiments, could contribute to its intracellular accumulation. In cell extracts, in addition to the 14-kDa protein, a 8.7-kDa fragment was observed at 24 h, and three fragments with molecular mass of 10.5, 8.7, and 6. 1 kDa were detected at 48 h. Our data point to a specific internalization and processing of human angiogenin by aortic smooth muscle cells.

[PMID: 10441122]
The crystal structure of ribonuclease A (RNase A) in complex with pdUppA-3'-p [5'-phospho-2'-deoxyuridine-3'-pyrophosphate (P'-->5') adenosine 3'-phosphate] has been determined at 1.7 A resolution. This dinucleotide is the most potent low molecular weight inhibitor of RNase A reported to date (K(i) = 27 nM) and is also effective against two major nonpancreatic RNases: eosinophil-derived neurotoxin and RNase-4; in all cases, tight binding in large part derives from the unusual 3',5'-pyrophosphate internucleotide linkage [Russo, N., and Shapiro, R. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 14902-14908]. The design of pdUppA-3'-p was based on the crystal structure of RNase A complexed with 5'-diphosphoadenosine 3'-phosphate (ppA-3'-p) [Leonidas, D. D., Shapiro, R., Irons, L. I., Russo, N., and Acharya, K. R. (1997) Biochemistry 36, 5578-5588]. The adenosine of pdUppA-3'-p adopts an atypical syn conformation not observed for standard adenosine nucleotides bound to RNase A. This conformation, which allows extensive interactions with Asn 67, Gln 69, Asn 71, and His 119, is associated with the placement of the 5'-beta-phosphate of the adenylate, rather than alpha-phosphate, at the site where substrate phosphodiester bond cleavage occurs. The contacts of the deoxyuridine 5'-phosphate portion of pdUppA-3'-p appear to be responsible for the 9-fold increased affinity of this compound as compared to ppA-3'-p: the uracil base binds to Thr 45 in the same manner as previous pyrimidine inhibitors, and the terminal 5'-phosphate is positioned to form medium-range Coulombic interactions with Lys 66. The full potential benefit of these added interactions is not realized because of compensatory losses of hydrogen bonds of Lys 7 and Gln 11 with the terminal 3'-phosphate and the adenylate 5'-alpha-phosphate, which were not predicted by modeling. The results reported here have important implications for the design of improved inhibitors of RNase A and for the development of therapeutic agents to control the activities of RNase homologues such as eosinophil-derived neurotoxin and angiogenin that have roles in human pathologies.

[PMID: 4074709]
The first human tumor derived protein with in vivo angiogenic activity to be obtained in pure form has been isolated from serum-free supernatants of an established human adenocarcinoma cell line (HT-29) and named angiogenin. It was purified by cation-exchange and reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography; the yield was approximately 0.5 microgram/L of medium. Biological activity of angiogenin was monitored throughout purification by using the chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay. Statistical evaluation demonstrates that it displays activity in this system with as little as 35 fmol per egg. Moreover, only 3.5 pmol is required to induce extensive blood vessel growth in the rabbit cornea. The amino acid composition of this basic (isoelectric point greater than 9.5), single-chain protein of molecular weight approximately 14 400 has been determined. The amino terminus is blocked, and the carboxyl-terminal residue is proline.