[PMID: 17264115]
The c-myc mRNA coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP) has high affinity for the coding region determinant (CRD) of c-myc mRNA. Such affinity is believed to protect c-myc CRD from endonucleolytic attack. We have recently purified a mammalian endoribonuclease which can cleave within the c-myc CRD in vitro. The availability of this purified endonuclease has made it possible to directly test the interaction between CRD-BP and the endonuclease in regulating c-myc CRD RNA cleavage. In this study, we have identified the coding region of MDR-1 RNA as a new target for CRD-BP. CRD-BP has the same affinity for c-myc CRD nts 1705-1886 and MDR-1 RNA nts 746-962 with K(d) of 500 nM. The concentration-dependent affinity of CRD-BP to these transcripts correlated with the concentration-dependent blocking of endonuclease-mediated cleavage by CRD-BP. In contrast, three other recombinant proteins tested which had no affinity for c-myc CRD did not block endonuclease-mediated cleavage. Finally, we have identified RNA sequences required for CRD-BP binding. These results provide the first direct evidence that CRD-BP can indeed protect c-myc CRD cleavage initiated by an endoribonuclease, and the framework for further investigation into the interactions between CRD-BP, c-myc mRNA, MDR-1 mRNA and the endoribonuclease in cells.

[PMID: 16778892]
Although constitutive activation of beta-catenin/Tcf signalling is implicated in the development of human cancers, the mechanisms by which the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway promotes tumorigenesis are incompletely understood. Messenger RNA turnover has a major function in regulating gene expression and is responsive to developmental and environmental signals. mRNA decay rates are dictated by cis-acting elements within the mRNA and by trans-acting factors, such as RNA-binding proteins (reviewed in refs 2, 3). Here we show that beta-catenin stabilizes the mRNA encoding the F-box protein betaTrCP1, and identify the RNA-binding protein CRD-BP (coding region determinant-binding protein) as a previously unknown target of beta-catenin/Tcf transcription factor. CRD-BP binds to the coding region of betaTrCP1 mRNA. Overexpression of CRD-BP stabilizes betaTrCP1 mRNA and elevates betaTrCP1 levels (both in cells and in vivo), resulting in the activation of the Skp1-Cullin1-F-box protein (SCF)(betaTrCP) E3 ubiquitin ligase and in accelerated turnover of its substrates including IkappaB and beta-catenin. CRD-BP is essential for the induction of both betaTrCP1 and c-Myc by beta-catenin signalling in colorectal cancer cells. High levels of CRD-BP that are found in primary human colorectal tumours exhibiting active beta-catenin/Tcf signalling implicates CRD-BP induction in the upregulation of betaTrCP1, in the activation of dimeric transcription factor NF-kappaB and in the suppression of apoptosis in these cancers.

[PMID: 11745432]
Mouse coding region determinant-binding (mCRD-BP) and human IGF-II mRNA-binding 1 (hIMP-1) proteins are orthologous mRNA-binding proteins that recognize c-myc and IGF-II mRNA, respectively, and regulate their expression posttranscriptionally. Here, we confirm that human CRD-BP/IMP-1 binds to c-myc mRNA and that it is predominantly expressed in fetal tissues. Moreover, hCRD-BP/IMP-1 expression was detected in cell lines of neoplastic origin and in selected primary tumors. In a series of 33 malignant and 10 benign mesenchymal tumors, 73% and 40%, respectively, were found to express hCRD-BP/IMP-1. In particular, expression was significant in 14 Ewing's sarcomas, all of which were positive. The data suggest that hCRD-BP/IMP-1 plays a role in abnormal cell proliferation in mesenchymal tumors.

[PMID: 10692488]
Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) are designed to bind to and inhibit a target mRNA. We used a novel approach for the design of ODNs to the c-myc mRNA using protein binding sites as targets for ODN action. Our strategy was to identify ODNs that could interfere with the coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP), a protein that binds to the CRD region of the c-myc mRNA. Using an in vitro gel shift assay, we show that ODN molecules can occlude the CRD-BP from the mRNA. The best ODN, CRD-ODN4, was able to inhibit RNA binding of the CRD-BP by 75%. This effect was sequence-specific and concentration dependent. K562 cells treated with a 2'-O-methyl derivative of CRD-ODN4 showed a concentration-dependent decrease in both c-myc mRNA and protein levels, with a maximal 65% inhibition of protein expression at 200 nM CRD-ODN4. In contrast, a 2'-O-methyl ODN derivative targeting the translation initiation codon (antimyc-aug) reduced c-myc protein but actually increased mRNA levels, an effect resulting at least partly from stabilization of the c-myc mRNA. CRD-ODN4 treatment did not alter the c-myc mRNA half-life. CRD-ODN4 was more effective in inhibiting K562 cell growth than antimyc-aug, reducing cell number by approximately 70% after 48 h of exposure to 750 nM. The correlation between ODN effects on RNA-protein interactions in vitro and those observed in cells supports the hypothesis that CRD-ODN4 inhibits the interaction between the CRD-BP and the c-myc mRNA and that disrupting this RNA-protein interaction reduces c-myc expression in cells.

[PMID: 12024010]
A 249-nucleotide coding region instability determinant (CRD) destabilizes c-myc mRNA. Previous experiments identified a CRD-binding protein (CRD-BP) that appears to protect the CRD from endonuclease cleavage. However, it was unclear why a CRD-BP is required to protect a well-translated mRNA whose coding region is covered with ribosomes. We hypothesized that translational pausing in the CRD generates a ribosome-deficient region downstream of the pause site, and this region is exposed to endonuclease attack unless it is shielded by the CRD-BP. Transfection and cell-free translation experiments reported here support this hypothesis. Ribosome pausing occurs within the c-myc CRD in tRNA-depleted reticulocyte translation reactions. The pause sites map to a rare arginine (CGA) codon and to an adjacent threonine (ACA) codon. Changing these codons to more common codons increases translational efficiency in vitro and increases mRNA abundance in transfected cells. These data suggest that c-myc mRNA is rapidly degraded unless it is (i) translated without pausing or (ii) protected by the CRD-BP when pausing occurs. Additional mapping experiments suggest that the CRD is bipartite, with several upstream translation pause sites and a downstream endonuclease cleavage site.

[PMID: 10850408]
The coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP) binds in vitro to c-myc mRNA and is thought to stabilize the mRNA and increase c-Myc protein abundance. The CRD-BP gene has 15 exons and 14 introns, is single-copy, and is located on chromosome 11 in mice and 17 in humans, close to HER-2/neu. The CRD-BP gene is moderately amplified in 12 of 40 human breast cancers; it is highly amplified in 2 others (14.4 and 20 copies). Despite their proximity, CRD-BP and HER-2/neu genes can be amplified independently. Amplification of a gene that might up-regulate c-Myc abundance could accelerate breast cancer.

[PMID: 9178888]
We previously isolated and characterized a coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP) that might regulate c-myc mRNA post-transcriptionally. CRD-BP binds specifically to the coding region of c-myc mRNA and might stabilize c-myc mRNA in vitro by protecting it from endonucleolytic cleavage. Since c-myc abundance is regulated during embryonic development and cell replication, we investigated whether CRD-BP is also regulated in animal tissues. We focused on CRD-BP expression during rat liver development and liver regeneration, because c-myc mRNA is regulated post-transcriptionally in both cases. CRD-BP expression parallels c-myc expression during liver development; the protein is present in fetal and neonatal liver but is absent or in low abundance in adult liver. In contrast, the up-regulation of c-myc mRNA following partial hepatectomy is not accompanied by up-regulation of CRD-BP. To our knowledge, CRD-BP is the first example of a putative mammalian mRNA-binding protein that is abundant in a fetal tissue but either absent from or scarce in adult tissues. Its expression in fetal liver and in transformed cell lines suggests CRD-BP is an oncofetal protein.

[PMID: 9801297]
The half-life of c- myc mRNA is regulated when cells change their growth rates or differentiate. Two regions within c- myc mRNA determine its short half-life. One is in the 3'-untranslated region, the other is in the coding region. A cytoplasmic protein, the coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP), binds in vitro to the c- myc coding region instability determinant. We have proposed that the CRD-BP, when bound to the mRNA, shields the mRNA from endonucleolytic attack and thereby prolongs the mRNA half-life. Here we report the cloning and further characterization of the mouse CRD-BP, a 577 amino acid protein containing four hnRNP K-homology domains, two RNP domains, an RGG RNA-binding domain and nuclear import and export signals. The CRD-BP is closely related to the chicken beta-actin zipcode-binding protein and is similar to three other proteins, one of which is overexpressed in some human cancers. Recombinant mouse CRD-BP binds specifically to c- myc CRD RNA in vitro and reacts with antibody against human CRD-BP. Most of the CRD-BP in the cell is cytoplasmic and co-sediments with ribosomal subunits.

[PMID: 12894594]
The Coding Region Determinant-Binding Protein (CRD-BP) is an RRM and KH-domain-containing protein that recognizes specifically at least three RNAs. It binds to one of the two c-myc mRNA instability elements, to the 5'Un Translated Region (UTR) of the leader 3 IGF-II mRNA and to the oncofetal H19 RNA. CRD-BP has been assigned a role in stabilizing c-myc mRNA by preventing its endonucleolytic cleavage and in repressing the translation of the leader 3 IGF-II mRNA, the major embryonic species of this message. CRD-BP is normally expressed only in fetal tissues. However, its expression is detected in primary tumors and transformed cell lines of different origins. The vast majority of colon (80%) and breast (60%) tumors and sarcomas (73%) express CRD-BP whereas in other tumor types, for example prostate carcinomas, its expression is rare. CRD-BP expression has also been detected in benign tumors such as breast fibroadenomas, meningiomas and other benign mesenchymal tumors, implying a role for this gene in abnormal cell proliferation. In breast carcinomas, CRD-BP expression and or gene copy number gains in the region encompassing the c-myc locus were detected in approximately 75% of tumors, implying that the deregulated expression of c-myc may be more widespread than previously believed. Infiltrated lymph nodes, corresponding to CRD-BP-positive primary tumors, were also found positive indicating that monitoring for CRD-BP could prove useful for the detection and monitoring of disseminated disease.