[PMID: 24203912]
The most reliable liver safety signal in a clinical trial is considered to be 'Hy's Law cases' defined as subjects experiencing hepatocellular injury and serum bilirubin elevations with no more likely cause than study drug. However, there is little published data to support the current biochemical criteria for Hy's Law cases or their use to estimate postmarketing risk of severe liver injury. The primary objective of this study was to identify and characterize Hy's Law cases in patients treated for tuberculosis (TB). A secondary objective was to identify patient risk factors for drug-induced liver injuries. We utilized eDISH (evaluation of Drug-Induced Serious Hepatoxicity) to retrospectively analyze data from 517 patients treated for activeTB, a regimen well known to be capable of causing severe hepatotoxicity. We identified two Hy's Law cases, which is consistent with the treatment's known risk of liver failure. Despite monthly monitoring, neither Hy's Law case experienced a documented elevation in serum alanine aminotransferase exceeding 10 × upper limits of normal. Hepatoprotectant use and infection with chronic hepatitis B were associated with increased risk of liver injury. Our observations support the current biochemical criteria for Hy's Law cases and their use to estimate postmarketing risk.

[PMID: 26116527]
Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) remains a leading reason why new compounds are dropped from further study or are the subject of product warnings and regulatory actions. Hy's Law of drug-induced hepatocellular jaundice causing a case-fatality rate or need for transplant of 10% or higher has been validated in several large national registries, including the ongoing, prospective U.S. Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network. It serves as the basis for stopping rules in clinical trials and in clinical practice. Because DILI can mimic all known causes of acute and chronic liver disease, establishing causality can be difficult. Histopathologic findings are often nonspecific and rarely, if ever, considered pathognomonic. A daily drug dose >50-100 mg is more likely to be hepatotoxic than does <10 mg, especially if the compound is highly lipophilic or undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism. The quest for a predictive biomarker to replace alanine aminotransferase is ongoing. Markers of necrosis and apoptosis such as microRNA-122 and keratin 18 may prove useful in identifying patients at risk for severe injury when they initially present with a suspected acetaminophen overdose. Although a number of drugs causing idiosyncratic DILI have HLA associations that may allow for pre-prescription testing to prevent hepatotoxicity, the cost and relatively low frequency of injury among affected patients limit the current usefulness of such genome-wide association studies. Alanine aminotransferase monitoring is often recommended but has rarely been shown to be an effective method to prevent serious DILI. Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of DILI have recently been published, although specific therapies remain limited. The LiverTox Web site has been introduced as an interactive online virtual textbook that makes the latest information on more than 650 agents available to clinicians, regulators, and drug developers alike.

[PMID: 23874514]
The genotype-phenotype interaction in drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a subject of growing interest. Previous studies have linked amoxicillin-clavulanate (AC) hepatotoxicity susceptibility to specific HLA alleles. In this study we aimed to examine potential associations between HLA class I and II alleles and AC DILI with regards to phenotypic characteristics, severity and time to onset in Spanish AC hepatotoxicity cases. High resolution genotyping of HLA loci A, B, C, DRB1 and DQB1 was performed in 75 AC DILI cases and 885 controls. The distributions of class I alleles A*3002 (P/Pc = 2.6E-6/5E-5, OR 6.7) and B*1801 (P/Pc = 0.008/0.22, OR 2.9) were more frequently found in hepatocellular injury cases compared to controls. In addition, the presence of the class II allele combination DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 (P/Pc = 5.1E-4/0.014, OR 3.0) was significantly increased in cholestatic/mixed cases. The A*3002 and/or B*1801 carriers were found to be younger (54 vs 65 years, P = 0.019) and were more frequently hospitalized than the DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 carriers. No additional alleles outside those associated with liver injury patterns were found to affect potential severity as measured by Hy's Law criteria. The phenotype frequencies of B*1801 (P/Pc = 0.015/0.42, OR 5.2) and DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201 (P/Pc = 0.0026/0.07, OR 15) were increased in AC DILI cases with delayed onset compared to those corresponding to patients without delayed onset, while the opposite applied to DRB1*1302-DQB1*0604 (P/Pc = 0.005/0.13, OR 0.07). HLA class I and II alleles influence the AC DILI signature with regards to phenotypic expression, latency presentation and severity in Spanish patients.

[PMID: 22928730]
Potential severe liver injury is identified in clinical trials by ALT >3 × upper limits of normal (ULN) and total bilirubin >2 × ULN, and termed 'Hy's Law' by the US FDA. However, there is limited evidence or validation of these thresholds in clinical trial populations. Using liver chemistry data from clinical trials, decision boundaries were built empirically with truncated robust multivariate outlier detection (TRMOD), in a statistically robust manner, and then compared with these fixed thresholds. Additionally, as the analysis of liver chemistry change from baseline has been recently suggested for the identification of liver signals, fold-baseline data was also assessed. The aim of the study was to examine and validate the performance of fixed and empirically derived thresholds for severe liver injury in generally healthy clinical trial populations (i.e. populations without underlying renal, haematological or liver disease). Using phase II-IV clinical trial data, ALT and total bilirubin data were analysed using outlier detection methods to compare with empirically derived and fixed thresholds of the FDA's Hy's Law limits, which were then assessed graphically with the FDA's evaluation of Drug-Induced Serious Hepatotoxicity (eDISH) assessing fold-ULN, as well as a modified eDISH (mDISH) to assess fold-baseline liver chemistries. Data from 28 phase II-IV clinical trials conducted by GlaxoSmithKline were aggregated and analysed by the TRMOD algorithm to create decision boundaries. The data consisted of 18 672 predominantly female subjects with a mean age of 44 years and without known liver disease. Among generally healthy clinical trial subjects, the empirically-derived TRMOD boundaries were approximately equivalent to 'Hy's Law'. TRMOD boundaries for identifying outliers were an ALT limit of 3.4 × ULN and a bilirubin limit of 2.1 × ULN, compared with the FDA's 'Hy's Law' of 3 × ULN and bilirubin 2 × ULN. Inter-laboratory data variations were observed across the 28 studies, and were diminished by use of baseline-corrected data. By applying TRMOD to baseline-corrected data, these boundaries became ALT limit of 3.8 × baseline and bilirubin limit of 4.8 × baseline. Cumulative incidence plots of liver signals identified over time were examined. TRMOD analyses identified normative boundaries and outliers that provide comparative data to detect liver signals in similar trial populations. TRMOD liver chemistry analyses of clinical trial data in generally healthy subjects have confirmed the FDA's Hy's Law threshold as a robust means of detecting liver safety outliers. TRMOD evaluation of liver chemistry data, by both fold-ULN and fold-baseline, provides complementary analyses and valuable normative data for comparison in similar patient populations. No liver signal is present when new clinical trial data from similar patient populations lies within these normative boundaries. Use of baseline-corrected data diminishes inter-laboratory variation and may be more sensitive to possible drug effects. We suggest examining liver chemistries using graphical depictions of both ULN-corrected data (eDISH) and baseline-corrected data (mDISH), as complementary methods.

[PMID: 24704526]
Hy's Law, which states that hepatocellular drug-induced liver injury (DILI) with jaundice indicates a serious reaction, is used widely to determine risk for acute liver failure (ALF). We aimed to optimize the definition of Hy's Law and to develop a model for predicting ALF in patients with DILI. We collected data from 771 patients with DILI (805 episodes) from the Spanish DILI registry, from April 1994 through August 2012. We analyzed data collected at DILI recognition and at the time of peak levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and total bilirubin (TBL). Of the 771 patients with DILI, 32 developed ALF. Hepatocellular injury, female sex, high levels of TBL, and a high ratio of aspartate aminotransferase (AST):ALT were independent risk factors for ALF. We compared 3 ways to use Hy's Law to predict which patients would develop ALF; all included TBL greater than 2-fold the upper limit of normal (×ULN) and either ALT level greater than 3 × ULN, a ratio (R) value (ALT × ULN/alkaline phosphatase × ULN) of 5 or greater, or a new ratio (nR) value (ALT or AST, whichever produced the highest ×ULN/ alkaline phosphatase × ULN value) of 5 or greater. At recognition of DILI, the R- and nR-based models identified patients who developed ALF with 67% and 63% specificity, respectively, whereas use of only ALT level identified them with 44% specificity. However, the level of ALT and the nR model each identified patients who developed ALF with 90% sensitivity, whereas the R criteria identified them with 83% sensitivity. An equal number of patients who did and did not develop ALF had alkaline phosphatase levels greater than 2 × ULN. An algorithm based on AST level greater than 17.3 × ULN, TBL greater than 6.6 × ULN, and AST:ALT greater than 1.5 identified patients who developed ALF with 82% specificity and 80% sensitivity. When applied at DILI recognition, the nR criteria for Hy's Law provides the best balance of sensitivity and specificity whereas our new composite algorithm provides additional specificity in predicting the ultimate development of ALF.

[PMID: 26159259]
Drug-induced liver injury (DILI), a relatively rare condition, is nevertheless a major reason for not approving a drug in development or for removing one already marketed. With a specific diagnostic biomarker lacking, finding elevated serum enzyme [alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase] activities remains an initial signal for incipient liver injury. Enzyme elevations alone may not be harmful, but if caused by a drug and followed by jaundice (called 'Hy's law') there is a high possibility of serious DILI. In 1997 several drugs were approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the USA that were later withdrawn from the market for serious liver toxicity. New drugs in development are now required to be monitored for liver injury, and the data is to be considered in the approval decision. A program called e-DISH (evaluation of drug-induced serious hepatotoxicity) was introduced in 2004 to aid medical reviewers to select from all subjects studied those few who show nontrivial liver injury and estimate the most likely cause. The threshold of enzyme elevation comprising a warning for possibly serious DILI is uncertain, although generally accepted as 3-5 times the 'upper limit of normal'. The new direct-acting antiviral agents for treating chronic hepatitis C virus, which often lead to a reduction of elevated ALTs, mandate that a later increase without viral breakthrough be compared to the new on-treatment level of values. The drug may be discontinued or interrupted for evaluation to exclude other possible causes of liver injury. The FDA has approved no drug since 1997 that has been withdrawn later because of serious hepatotoxicity.

[PMID: 23300062]
Identifying drug-induced liver injury is a critical task in drug development and postapproval real-world care. Severe liver injury is identified by the liver chemistry threshold of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) >3× upper limit of normal (ULN) and bilirubin >2× ULN, termed Hy's law by the Food and Drug Administration. These thresholds require discontinuation of the causative drug and are seldom exceeded in most patient populations. However, because maintenance of therapy is critical in the treatment of advanced cancer, customized thresholds may be useful in oncology patient populations, particularly for those with baseline liver chemistries elevations. Liver chemistry data from 31 aggregated oncology clinical trials were modeled through a truncated robust multivariate outlier detection (TRMOD) method to develop the decision boundary or threshold for examining liver injury in oncology clinical trials. The boundary of TRMOD identified outliers with an ALT limit 5.0× ULN and total bilirubin limit 2.7× ULN. In addition, TRMOD was applied to the aggregated oncology data to examine fold-baseline ALT and total bilirubin, revealing limits of ALT 6.9× baseline and bilirubin 6.5× baseline. Similar ALT and bilirubin threshold limits were observed for oncology patients both with and without liver metastases. These higher liver chemistry thresholds examining fold-ULN and fold-baseline data may be valuable in identifying potential severe liver injury and detecting liver safety signals of clinical concern in oncology clinical trials and postapproval settings while helping to avoid premature discontinuation of curative therapy.

[PMID: 26122767]
Few studies have evaluated the ability of laboratory tests to predict risk of acute liver failure (ALF) among patients with drug-induced liver injury (DILI). We aimed to develop a highly sensitive model to identify DILI patients at increased risk of ALF. We compared its performance with that of Hy's Law, which predicts severity of DILI based on levels of alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase and total bilirubin, and validated the model in a separate sample. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of 15,353 Kaiser Permanente Northern California members diagnosed with DILI from 2004 through 2010, liver aminotransferase levels above the upper limit of normal, and no pre-existing liver disease. Thirty ALF events were confirmed by medical record review. Logistic regression was used to develop prognostic models for ALF based on laboratory results measured at DILI diagnosis. External validation was performed in a sample of 76 patients with DILI at the University of Pennsylvania. Hy's Law identified patients that developed ALF with a high level of specificity (0.92) and negative predictive value (0.99), but low level of sensitivity (0.68) and positive predictive value (0.02). The model we developed, comprising data on platelet count and total bilirubin level, identified patients with ALF with a C statistic of 0.87 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.76-0.96) and enabled calculation of a risk score (Drug-Induced Liver Toxicity ALF Score). We found a cut-off score that identified patients at high risk patients for ALF with a sensitivity value of 0.91 (95% CI, 0.71-0.99) and a specificity value of 0.76 (95% CI, 0.75-0.77). This cut-off score identified patients at high risk for ALF with a high level of sensitivity (0.89; 95% CI, 0.52-1.00) in the validation analysis. Hy's Law identifies patients with DILI at high risk for ALF with low sensitivity but high specificity. We developed a model (the Drug-Induced Liver Toxicity ALF Score) based on platelet count and total bilirubin level that identifies patients at increased risk for ALF with high sensitivity.

[PMID: 25683797]
Using liver laboratory tests (LLTs), Hy's law is a method used to identify drug-induced liver injury (DILI), after excluding other causes. Elevated LLTs in chemotherapy-exposed patients may result from tumor effects or comorbidities. This study evaluated incidence of Hy's law in chemotherapy-treated cancer patients. We identified breast, colorectal, and lung cancer patients diagnosed in 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2007 at a Midwestern health system. Using automated data, potential Hy's law (PHL) cases were defined by patterns of elevated LLTs suggestive of DILI. Among those treated with chemotherapy, we excluded PHL patients with pre-existing conditions that could cause liver injury, producing a cohort meeting Hy's law criteria, according to automated data. Medical record review, conducted among these automated data-derived Hy's law patients, further excluded those with causes of liver injury other than chemotherapy. Using automated data, among chemotherapy-exposed patients (N = 2788), 91 (3.3%) met PHL criteria using LLTs and 64 (2.3%) met Hy's law after excluding underlying liver injury using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision codes. After a medical record review, 62 of 64 patients qualifying as Hy's law through automated data had other potential causes, leaving two patients (0.07%; 95%CI: 0.01-0.24%) with chemotherapy as a likely alternative cause of liver injury. Abnormal LLTs are common in chemotherapy-treated patients. Medical record review showed that the incidence of Hy's law events is rare. These data provide context for evaluating DILI in clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance of anticancer therapies, understanding that automated data alone may substantially overestimate the number of Hy's law cases.