[PMID: 23843625]
Angiogenin (ANG) promotes cell growth and survival. Under growth conditions, ANG undergoes nuclear translocation and accumulates in the nucleolus where it stimulates rRNA transcription. When cells are stressed, ANG mediates the production of tRNA-derived stress-induced small RNA (tiRNA), which reprograms protein translation into a survival mechanism. The ribonucleolytic activity of ANG is essential for both processes but how this activity is regulated is unknown. We report here that ribonuclease/angiogenin inhibitor 1 (RNH1) controls both the localization and activity of ANG. Under growth conditions, ANG is located in the nucleus and is not associated with RNH1 so that the ribonucleolytic activity is retained to ensure rRNA transcription. Cytoplasmic ANG is associated with and inhibited by RNH1 so that random cleavage of cellular RNA is prevented. Under stress conditions, ANG is localized to the cytoplasm and is concentrated in stress granules where it is not associated with RNH1 and thus remains enzymatically active for tiRNA production. By contrast, nuclear ANG is associated with RNH1 in stressed cells to ensure that the enzymatic activity is inhibited and no unnecessary rRNA is produced to save anabolic energy. Knockdown of RNH1 abolished stress-induced relocalization of ANG and decreased cell growth and survival.

[PMID: 11443914]
The review is devoted to angiogenin, one of the factors that induce formation of blood vessels, which is unique among them in that it is a ribonuclease. Consideration is given to the tertiary structure of human angiogenin; the catalytic and cell-receptor binding sites, their significance for angiogenic activity; the human angiogenin gene structure, chromosomal localization, and expression; the specificity of angiogenin as a ribonuclease and abolishment of protein synthesis; the nuclear localization of angiogenin in proliferating endothelial cells and its significance for angiogenic activity; angiogenin binding to a cell-surface actin as a plausible mechanism of inducing neovascularization (enhancement of plasminogen activation by actin with angiogenin, stimulation of the cell-associated proteolytic activity by angiogenin; promotion of the cultured cells invasiveness); modulation of mitogenic stimuli in endothelial, smooth muscle, and fibroblast cells by angiogenin. The importance of angiogenin as an adhesive molecule for endothelial and tumor cells is discussed too, as well as the modulation of tubular morphogenesis by bovine angiogenin, prevention of tumor growth in vivo by angiogenin antagonists, prospects of the use of angiogenin and angiogenin-encoding recombinant plasmids and vaccinia virus in therapeutic practice.

[PMID: 7945327]
Angiogenin is endocytosed by subconfluent endothelial cells, translocated to the nucleus and accumulates in the nucleolus. It also localizes into the nucleolus of digitonin-permeabilized endothelial cells. The peptide RRRGL corresponding to residues 31-35 of human angiogenin specifically targets non-nuclear carrier proteins such as albumin, an anti-human nucleolus monoclonal antibody and R33A angiogenin to the nucleolus of permeabilized endothelial cells. Proteins conjugated with a "mutant" peptide, RRAGL, are not imported. Fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated RRRGL is also rapidly imported into the nucleus and localized to the nucleolus, whereas the "mutant" peptide is not. Residue R33 is essential for nuclear translocation and R31 and R32 appear to modulate this process. Thus, 31RRRGL35 is a nuclear localization signal responsible for the nucleolar targeting of human angiogenin.

[PMID: 24603325]
Amyloidogenic 'gain-of-function' mutations in apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) gene (APOA1) result in systemic amyloidosis characterized by aggregate deposition and eventually cell death. However, how amyloidogenic variants of ApoA-I induce cell death is unknown. Here we report that one of the mechanisms by which amyloidogenic ApoA-I induces cell death is through attenuating anti-stress activity of angiogenin (ANG), a homeostatic protein having both pro-growth and pro-survival functions. Under growth conditions, ANG is located in nucleolus where it promotes ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcription thereby stimulating cell growth. In adverse conditions, ANG is relocated to cytoplasm to promote damage repairs and cell survival. We find that in cells overexpressing the L75P-APOA1 mutant ANG expression is decreased and normal cellular localization of ANG is altered in response to stress and growth signals. In particular, ANG does not relocate to cytoplasm under stress conditions but is rather retained in the nucleolus where it continues promoting rRNA transcription, thus imposing a ribotoxic effect while simultaneously compromising its pro-survival activity. Consistently, we also find that addition of exogenous ANG protects cells from L75P-ApoA-I-induced apoptosis.

[PMID: 9299500]
Exogenous angiogenin undergoes rapid nuclear translocation in cultured human umbilical artery endothelial cells at 37 degrees C but not at 4 degrees C. Treatment of cells with colchicine, nocodazole and taxol, which disrupt the microtubule system, does not affect the nuclear translocation process of angiogenin, suggesting that cells transport internalized angiogenin in a microtubule independent fashion. Lysosomal inhibitors, chloroquine and leupeptin, neither inhibit nor enhance the nuclear translocation of angiogenin, indicating that lysosomal targeting and processing are not required for, and do not compete with, the nuclear translocation. Moreover, treatment of cells with a tyrosine kinase antagonist, genistein, does not change the ability of the cells to translocate angiogenin into the nucleus. We suggest that exogenous angiogenin is translocated to the nucleus by a mechanism that does not require activation of tyrosine kinase, but includes receptor-mediated endocytosis, microtubule and lysosome independent transport across the cytoplasm, and nuclear localization sequence-assisted nuclear import.

[PMID: 22384259]
Mutations in the coding region of angiogenin (ANG) gene have been found in patients suffering from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Neurodegeneration results from the loss of angiogenic ability of ANG (protein coded by ANG). In this work, we performed extensive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of wild-type ANG and disease associated ANG variants to elucidate the mechanism behind the loss of ribonucleolytic activity and nuclear translocation activity, functions needed for angiogenesis. MD simulations were carried out to study the structural and dynamic differences in the catalytic site and nuclear localization signal residues between WT-ANG (Wild-type ANG) and six mutants. Variants K17I, S28N, P112L and V113I have confirmed association with ALS, while T195C and A238G single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) encoding L35P and K60E mutants respectively, have not been associated with ALS. Our results show that loss of ribonucleolytic activity in K17I is caused by conformational switching of the catalytic residue His114 by 99°. The loss of nuclear translocation activity of S28N and P112L is caused by changes in the folding of the residues (31)RRR(33) that result in the reduction in solvent accessible surface area (SASA). Consequently, we predict that V113I will exhibit loss of angiogenic properties by loss of nuclear translocation activity and L35P by loss of both ribonucleolytic activity and nuclear translocation activity. No functional loss was inferred for K60E. The MD simulation results were supported by hydrogen bond interaction analyses and molecular docking studies. Conformational switching of catalytic residue His114 seems to be the mechanism causing loss of ribonucleolytic activity and reduction in SASA of nuclear localization signal residues (31)RRR(33) results in loss of nuclear translocation activity in ANG mutants. Therefore, we predict that L35P mutant, would exhibit loss of angiogenic functions, and hence would correlate with ALS while K60E would not show any loss.

[PMID: 18246300]
Angiogenin, a potent angiogenic factor, was cloned and expressed by Escherichia coli and then purified with gel filtration chromatography. Approximately 90% pure angiogenin was obtained to generate a monoclonal antibody. Using western immunoblotting and ELISA, we confirmed that monoclonal antibody C46 secreted from hybridoma cells stably and specifically binds to angiogenin. The fused protein angiogenin-EGF was then expressed in HUVECs, and the subcellular localization of the recombinant protein was determined by confocal microscopy and TEM assay. Recombinant angiogenin was found to mainly concentrate in the pars granulosa of the nucleus, where the protein accumulates to form ribonucleoprotein particles.

[PMID: 22438557]
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is etiologically associated with the angioproliferative Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). KSHV infection and the expression of latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA-1) upregulates the angiogenic multifunctional 123-amino-acid, 14-kDa protein angiogenin (ANG), which is detected in KS lesions and in KSHV-associated primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cells. ANG knockdown or the inhibition of ANG's nuclear translocation resulted in decreased LANA-1 gene expression and reduced KSHV-infected endothelial and PEL cell survival (Sadagopan et al., J. Virol. 83:3342-3364, 2009). Further studies here demonstrate that LANA-1 and ANG colocalize and coimmunoprecipitate in de novo infected endothelial cells and in latently infected PEL (BCBL-1 and BC-3) cells. LANA-1 and ANG interaction occurred in the absence of the KSHV genome and other viral proteins. In gel filtration chromatography analyses of BC-3 cell lysates, ANG coeluted with LANA-1, p53, and Mdm2 in high-molecular-weight fractions, and LANA-1, p53, and Mdm2 also coimmunoprecipitated with ANG. LANA-1, ANG, and p53 colocalized in KSHV-infected cells, and colocalization between ANG and p53 was also observed in LANA-1-negative cells. The deletion constructs of ANG suggested that the C-terminal region of amino acids 104 to 123 is involved in LANA-1 and p53 interactions. Silencing ANG or inhibiting its nuclear translocation resulted in decreased nuclear LANA-1 and ANG levels, decreased interactions between ANG-LANA-1, ANG-p53, and LANA-1-p53, the induction of p53, p21, and Bax proteins, the increased cytoplasmic localization of p53, the downregulation of Bcl-2, the increased cleavage of caspase-3, and the apoptosis of cells. No such effects were observed in KSHV-negative BJAB cells. The phosphorylation of p53 at serine 15, which is essential for p53 stabilization and for p53's apoptotic and cell cycle regulation functions, was increased in BCBL-1 cells transduced with short hairpin RNA targeting ANG. Together, these studies suggest that the antiapoptosis observed in KSHV-infected cells and the suppression of p53 functions are mediated in part by ANG, and KSHV has probably evolved to utilize angiogenin's multiple functions for the maintenance of its latency and cell survival. Thus, targeting ANG to induce the apoptosis of cells latently infected with KSHV is an attractive therapeutic strategy against KSHV infection and associated malignancies.

[PMID: 21528671]
Human malignant melanoma is a very aggressive and highly angiogenesis-dependent tumor. Basic fibroblast growth factor and angiogenin are the potentially important angiogenic factors for melanoma progression and metastasis. Many studies have mainly focused on how they induce angiogenesis. In the present study, we investigated the effects of basic fibroblast growth factor on the expression of angiogenin and melanoma cell growth. Angiogenin mRNA and protein expression were investigated by means of semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay and western blotting. We analyzed cell proliferation using MTT, flow cytometry and soft agar assay. Immunofluorescence staining was applied to investigate co-localization and nuclear translocation. We found that basic fibroblast growth factor negatively affected the expression of angiogenin in A375 cells. The result showed that down-regulation of basic fibroblast growth factor induced decreased cell proliferation ofA375 cells, and in basic fibroblast growth factor up-regulated cells, cell proliferation was increased. We demonstrated that basic fibroblast growth factor protein was co-localized with angiogenin and that it underwent nuclear translocation in A375 cells. These findings suggest that there is a cooperation mechanism between basic fibroblast growth factor and angiogenin in A375 cells, and the cooperation mechanism affects the progress of tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis.