[PMID: 26904946]
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) protein complexes, including cohesin and condensin, play key roles in the regulation of higher-order chromosome organization. Even though SMC proteins are thought to mechanistically determine the function of the complexes, their native conformations and dynamics have remained unclear. Here, we probe the topology of Smc2-Smc4 dimers of the S. cerevisiae condensin complex with high-speed atomic force microscopy (AFM) in liquid. We show that the Smc2-Smc4 coiled coils are highly flexible polymers with a persistence length of only ∼ 4 nm. Moreover, we demonstrate that the SMC dimers can adopt various architectures that interconvert dynamically over time, and we find that the SMC head domains engage not only with each other, but also with the hinge domain situated at the other end of the ∼ 45-nm-long coiled coil. Our findings reveal structural properties that provide insights into the molecular mechanics of condensin complexes.

[PMID: 16100111]
Smc2/4 forms the core of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae condensin, which promotes metaphase chromosome compaction. To understand how condensin manipulates DNA, we used two in vitro assays to study the role of SMC (structural maintenance of chromosome) proteins and ATP in reconfiguring the path of DNA. The first assay evaluated the topology of knots formed in the presence of topoisomerase II. Unexpectedly, both wild-type Smc2/4 and an ATPase mutant promoted (+) chiral knotting of nicked plasmids, revealing that ATP hydrolysis and the non-SMC condensins are not required to compact DNA chirally. The second assay measured Smc2/4-dependent changes in linking number (Lk). Smc2/4 did not induce (+) supercoiling, but instead induced broadening of topoisomer distributions in a cooperative manner without altering Lk(0). To explain chiral knotting in substrates devoid of chiral supercoiling, we propose that Smc2/4 directs chiral DNA compaction by constraining the duplex to retrace its own path. In this highly cooperative process, both (+) and (-) loops are sequestered (about one per kb), leaving net writhe and twist unchanged while broadening Lk. We have developed a quantitative theory to account for these results. Additionally, we have shown at higher molar stoichiometries that Smc2/4 prevents relaxation by topoisomerase I and nick closure by DNA ligase, indicating that Smc2/4 can saturate DNA. By electron microscopy of Smc2/4-DNA complexes, we observed primarily two protein-laden bound species: long flexible filaments and uniform rings or "doughnuts." Close packing of Smc2/4 on DNA explains the substrate protection we observed. Our results support the hypothesis that SMC proteins bind multiple DNA duplexes.

[PMID: 12783798]
Proper chromatin condensation and sister chromatid resolution are essential for the maintenance of chromosomal integrity during cell division, and is in part mediated by a conserved multisubunit apparatus termed the condensin complex. The core subunits of the complex are members of the SMC2 (Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes) and SMC4 gene families. We have cloned an Arabidopsis gene, AtCAP-E1, which is a functional ortholog of the yeast SMC2 gene. A second, highly homologous SMC2 gene, AtCAPE-2, was identified by the Arabidopsis genome project. SMC2 gene expression in Arabidopsis was correlated with the mitotic activity of tissues, with high level expression observed in meristematic cells. The two genes are differentially expressed with AtCAP-E1 accounting for more than 85% of the total SMC2 transcript pool. The titan3 mutant is the result of a T-DNA insertion into AtCAP-E1, but other than subtle endosperm defects, titan3 is viable and fecund. We identified a T-DNA insertion mutant of AtCAP-E2, which showed no obvious mutant phenotype, indicating that the two genes are functionally redundant. Genetic crosses were employed to examine the consequences of reduced SMC2 levels. Both male and female gametogenesis were compromised in double mutant spores. Embryo lethality was observed for both double homozygous and AtCAP-E1(-/-), AtCAP-E2(+/-) plants; arrest occurred at or before the globular stage and was associated with altered planes of cell division in both the suspensor and the embryo. Down regulation of both genes by antisense technology, as well as in AtCAP-E1(+/-), AtCAP-E2(-/-) plants results in meristem disorganization and fasciation. Our data are consistent with the interpretation that threshold levels of SMC2 proteins are required for normal development and that AtCAP-E2 may have a higher affinity for its target than AtCAP-E1.

[PMID: 10811823]
We have characterized five genes encoding condensin components in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. All genes are essential for cell viability and encode proteins that form a complex in vivo. We characterized new mutant alleles of the genes encoding the core subunits of this complex, smc2-8 and smc4-1. Both SMC2 and SMC4 are essential for chromosome transmission in anaphase. Mutations in these genes cause defects in establishing condensation of unique (chromosome VIII arm) and repetitive (rDNA) regions of the genome but do not impair sister chromatid cohesion. In vivo localization of Smc4p fused to green fluorescent protein showed that, unexpectedly, in S. cerevisiae the condensin complex concentrates in the rDNA region at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. rDNA segregation in mitosis is delayed and/or stalled in smc2 and smc4 mutants, compared with separation of pericentromeric and distal arm regions. Mitotic transmission of chromosome III carrying the rDNA translocation is impaired in smc2 and smc4 mutants. Thus, the condensin complex in S. cerevisiae has a specialized function in mitotic segregation of the rDNA locus. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis revealed that condensin is physically associated with rDNA in vivo. Thus, the rDNA array is the first identified set of DNA sequences specifically bound by condensin in vivo. The biological role of higher-order chromosome structure in S. cerevisiae is discussed.

[PMID: 25300489]
The structural organization of chromosomes is essential for their correct function and dynamics during the cell cycle. The assembly of DNA into chromatin provides the substrate for topoisomerases and condensins, which introduce the different levels of superhelical torsion required for DNA metabolism. In particular, Top2 and condensin are directly involved in both the resolution of precatenanes that form during replication and the formation of the intramolecular loop that detects tension at the centromeric chromatin during chromosome biorientation. Here we show that histone depletion activates the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) and impairs sister chromatid decatenation, leading to chromosome mis-segregation and lethality in the absence of the SAC. We demonstrate that histone depletion impairs chromosome biorientation and activates the Aurora-dependent pathway, which detects tension problems at the kinetochore. Interestingly, SAC activation is suppressed by the absence of Top2 and Smc2, an essential component of condensin. Indeed, smc2-8 suppresses catenanes accumulation, mitotic arrest and growth defects induced by histone depletion at semi-permissive temperature. Remarkably, SAC activation by histone depletion is associated with condensin-mediated alterations of the centromeric chromatin. Therefore, our results reveal the importance of a precise interplay between histone supply and condensin/Top2 for pericentric chromatin structure, precatenanes resolution and centromere biorientation.

[PMID: 12719426]
To better understand the contributions that the structural maintenance of chromosome proteins (SMCs) make to condensin activity, we have tested a number of biochemical, biophysical, and DNA-associated attributes of the Smc2p-Smc4p pair from budding yeast. Smc2p and Smc4p form a stable heterodimer, the "Smc2/4 complex," which upon analysis by sedimentation equilibrium appears to reversibly self-associate to form heterotetramers. Individually, neither Smc2p nor Smc4p hydrolyzes ATP; however, ATPase activity is recovered by equal molar mixing of both purified proteins. Hydrolysis activity is unaffected by the presence of DNA. Smc2/4 binds both linearized and circular plasmids, and the binding appears to be independent of adenylate nucleotide. High mole ratios of Smc2/4 to plasmid promote a geometric change in circular DNA that can be trapped as knots by type II topoisomerases but not as supercoils by a type I topoisomerase. Binding titration analyses reveal that two Smc2/4-DNA-bound states exist, one disrupted by and one resistant to salt challenge. Competition-displacement experiments show that Smc2/4-DNA-bound species formed at even high protein to DNA mole ratios remain reversible. Surprisingly, only linear and supercoiled DNA, not nicked-circular DNA, can completely displace Smc2/4 prebound to a labeled, nicked-circular DNA. To explain this geometry-dependent competition, we present two models of DNA binding by SMCs in which two DNA duplexes are captured within the inter-coil space of an Smc2/4 heterodimer. Based on these models, we propose a DNA displacement mechanism to explain how differences in geometry could affect the competitive potential of DNA.

[PMID: 11846874]
The titan (ttn) mutants of Arabidopsis exhibit striking alterations in chromosome dynamics and cell division during seed development. Endosperm defects include aberrant mitoses and giant polyploid nuclei. Mutant embryos differ in cell size, morphology and viability, depending on the locus involved. Here we demonstrate that three TTN genes encode chromosome scaffold proteins of the condensin (SMC2) and cohesin (SMC1 and SMC3) classes. These proteins have been studied extensively in yeast and animal systems, where they modulate chromosome condensation, chromatid separation, and dosage compensation. Arabidopsis contains single copies of SMC1 and SMC3 cohesins. We used forward genetics to identify duplicate T-DNA insertions in each gene. These mutants (ttn7 and ttn8) have similar titan phenotypes: giant endosperm nuclei and arrested embryos with a few small cells. A single SMC2 knockout (ttn3) was identified and confirmed by molecular complementation. The weak embryo phenotype observed in this mutant may result from expression of a related gene (AtSMC2) with overlapping functions. Further analysis of titan mutants and the SMC gene family in Arabidopsis should provide clues to chromosome mechanics in plants and insights into the regulation of nuclear activity during endosperm development.

[PMID: 10749931]
This work describes BRN1, the budding yeast homologue of Drosophila Barren and Xenopus condensin subunit XCAP-H. The Drosophila protein is required for proper chromosome segregation in mitosis, and Xenopus protein functions in mitotic chromosome condensation. Mutant brn1 cells show a defect in mitotic chromosome condensation and sister chromatid separation and segregation in anaphase. Chromatid cohesion before anaphase is properly maintained in the mutants. Some brn1 mutant cells apparently arrest in S-phase, pointing to a possible function for Brn1p at this stage of the cell cycle. Brn1p is a nuclear protein with a nonuniform distribution pattern, and its level is up-regulated at mitosis. Temperature-sensitive mutations of BRN1 can be suppressed by overexpression of a novel gene YCG1, which is homologous to another Xenopus condensin subunit, XCAP-G. Overexpression of SMC2, a gene necessary for chromosome condensation, and a homologue of the XCAP-E condensin, does not suppress brn1, pointing to functional specialization of components of the condensin complex.

[PMID: 10485849]
The condensin complex in frog extracts, containing two SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) and three non-SMC subunits, promotes mitotic chromosome condensation, and its supercoiling activity increases during mitosis by Cdc2 phosphorylation. Here, we report that fission yeast has the same five-member condensin complex, each of which is essential for mitotic condensation. The condensin complex was purified and the subunits were identified by microsequencing. Cnd1, Cnd2, and Cnd3, three non-SMC subunits showing a high degree of sequence conservation to frog subunits, are essential for viability, and their gene disruption leads to a phenotype indistinguishable from that observed in cut3-477 and cut14-208, known mutations in SMC4 and SMC2-like subunits. Condensin subunits tagged with GFP were observed to alter dramatically their localization during the cell cycle, enriched in the nucleus during mitosis, but cytoplasmic during other stages. This stage-specific alteration in localization requires mitosis-specific phosphorylation of the T19 Cdc2 site in Cut3. The T19 site is phosphorylated in vitro by Cdc2 kinase and shows the maximal phosphorylation in metaphase in vivo. Its alanine substitution mutant fails to suppress the temperature-sensitive phenotype of cut3-477, and shows deficiency in condensation, probably because Cut3 T19A remains cytoplasmic. Therefore, direct Cdc2 phosphorylation of fission yeast condensin may facilitate its nuclear accumulation during mitosis.