[PMID: 16400831]
There is no single test that is diagnostic of MS, including MRI. The lesions detected with MRI are pathologically nonspecific. The principles of MS diagnosis are based on showing dissemination of white matter lesions in space and time. MRI is the most sensitive method for revealing asymptomatic dissemination of lesions in space and time. The pattern and evolution of MRI lesions, in the appropriate clinical setting, has made MRI abnormalities invaluable criteria for the early diagnosis of MS. The first important role for MRI in the diagnosis of MS allows for an early diagnosis of MS for CIS patients using the IP diagnostic criteria, including MRI for dissemination in space (DIS) and time (DIT). The sensitivity of diagnosing MS within the first year after a single attack is 94%, with a specificity of 83%. The MRI evidence required to support the diagnosis varies, depending on the strength of the clinical findings. Allowing a new MRI lesion to substitute for a clinical attack doubles the number of CIS patients who can be diagnosed as having MS within 1 year of symptom onset. Increasing the sensitivity of the test with more lenient criteria, as recommended by the AAN subcommittee, can result in decreased specificity. The second important role for MRI in the diagnostic work-up of suspected MS patients is to rule out alternative diagnoses obvious on MRI, such as spinal stenosis and most brain tumors. Characteristic lesions that favor MS include Dawson Fingers, ovoid lesions, corpus callosum lesions, and asymptomatic spinal cord lesions. However, other white matter diseases can have similar appearances on MRI. Persistent gadolinium enhancement greater than three months, lesions with mass effect, and meningeal enhancement suggest other disorders. A standardized MRI protocol for brain and spinal cord is crucial for comparing across studies or between centers. T2W MRI cannot distinguish between acute and chronic lesions. Gadolinium provides useful information about new lesion activity and is helpful in ruling out alternative diagnoses such as neoplasm, vascular malformations, and leptomeningeal disease. A single gadolinium-enhanced MRI can potentially provide evidence for dissemination in space and time. Spinal cord imaging is equally valuable to rule out spinal stenosis or tumor, and for detecting asymptomatic lesions when brain imaging is nondiagnostic in patients suspected of having MS. Precise criteria may be too suggestive that MS can be diagnosed by MRI and a negative MRI at the time of CIS does not rule out MS. MRI evidence plays a supportive role in what is ultimately a clinical diagnosis of MS, in the appropriate clinical situation, and always at the exclusion of alternative diagnoses.

[PMID: 10919200]
Magnetic resonance is the most sensitive para-clinical method available for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis since it shows changes in 95% of the patients with clinically definite multiple sclerosis. However, little correlation has been found, in different studies, between the parameters of magnetic resonance and the degree of neurological disability. The development and gradual application of new techniques of magnetic resonance, which permit specific detection of the lesions with the greatest degree of nerve dysfunction, permits improvement in the use of this technique for study of the natural history of the disease and thus to monitor patients given new treatments.

[PMID: 3208208]
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been shown to be a good method of visualizing the lesions in MS. We have studied several applications of MRI to the evaluation of patients and experimental models. In diagnosis, MRI is the most sensitive test for the demonstration of dissemination of lesions in space. Pathological correlation studies show that MRI reliably measures the extent of chronic demyelination. Experimental studies show that MRI detects acute inflammatory lesions and measures their evolution. MRI also is a reliable measure of the extent of the MS process, serial MRI scans detect evidence of disease activity in MS not always disclosed by clinical evaluation. MRI will have an enormous future impact on the evaluation of patients in clinical studies and in understanding the evolution of pathological processes.

[PMID: 20003089]
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a sensitive paraclinical test for diagnosis and assessment of disease progression in multiple sclerosis (MS) and is often used to evaluate therapeutic efficacy. The formation of new T2-hyperintense MRI lesions is commonly used to measure disease activity, but lacks specificity because edema, inflammation, gliosis, and axonal loss all contribute to T2 lesion formation. As the role of neurodegeneration in the pathophysiology of MS has become more prominent, the formation and evolution of chronic or persistent Tl-hypointense lesions (black holes) have been used as markers of axonal loss and neuronal destruction to measure disease activity. Despite the use of various detection methods, including advanced imaging techniques such as magnetization transfer imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy, correlation of persistent black holes with clinical outcomes in patients with MS remains uncertain. Furthermore, although axonal loss and neuronal tissue destruction are known to contribute to irreversible disability in patients with MS, there are limited data on the effect of therapy on longitudinal change in Tl-hypointense lesion volume. Measurement of black holes in clinical studies may elucidate the underlying pathophysiology of MS and may be an additional method of evaluating therapeutic efficacy.

[PMID: 6830166]
The results of cerebrospinal fluid agarose gel electrophoresis in 300 consecutive patients were correlated with neurological examinations and diagnoses, other cerebrospinal fluid studies, and the results of evoked potential examinations. The presence of oligoclonal bands was the most sensitive test for multiple sclerosis (MS); bands were present in from 100% (11/11) of patients with definite MS to 82% (27/33) of those with possible MS (classified by McAlpine criteria). The visual evoked response was the next most sensitive study. Thirty-eight patients without MS or related disorders had bands in the IgG region. Three patients had plasma cell dyscrasias. Seven patients had thick single bands. Single bands did not correlate with chronic polyneuropathy but appeared to be an artifact of storage. Twenty-eight patients had active neurological disease, including cerebral infarction (in 5), viral infection (in 4), remote effect of carcinoma (in 4), and acute and chronic polyneuropathies (in 6). In acute illnesses (i.e., vascular insults), repeat electrophoresis showed disappearance of bands. In continually active disease, bands persisted. These results indicate that the presence of oligoclonal bands provides sensitive supporting evidence for the diagnosis of MS but that bands may be present in other disorders, including those not directly related to infection or abnormal immune response. The data suggest that oligoclonal bands may represent an immune response to neurological injury that is prominent in disorders with a particularly intense or continuous antigenic stimulus.

[PMID: 7629529]
The yield of paraclinical tests was evaluated in a prospective study of 189 consecutive patients referred for suspected multiple sclerosis (142 patients with multiple sclerosis, 47 non-multiple sclerosis patients on discharge). Patients were first classified according to the Poser criteria by the clinical findings. Subsequently, the results of paraclinical tests (cranial MRI, visually evoked potentials (VEPs), somatosensory evoked potentials by tibial nerve stimulation (SSEPs), motor evoked potentials (MEPs), and analysis of CSF for oligoclonal banding and IgG-index (CSF)) were taken into account. The percentage of reclassified patients (reclassification sensitivity, RS) was always lower than the percentage of abnormal results (diagnostic sensitivity, DS), and the divergence of RS v DS differed between the tests (60% v 84% in MRI, 31% v 77% in CSF, 29% v 37% in VEPs, 20% v 68% in MEPs, and 12% v 46% in SSEPs respectively). False reclassifications of non-multiple sclerosis patients to multiple sclerosis would have occurred with all tests (MRI: six of 47 patients, (reclassification specificity 88%); CSF: one (98%); VEPs: two (96%); MEPs: two (96%); SSEPs: four (91%); P < 0.05). Although MRI had superior diagnostic capacity, 57 of the 142 patients with multiple sclerosis were not reclassified by the MRI result, 12 of whom were reclassified by CSF and 18 by one of the evoked potential (EP) studies. Of the 98 patients not reclassified by CSF, 53 were reclassified by MRI and 39 by EPs. The results suggest that for the evaluation of paraclinical tests in suspected multiple sclerosis, comparison of diagnostic sensitivities is inappropriate. In general, a cranial MRI contributes most to the diagnosis; however, due to its comparatively low specificity and its considerable number of negative results, EP or CSF studies are often useful to establish the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis.

[PMID: 1449838]
The relation between the results of 7 biological markers (cells, total protein, albumin, IgG, IgG ratio, Tibbling ratio, and Tourtellotte's formula) and 4 paraclinical tests (PEV, PEATC, CT and MR) in 236 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) not selected by the localization of symptoms were studied. One hundred forty-one had clinically defined MS, 22 had defined MS supported by a laboratory and 68 had clinically probable MS. The existence of a relation between PEV and MRI abnormality and the increase in the concentration and the ratios of intrathecal IgG synthesis and the degree of certainty of disease diagnosis was demonstrated. The most sensitive test was MRI (93%) followed by VEP (83%) and BAEP (60%) and the sensitivity of the study with high resolution CT including 59 patients explored by double enhancement and delayed cut off was very low (33%). It was considered that for the lack of a specific diagnostic test the use of biological markers PEV and MR constituted a necessary aid in the diagnosis of MS.

[PMID: 2795066]
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has recently been recognised as the most sensitive method with which to detect clinically silent lesions in patients affected by multiple sclerosis. Visually guided horizontal saccadic eye movements (SEM) were studied, together with MRI, in 57 multiple sclerosis patients. A very similar sensitivity was found for both MRI (78.2%) and SEM analysis (76.3%). Significant associations between peak saccadic velocity and brain stem signs and between saccadic latency and visual signs were observed.

[PMID: 8164014]
The sensitivities and predictive values of visual, somatosensory, and brain auditory evoked potentials (EPs), cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal banding (CSF-OB) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were evaluated for the early diagnosis of clinically definite multiple sclerosis (CDMS). Paraclinical evidence of asymptomatic lesions allows a diagnosis of CDMS. Eighty-two patients in whom MS was suspected but diagnosis of CDMS was not possible entered the study prospectively. Paraclinical examinations were performed at entry. Patients were examined and underwent EPs every 6 months, and MRI yearly. After a mean follow-up of 2.9 years, 28 patients (34%) had developed CDMS (McDonald-Halliday criteria). The initial MRI was strongly suggestive of MS in 19 of these (68%), while 27 (96%) had at least one MS-like abnormality in the initial MRI. CSF-OB and EPs had lower sensitivities. CDMS developed during follow-up in 19 of the 36 patients (53%) who had an initial MRI strongly suggestive of MS but in only 1 of the 25 who had normal MRI when first studied. These results support previous conclusions that MRI is the most sensitive test for detecting white matter asymptomatic lesions, and the most predictive for the diagnosis of CDMS.