[PMID: 17498659]
BRD7 is an important protein tightly associated with Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Overexpression of BRD7 inhibits NPC cell growth and cell cycle by transcriptionally regulating the cell cycle related genes. BRD7 contains a bromodomain that is found in many chromatin-associated proteins and in nearly all known nuclear histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and plays an important role in chromatin remodeling and transcriptional activation. Here, we report the solution structure of BRD7 bromodomain determined by NMR spectroscopy, and its binding specificity revealed by NMR titration with several acetylated histone peptides. We find that BRD7 bromodomain contains the typical left-handed four-helix bundle topology, and can bind with weak affinity to lysine-acetylated peptides derived from histone H3 with K9 or K14 acetylated and from histone H4 with K8, K12 or K16 acetylated. Our results show that BRD7 bromodomain lacks inherent binding specificity when binding to histones in vitro.

[PMID: 17148447]
The BET (bromodomains and extra terminal domain) family proteins recognize acetylated chromatin through their bromodomain and act as transcriptional activators. One of the BET proteins, BRD2, associates with the transcription factor E2F, the mediator components CDK8 and TRAP220, and RNA polymerase II, as well as with acetylated chromatin during mitosis. BRD2 contains two bromodomains (BD1 and BD2), which are considered to be responsible for binding to acetylated chromatin. The BRD2 protein specifically recognizes the histone H4 tail acetylated at Lys12. Here, we report the crystal structure of the N-terminal bromodomain (BD1, residues 74-194) of human BRD2. Strikingly, the BRD2 BD1 protein forms an intact dimer in the crystal. This is the first observation of a homodimer among the known bromodomain structures, through the buried hydrophobic core region at the interface. Biochemical studies also demonstrated BRD2 BD1 dimer formation in solution. The two acetyllysine-binding pockets and a negatively charged secondary binding pocket, produced at the dimer interface in BRD2 BD1, may be the unique features that allow BRD2 BD1 to selectively bind to the acetylated H4 tail.

[PMID: 17694091]
Histone lysine acetylation is central to epigenetic control of gene transcription. The bromodomain, found in chromatin-associated proteins and histone acetyltranferases, functions as the sole protein module known to bind acetyl-lysine motifs. Recent structural and functional analyses of bromodomains' recognition of lysine-acetylated peptides derived from major acetylation sites in histones and cellular proteins provide new insights into differences in ligand binding selectivity as well as unifying features of histone recognition by the bromodomains. These new findings highlight the functional importance of bromodomain/acetyl-lysine binding as a pivotal mechanism for regulating protein-protein interactions in histone-directed chromatin remodeling and gene transcription. These new studies also support the notion that functional diversity of a conserved bromodomain structural fold is achieved by evolutionary changes of structurally flexible amino-acid sequences in the ligand binding site such as the ZA and BC loops.

[PMID: 10827952]
TFIID is a large multiprotein complex that initiates assembly of the transcription machinery. It is unclear how TFIID recognizes promoters in vivo when templates are nucleosome-bound. Here, it is shown that TAFII250, the largest subunit of TFIID, contains two tandem bromodomain modules that bind selectively to multiply acetylated histone H4 peptides. The 2.1 angstrom crystal structure of the double bromodomain reveals two side-by-side, four-helix bundles with a highly polarized surface charge distribution. Each bundle contains an Nepsilon-acetyllysine binding pocket at its center, which results in a structure ideally suited for recognition of diacetylated histone H4 tails. Thus, TFIID may be targeted to specific chromatin-bound promoters and may play a role in chromatin recognition.

[PMID: 17848202]
Brd2 is a transcriptional regulator and belongs to BET family, a less characterized novel class of bromodomain-containing proteins. Brd2 contains two tandem bromodomains (BD1 and BD2, 46% sequence identity) in the N-terminus and a conserved motif named ET (extra C-terminal) domain at the C-terminus that is also present in some other bromodomain proteins. The two bromodomains have been shown to bind the acetylated histone H4 and to be responsible for mitotic retention on chromosomes, which is probably a distinctive feature of BET family proteins. Although the crystal structure of Brd2 BD1 is reported, no structure features have been characterized for Brd2 BD2 and its interaction with acetylated histones. Here we report the solution structure of human Brd2 BD2 determined by NMR. Although the overall fold resembles the bromodomains from other proteins, significant differences can be found in loop regions, especially in the ZA loop in which a two amino acids insertion is involved in an uncommon pi-helix, termed piD. The helix piD forms a portion of the acetyl-lysine binding site, which could be a structural characteristic of Brd2 BD2 and other BET bromodomains. Unlike Brd2 BD1, BD2 is monomeric in solution. With NMR perturbation studies, we have mapped the H4-AcK12 peptide binding interface on Brd2 BD2 and shown that the binding was with low affinity (2.9 mM) and in fast exchange. Using NMR and mutational analysis, we identified several residues important for the Brd2 BD2-H4-AcK12 peptide interaction and probed the potential mechanism for the specific recognition of acetylated histone codes by Brd2 BD2. Brd2 BD2 is monomeric in solution and dynamically interacts with H4-AcK12. The additional secondary elements in the long ZA loop may be a common characteristic of BET bromodomains. Surrounding the ligand-binding cavity, five aspartate residues form a negatively charged collar that serves as a secondary binding site for H4-AcK12. We suggest that Brd2 BD1 and BD2 may possess distinctive roles and cooperate to regulate Brd2 functions. The structure basis of Brd2 BD2 will help to further characterize the functions of Brd2 and its BET members.

[PMID: 17582821]
Bromodomains represent an extensive family of evolutionarily conserved domains that are found in many chromatin-associated proteins such as histone acetyltransferases (HAT) and subunits of ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complexes. These domains are associated with acetylated lysine residues that bind both in vivo and in vitro; for example, they bind to the N-acetylated lysines of the histone tail of nucleosomes. In this report, we determined the structure of the bromodomain from human brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1) protein, a subunit of an ATP-dependent switching/sucrose nonfermenting (SWI/SNF) remodeling complex, and have also characterized its in vitro interaction with N-acetylated lysine peptides from histones. In addition to a typical all-alpha-helical fold that was observed in the bromodomains, we observed for the first time a small beta-sheet in the ZA loop region of the BRG1 protein. The BRG1 bromodomain exhibited binding, albeit weak, to acetylated peptides that were derived from histones H3 and H4. We have compared the acetyl-lysine binding sites of BRG1 bromodomain with the yGCN5 (general control of amino acid biosynthesis). By modeling the acetylated-lysine peptide into the BRG1 bromodomain structure, we were able to explain the weak binding of acetylated-lysine peptides to this bromodomain.

[PMID: 11090279]
The solution structure of the bromodomain from the human transcriptional coactivator GCN5 has been determined using NMR methods. The structure has a left-handed four-helix bundle topology, with two short additional helices in a long connecting loop. A hydrophobic groove and deep hydrophobic cavity are formed by loops at one end of the molecule. NMR binding experiments show that the cavity forms a specific binding pocket for the acetamide moiety. Peptides containing an N(epsilon)-acetylated lysine residue bind in this pocket with modest affinity (K(D) approximately 0.9 mM); no comparable binding occurs with unacetylated peptides. The GCN5 bromodomain binds the small ligands N(omega)-acetylhistamine and N-methylacetamide, confirming specificity for the alkyl acetamide moiety and showing that the primary element of recognition is simply the sterically unhindered terminal acetamide moiety of an acetylated lysine residue. Additional experiments show that binding is enhanced if the acetyl-lysine residue occurs within the context of a basic peptide and is inhibited by the presence of nearby acidic residues and by the carboxyl group of the free acetyl-lysine amino acid. The binding of the GCN5 bromodomain to acetylated peptides appears to have little additional sequence dependence, although weak interactions with other regions of the peptide are implicated by the binding data. Discrimination between ligands of positive and negative charge is attributed to the presence of several acidic residues located on the loops that form the sides of the binding pocket. Unlike the residues forming the acetamide binding cavity, these acidic side-chains are not conserved in other bromodomain sequences, suggesting that bromodomains might display differences in substrate selectivity and specificity as well as differences in function in vivo.

[PMID: 17274598]
Human brahma-related gene 1 (Brg1) is a core protein in human SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex which regulates gene expression. Brg1 contains a bromodomain that has been shown to anchor the entire complex to promoter nucleosomes by interacting with histones that are acetylated at specific lysine residues. The Brg1 bromodomain belongs to an important subclass of the bromodomain family for which no structural information is known. Here we report the solution structure of the Brg1 bromodomain determined by NMR. The Brg1 bromodomain conserves the left-handed, four-helix bundle topology found in other bromodomain structures. However, the alphaZ helix of Brg1 bromodomain is about 4 residues shorter relative to previously published bromodomain structures. Using NMR perturbation studies, we demonstrate the Brg1 bromodomain binds acetyllysine in the context of histone tails, with no comparable affinity for unacetylated peptides. The estimated dissociation constants (KD) for acetylated histone peptides H4-AcK8 and H4-AcK12 are 4.0 and 3.6 mM, respectively. In this study the dominant substrate was H3-AcK14 (KD approximately 1.2 mM). Mutagenesis analysis reveals several residues important for the binding specificity. Using molecular dynamics simulations, we present a model of the Brg1 bromodomain in complex with H3-AcK14 and discuss the potential interactions which provide the selectivity of the Brg1 bromodomain for histone H3-AcK14.

[PMID: 10365964]
Histone acetylation is important in chromatin remodelling and gene activation. Nearly all known histone-acetyltransferase (HAT)-associated transcriptional co-activators contain bromodomains, which are approximately 110-amino-acid modules found in many chromatin-associated proteins. Despite the wide occurrence of these bromodomains, their three-dimensional structure and binding partners remain unknown. Here we report the solution structure of the bromodomain of the HAT co-activator P/CAF (p300/CBP-associated factor). The structure reveals an unusual left-handed up-and-down four-helix bundle. In addition, we show by a combination of structural and site-directed mutagenesis studies that bromodomains can interact specifically with acetylated lysine, making them the first known protein modules to do so. The nature of the recognition of acetyl-lysine by the P/CAF bromodomain is similar to that of acetyl-CoA by histone acetyltransferase. Thus, the bromodomain is functionally linked to the HAT activity of co-activators in the regulation of gene transcription.