[PMID: 26938566]
Cytokines are believed to be crucial mediators of chronic intestinal inflammation in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) such as Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Many of these cytokines trigger cellular effects and functions through signaling via janus kinase (JAK) and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules. In this way, JAK/STAT signaling controls important events like cell differentiation, secretion of cytokines or proliferation and apoptosis in IBD in both adaptive and innate immune cells. Moreover, JAK/STAT signaling, especially via the IL-6/STAT3 axis, is believed to be involved in the transition of inflammatory lesions to tumors leading to colitis-associated cancer (CAC). In this review, we will introduce the main cellular players and cytokines that contribute to pathogenesis of IBD by JAK/STAT signaling, and will highlight the integrative function that JAK/STATs exert in this context as well as their divergent role in different cells and processes. Moreover, we will explain current concepts of the implication of JAK/STAT signaling in CAC and finally discuss present and future therapies for IBD that interfere with JAK/STAT signaling.

[PMID: 27928945]
JAK/STAT signal pathway, a requisite part in the signaling process of growth factors and cytokines, has become attractive targets for numerous immune, inflammatory and hematopoietic diseases. Herein, we present a review of the JAK/STAT signal pathway, the structure, biological function, mechanism of the JAKs and STATs along with a summary of the up-to-date clinical or approved JAK inhibitors which are involved in the treatment of various kinds of tumors and other immunity indications. Moreover, kinds of recently discovered JAKs inhibitors with potent activity or promising selectivity are also briefly discussed. Research and development of isoform selective JAK inhibitors has become a hot topic in this field. With the assistance of high throughput screening and rational drug design, more and more JAK inhibitors with improved selective profiles will be discovered as biological probes and even therapeutic agents.

[PMID: 26398764]
Gastric carcinoma remains one of the most prevalent forms of cancer worldwide, despite the decline in incidence rates, increased awareness of the disease and advancement in treatment strategies. Helicobacter pylori infection, dietary factors, lifestyle influences and various genetic aberrations have been shown to contribute to the development and progression of gastric cancer. Recent studies on the genomic landscape of gastric adenocarcinoma have identified several key signaling molecules, including epidermal growth factor receptor family (ErbB) members, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor family (VEGFR) members and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway components, that have been implicated in the molecular pathogenesis of gastric cancers. However, clinical trials with compounds that target these molecules have failed to show a significant improvement in overall survival rates when supplemented with conventional therapies. Therefore, it is essential to identify effective prognostic and/or diagnostic biomarkers and develop molecular targeted therapies. The JAK/STAT cascade is a principal signal transduction pathway in cytokine and growth factor signaling, regulating various cellular processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation, migration and survival. Numerous in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that dysregulated JAK/STAT signaling is a driving force in the pathogenesis of various solid cancers as well as hematopoietic malignancies. Hence, a large number of preclinical and clinical studies of drugs targeting this pathway are currently underway. Notably, aberrant JAK/STAT signaling has also been implicated in gastric cancers. In this review, we focus on the ongoing research on the JAK/STAT cascade in gastric carcinoma and discuss the therapeutic potential of targeting JAK/STAT signaling for the treatment of gastric cancer.

[PMID: 28716890]
Cytokines are key modulators of immunity. Most cytokines use the Janus kinase and signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway to promote gene transcriptional regulation, but their signals must be attenuated by multiple mechanisms. These include the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family of proteins, which represent a main negative regulation mechanism for the JAK-STAT pathway. Cytokine-inducible Src homology 2 (SH2)-containing protein (CIS), SOCS1, and SOCS3 proteins regulate cytokine signals that control the polarization of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells and the maturation of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. SOCS proteins also regulate innate immune cells and are involved in tumorigenesis. This review summarizes recent progress on CIS, SOCS1, and SOCS3 in T cells and tumor immunity.

[PMID: 27713030]
The Janus Kinase/Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway is utilized by numerous cytokines and interferons, and is essential for the development and function of both innate and adaptive immunity. Aberrant activation of the JAK/STAT pathway is evident in neuroinflammatory diseases such as Multiple Sclerosis and Parkinson's Disease. Innate immunity is the front line defender of the immune system and is composed of various cell types, including microglia, macrophages and neutrophils. Innate immune responses have both pathogenic and protective roles in neuroinflammation, depending on disease context and the microenvironment in the central nervous system. In this review, we discuss the role of innate immunity in the pathogenesis of neuroinflammatory diseases, how the JAK/STAT signaling pathway regulates the innate immune response, and finally, the potential for ameliorating neuroinflammation by utilization of JAK/STAT inhibitors.

[PMID: 22284190]
The Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway is involved in many cellular processes, including cell growth and differentiation, immune functions and cancer. It is activated by various cytokines, growth factors, and protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and regulates the transcription of many genes. Of the four JAK isoforms and seven STAT isoforms known, JAK2 and STAT3 are highly expressed in the brain where they are present in the postsynaptic density (PSD). Here, we demonstrate a new neuronal function for the JAK/STAT pathway. Using a variety of complementary approaches, we show that the JAK/STAT pathway plays an essential role in the induction of NMDA-receptor dependent long-term depression (NMDAR-LTD) in the hippocampus. Therefore, in addition to established roles in cytokine signaling, the JAK/STAT pathway is involved in synaptic plasticity in the brain.

[PMID: 28914550]
Stimulation of the cholinergic inflammatory pathway can attenuate collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and inhibit synovitis by Janus kinase (JAK) 2 and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 3 signaling. Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) protein can also regulate the inflammatory processes and activate JAK/STAT signal transduction, but its involvement in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has not been demonstrated. This study investigated the effect of SOCS on cholinergic pathway regulation of synovitis in the fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) of RA and CIA mice. The effects of nicotine on SOCS1 and SOCS3 protein expression in FLSs were assayed by western blotting before and after transfection with a small interfering RNA oligonucleotide (SOCS3-siRNA or control-siRNA). Interleukin-6 was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of SOCS3-siRNA and control-siRNA transfected FLS culture supernatants. Histopathological evaluation and immunohistochemical staining of SOCS3 were performed in joint tissue sections of control, CIA model, vagotomy, and nicotine-treated DBA/1 mice. Nicotine increased SOCS3 expression in the FLSs of RA. The inhibitory effect of nicotine on inflammatory factors was abolished by siRNA knockdown of SOCS3 protein expression. Nicotine increased the expression of SOCS3 protein in the synovium and reduced synovitis and bone erosion in CIA mice.

[PMID: 23827161]
The Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway constitute the fulcrum in many vital cellular processes, including cell growth, differentiation, proliferation, and regulatory immune functions. Various cytokines, growth factors, and protein tyrosine kinases communicate through the JAK/STAT pathway and regulate the transcription of numerous genes. In addition to their critical roles in a plethora of key cellular activities, the JAK/STAT signaling pathways also have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), especially since a JAK inhibitor recently has been shown to be effective in the treatment of ulcerative colitis. The aim of this review is to highlight the recent findings on the regulatory mechanism of JAK/STAT signaling pathways and to reveal the evolving comprehension of their interface which might be of interest for clinicians involved in IBD therapy. Further, it is described how these signaling pathways have been exploited for the development of promising novel JAK inhibitors with anti-inflammatory effects verified in clinical trials.

[PMID: 12479803]
The JAK/STAT pathway was originally identified in mammals. Studies of this pathway in the mouse have revealed that JAK/STAT signaling plays a central role during hematopoeisis and other developmental processes. The role of JAK/STAT signaling in blood appears to be conserved throughout evolution, as it is also required during fly hematopoeisis. Studies in Dictyostelium, Drosophila, and zebrafish have shown that the JAK/STAT pathway is also required in an unusually broad set of developmental decisions, including cell proliferation, cell fate determination, cell migration, planar polarity, convergent extension, and immunity. There is increasing evidence that the versatility of this pathway relies on its cooperation with other signal transduction pathways. In this review, we discuss the components of the JAK/STAT pathway in model organisms and what is known about its requirement in cellular and developmental processes. In particular, we emphasize recent insights into the role that this pathway plays in the control of cell movement.