[PMID: 29753094]
Microphthalmia, anophthalmia are the malformations of the eye, referring to a congenital absence, and a reduced size of the eyeball. Coloboma of iris is associated with many of the cases. Here, we report a propositus with eye anomalies and intellectual disability associated with TENM3 pathogenic variations identified by exome sequencing and confirms intellectual disability as a phenotype associated with TENM3 variations. This child was compound heterozygote [NM_001080477.3(TENM3):c.4046C > G; p.(Ala1349Gly) and NM_001080477.3(TENM3): c.7687C > T; p.(Arg2563Trp)] for the missense likely pathogenic sequence variations in TENM3 gene. To our knowledge only three patients till now have been reported to have TENM3 pathogenic variations in association with microphthalmia, two siblings without developmental delay and third with developmental delay. This report supports the association of TENM3 variations with colobomatous microphthalmia and expands the phenotypic spectrum associated with pathogenic variations in this gene.

[PMID: 17522144]
Developmental eye anomalies, which include anophthalmia (absent eye) or microphthalmia (small eye) are an important cause of severe visual impairment in infants and young children. Heterozygous mutations in SOX2, a SOX1B-HMG box transcription factor, have been found in up to 10% of individuals with severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia and such mutations could also be associated with a range of non-ocular abnormalities. We performed mutation analysis on a new cohort of 120 patients with congenital eye abnormalities, mainly anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) were used to detect whole gene deletion. We identified four novel intragenic SOX2 mutations (one single base deletion, one single base duplication and two point mutations generating premature translational termination codons) and two further cases with the previously reported c.70del20 mutation. Of 52 patients with severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia analysed by MLPA, 5 were found to be deleted for the whole SOX2 gene and 1 had a partial deletion. In two of these, FISH studies identified sub-microscopic deletions involving a minimum of 328 Kb and 550 Kb. The SOX2 phenotypes include a patient with anophthalmia, oesophageal abnormalities and horseshoe kidney, and a patient with a retinal dystrophy implicating SOX2 in retinal development. Our results provide further evidence that SOX2 haploinsufficiency is a common cause of severe developmental ocular malformations and that background genetic variation determines the varying phenotypes. Given the high incidence of whole gene deletion we recommend that all patients with severe microphthalmia or anophthalmia, including unilateral cases be screened by MLPA and FISH for SOX2 deletions.

[PMID: 26250054]
SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome is an uncommon autosomal dominant syndrome caused by mutations in the SOX2 gene and clinically characterized by severe eye malformations (anophthalmia/microphthalmia) and extraocular anomalies mainly involving brain, esophagus, and genitalia. In this work, a patient with the SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome and exhibiting a novel dental anomaly is described. SOX2 genotyping in this patient revealed an apparently de novo c.70del20 deletion, a commonly reported SOX2 mutation. A review of the phenotypic variation observed in patients carrying the recurrent SOX2 c.70del20 mutation is presented. Although dental anomalies are uncommonly reported in the SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome, we suggest that a dental examination should be performed in patients with SOX2 mutations.

[PMID: 30515001]
Anophthalmia is congenital absence of the eyes; it may be unilateral or bilateral. Though rare, it occurs worldwide. It usually occurs in association with other systemic malformations. Therefore, the case of a female child delivered in University Clinic Center Tuzla is presented here with bilateral anophthalmia. The diagnosis was confirmed with an ocular computer tomography (CT) scan that showed under development of both globes within the orbit with a conclusion of bilateral anophthalmia. No other anomalies were found. This is unique case in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as according to the literature this is the first case of anophthalmia presented in this region. Currently two years ago she is followed both in ophthalmic and pediatric clinic at University Clinical Center in Tuzla.

[PMID: 20704474]
Anophthalmia is the congenital absence of ocular tissue from the orbit. Many syndromes and malformations (e.g., anophthalmia-esophageal-genital syndrome, Matthew-Wood syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, oculo-facial-cardio-dental-syndome, heterotaxy, and Fraser syndrome) have been associated with anophthalmia. However, its relation with congenital heart disease has not been fully elucidated. In this article, we discuss two cases of patients with anophthalmia and congenital heart defects, and we compare these findings with other syndromes with which anophthalmia has been associated. One of our two patients showed complex congenital heart disease with heterotaxia, polysplenia, and normal lung lobation. These findings may reflect a new dimension of anophthalmia, heterotaxia, and congenital heart disease associations.

[PMID: 30262714]
Congenital anophthalmia is a rare eye anomaly which lacks a recognizable eye in the orbit. It can be isolated (nonsyndromic) or be observed as a sign of other diseases (syndromic). A Chinese infant was born with bilateral anophthalmia and palpebral fissure closures. Ocular and systemic examinations were performed, and genomic DNA was prepared from peripheral leukocytes. The coding exons and the adjacent intrinsic sequence of <i>SOX2</i> were analysed by Sanger sequencing. A c.70_89del (p. Asn24ArgfsX65; rs398123693) mutation in <i>SOX2</i> was identified in the Chinese infant with bilateral clinical anophthalmia and sensorineural hearing loss. Thismutation was not detected in the unaffected parents and 150 unaffected control individuals.Mutation in <i>SOX2</i> is associated with bilateral clinical anophthalmia and probablywith other anomalies in the Chinese infant. Until nowhearing loss has not been reported in individuals with <i>SOX2</i> mutation. The results remind us that clinical anophthalmia may be accompanied by sensorineural hearing loss and may be associated with <i>SOX2</i> mutation, and it will contribute to improving diagnosis and patient care. Given that children with anophthalmia already have reduced sight, it seems worthwhile to make a point of careful vigilance on hearing for all such patients.

[PMID: 27785411]
Clinical anophthalmia is a rare inherited disease of the eye and phenotype refers to the absence of ocular tissue in the orbit of eye. Patients may have unilateral or bilateral anophthalmia, and generally have short palpebral fissures and small orbits. Anophthalmia may be isolated or associated with a broader syndrome and may have genetic or environmental causes. However, genetic cause has been defined in only a small proportion of cases, therefore, a consanguineous Pakistani family of the Pashtoon ethnic group, with isolated clinical anophthalmia was investigated using linkage mapping. A family pedigree was created to trace the possible mode of inheritance of the disease. Blood samples were collected from affected as well as normal members of this family, and screened for disease-associated mutations. This family was analyzed for linkage to all the known loci of clinical anophthalmia, using microsatellite short tandem repeat (STR) markers. Direct sequencing was performed to find out disease-associated mutations in the candidate gene. This family with isolated clinical anophthalmia, was mapped to the <i>SOX2</i> gene that is located at chromosome 3q26.3-q27. However, on exonic and regulatory regions mutation screening of the <i>SOX2</i> gene, the disease-associated mutation was not identified. It showed that another gene responsible for development of the eye might be present at chromosome 3q26.3-q27 and needs to be identified and screened for the disease-associated mutation in this family.

[PMID: 25071894]
Anophthalmia is a condition of the absence of an eye and the presence of a small eye within the orbit. It is associated with many known syndromes. Clinical findings, as well as imaging modalities and genetic analysis, are important in making the diagnosis. Imaging modalities are crucial scanning methods. Cryptophthalmos, cyclopia, synophthalmia and congenital cystic eye should be considered in differential diagnoses. We report two clinical anophthalmic siblings, emphasizing the importance of neuroradiological and orbital imaging findings in distinguishing true congenital anophthalmia from clinical anophthalmia.

[PMID: 28590501]
Anophthalmia is a rare eye development anomaly resulting in absent ocular globes or tissue in the orbit since birth. Here, we investigated a newborn with bilateral anophthalmia in a Chinese family. Exome sequencing revealed that compound heterozygous mutations c.287G > A (p.(Arg96His)) and c.709G > A (p.(Gly237Arg)) of the ALDH1A3 gene were present in the affected newborn. Both mutations were absent in all of the searched databases, including 10,000 in-house Chinese exome sequences, and these mutations were confirmed as having been transmitted from the parents. Comparative amino acid sequence analysis across distantly related species revealed that the residues at positions 96 and 234 were evolutionarily highly conserved. In silico analysis predicted these changes to be damaging, and in vitro expression analysis revealed that the mutated alleles were associated with decreased protein production and impaired tetrameric protein formation. This study firstly reported that compound heterozygous mutations of the ALDH1A3 gene can result in anophthalmia in humans, thus highlighting those heterozygous mutations in ALDH1A3 should be considered for molecular screening in anophthalmia, particularly in cases from families without consanguineous relationships.