[PMID: 23607685]
The molecular mechanisms by which hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4α regulates fetal liver development have not been fully elucidated. We screened the downstream molecules of HNF4α during liver development and identified sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter (SNAT)4. The aim of this study is to investigate the regulation of SNAT4 by HNF4α and to clarify its roles in differentiating hepatocytes. HNF4α was overexpressed in cultured liver buds using adenovirus, and suppression subtractive hybridization screening was performed. Temporal and spatial expression of SNAT4 during liver development was investigated. Regulation of SNAT4 by HNF4α was examined by promoter analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). Metabolic labeling and western blotting were carried out using primary hepatoblasts with SNAT4 overexpression. The expression of Slc38a4 encoding SNAT4 showed a marked perinatal increase, and was predominant among system A amino acid transporters. It was first detected in embryonic day 18.5 liver, and found in most hepatocytes after birth. Three alternative first exons were found in the SNAT4 gene. Promoter analyses using approximately 3-kb fragments corresponding to each first exon (AP1, AP2, AP3) revealed that AP1 and AP2 exhibited strong promoter activity in mouse hepatoblasts with endogenous HNF4α. Transactivation of AP2 was upregulated by HNF4α in HeLa cells without endogenous HNF4α. EMSA has demonstrated that HNF4α directly binds to cis-elements in AP2. Overexpression of SNAT4 facilitated amino acid uptake and de novo protein synthesis in primary hepatoblasts. SNAT4 functions downstream of HNF4α and plays significant roles in liver development through mechanisms of amino acid uptake and protein synthesis.

[PMID: 20657840]
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a post-transcriptional RNA surveillance process that facilitates the recognition and destruction of mRNAs bearing premature terminations codons (PTCs). Such PTC-containing (PTC+) mRNAs may arise from different processes, including erroneous processing and expression of pseudogenes, but also from more regulated events such as alternative splicing coupled NMD (AS-NMD). Thus, the NMD pathway serves both as a silencer of genomic noise and a regulator of gene expression. Given the early embryonic lethality in NMD deficient mice, uncovering the full regulatory potential of the NMD pathway in mammals will require the functional assessment of NMD in different tissues. Here we use mouse genetics to address the role of UPF2, a core NMD component, in the development, function and regeneration of the liver. We find that loss of NMD during fetal liver development is incompatible with postnatal life due to failure of terminal differentiation. Moreover, deletion of Upf2 in the adult liver results in hepatosteatosis and disruption of liver homeostasis. Finally, NMD was found to be absolutely required for liver regeneration. Collectively, our data demonstrate the critical role of the NMD pathway in liver development, function and regeneration and highlights the importance of NMD for mammalian biology.

[PMID: 29234104]
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4α) is a well established master regulator of liver development and function. We identified the in vitro presence of a stable secondary structure, G-quadruplex (G4) in the 5' UTR of P1-HNF4A, the predominant HNF4α isoform(s) in adult liver. Our data suggest that the cooperation of G4 and the adjacent putative protein-binding sites within the 5' UTR was necessary and sufficient to mediate a strong translational repression. This was supported by analysis of deleted/mutated 5'UTRs and two native regulatory single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the 5'UTR. Additional results indicated that G4 motifs in the 5' UTRs of other liver-enriched transcription factors also inhibited protein expression. Moreover, pyridostatin, a G4 ligand, specifically potentiated the translational suppressing effect of P1-HNF4A-5' UTR. In summary, the present study provides the first evidence of the presence of G4 in human P1-HNF4A-5' UTR in vitro, and establishes a novel working model of strong inhibition of protein translation via interactions of G4 with potential RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). The protein expression of the tumor suppressor HNF4α may be inhibited by interactions of RBPs with the G4 motif in the 5' UTR to promote cell proliferation during liver development and carcinogenesis.

[PMID: 29332143]
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4α) is a well-established master regulator of liver development and function. Restoration of HNF4α can treat multiple liver disorders and liver cancers. To date, HNF4α is still "undruggable" due to lack of known activating ligands. Thus, understanding the regulatory mechanism of HNF4α expression may help develop an alternative approach to modulate HNF4α protein levels. G-quadruplexes (G4) are non-canonical stable secondary structures discovered mostly in the promoters of oncogenes. Recent genome-wide studies demonstrate the enrichment of G4s in the 5' untranslated region (UTR). By protoporphyrin IX-binding assay and circular dichroism spectrum, we validated the presence of a chemically highly stable 4-ring G4 within the 5' UTR of mouse Hnf4a1. Our real-time PCR and Western blot data showed that the Hnf4a1 5' UTR caused a remarkable translational suppression regardless of a moderate effect on Hnf4a1 mRNA levels. The subsequent deletion/mutation analysis of Hnf4a1 5' UTR using dual-luciferase reporter assays further demonstrated that although the disruption of the chemically highly stable 4-ring G4 resulted in a marked attenuation of inhibition, the G4 alone only weakly inhibited translation. Likewise, disruption of a long stem-loop adjacent to the 4-ring G4 markedly attenuated translational inhibition, although the stem-loop alone only exerted a weak inhibitory effect. Thus, the tight conjunction of G4s and an adjacent stem-loop within the Hnf4a1 5' UTR was both necessary and sufficient to mediate the very strong translational repression. Our results establish a novel working model that a chemically stable G4 may require co-factors to be bio-stable for exerting biological functions.

[PMID: 27709008]
The liver is essential for survival due to its critical role in the regulation of metabolic homeostasis. Metabolism of xenobiotics, such as environmental chemicals and drugs by the liver protects us from toxic effects of these xenobiotics, whereas metabolism of cholesterol, bile acids (BAs), lipids, and glucose provide key building blocks and nutrients to promote the growth or maintain the survival of the organism. As a well-established master regulator of liver development and function, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4<i>α</i>) plays a critical role in regulating a large number of key genes essential for the metabolism of xenobiotics, metabolic wastes, and nutrients. The expression and activity of HNF4<i>α</i> is regulated by diverse hormonal and signaling pathways such as growth hormone, glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone, insulin, transforming growth factor-<i>β</i>, estrogen, and cytokines. HNF4<i>α</i> appears to play a central role in orchestrating the transduction of extracellular hormonal signaling and intracellular stress/nutritional signaling onto transcriptional changes in the liver. There have been a few reviews on the regulation of drug metabolism, lipid metabolism, cell proliferation, and inflammation by HNF4<i>α</i>. However, the knowledge on how the expression and transcriptional activity of HNF4<i>α</i> is modulated remains scattered. Herein I provide comprehensive review on the regulation of expression and transcriptional activity of HNF4<i>α</i>, and how HNF4<i>α</i> crosstalks with diverse extracellular and intracellular signaling pathways to regulate genes essential in liver pathophysiology.

[PMID: 18462375]
To know the precise mechanisms underlying the life or death and the regeneration or differentiation of cells would be relevant and useful for the development of a regenerative therapy for organ failure. Liver-specific gene expression is controlled primarily at a transcriptional level. Studies on the transcriptional regulatory elements of genes expressed in hepatocytes have identified several liver-enriched transcriptional factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1, HNF-3, HNF-4, HNF-6 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein families, which are key components of the differentiation process for the fully functional liver. The transcriptional regulation by these HNFs, which form a hierarchical and cooperative network, is both essential for hepatocyte differentiation during mammalian liver development and also crucial for metabolic regulation and liver function. Among these liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-4 is likely to act the furthest upstream as a master gene in transcriptional cascade and interacts with other liver-enriched transcriptional factors to stimulate hepatocyte-specific gene transcription. A link between the extracellular matrix, changes in cytoskeletal filament assembly and hepatocyte differentiation via HNF-4 has been shown to be involved in the transcriptional regulation of liver-specific gene expression. This review provides an overview of the roles of liver-enriched transcription factors in liver function.

[PMID: 30191603]
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α) is a master regulator of development and function of digestive tissues. The HNF4A gene uses two separate promoters P1 and P2, with P1 products predominant in adult liver, whereas P2 products prevalent in fetal liver, pancreas, and liver/colon cancer. To date, the mechanisms for the regulation of HNF4A and the dynamic switch of P1-HNF4α and P2-HNF4α during ontogenesis and carcinogenesis are still obscure. Our study validated the previously reported self-stimulation of P1-HNF4α but invalidated the reported synergism between HNF4α and HNF1α. HNF4A-AS1, a long noncoding RNA, is localized between the P2 and P1 promoters of HNF4A. We identified critical roles of P1-HNF4α in regulating the expression of HNF4A-AS1 and its mouse ortholog Hnf4a-os. Paired box 6 (PAX6), a master regulator of pancreas development overexpressed in colon cancer, cooperated with HNF1α to induce P2-HNF4α but antagonized HNF4α in HNF4A-AS1 expression. Thus, PAX6 may be important in determining ontogenic and carcinogenic changes of P2-HNF4α and HNF4A-AS1 in the pancreas and intestine. We also interrogated transactivation activities on multiple gene targets by multiple known and novel HNF4α mutants identified in patients with maturity onset diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1) and liver cancer. Particularly, HNF4α-D78A and HNF4α-G79S, two mutants found in liver cancer with mutations in DNA-binding domain, displayed highly gene-specific transactivation activities. Interestingly, HNF4α-Q277X, a MODY1 truncation mutant, antagonized the transactivation activities of HNF1α and farnesoid X receptor, key regulators of insulin secretion. Taken together, our study provides novel mechanistic insights regarding the transcriptional regulation and transactivation activity of HNF4α in digestive tissues.

[PMID: 25043045]
Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) and IDH2 are among the most common genetic alterations in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC), a deadly liver cancer. Mutant IDH proteins in IHCC and other malignancies acquire an abnormal enzymatic activity allowing them to convert α-ketoglutarate (αKG) to 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), which inhibits the activity of multiple αKG-dependent dioxygenases, and results in alterations in cell differentiation, survival, and extracellular matrix maturation. However, the molecular pathways by which IDH mutations lead to tumour formation remain unclear. Here we show that mutant IDH blocks liver progenitor cells from undergoing hepatocyte differentiation through the production of 2HG and suppression of HNF-4α, a master regulator of hepatocyte identity and quiescence. Correspondingly, genetically engineered mouse models expressing mutant IDH in the adult liver show an aberrant response to hepatic injury, characterized by HNF-4α silencing, impaired hepatocyte differentiation, and markedly elevated levels of cell proliferation. Moreover, IDH and Kras mutations, genetic alterations that co-exist in a subset of human IHCCs, cooperate to drive the expansion of liver progenitor cells, development of premalignant biliary lesions, and progression to metastatic IHCC. These studies provide a functional link between IDH mutations, hepatic cell fate, and IHCC pathogenesis, and present a novel genetically engineered mouse model of IDH-driven malignancy.

[PMID: 25263553]
Cell fate acquisition is heavily influenced by direct interactions between master regulators and tissue-specific enhancers. However, it remains unclear how lineage-specifying transcription factors, which are often expressed in both progenitor and mature cell populations, influence cell differentiation. Using in vivo mouse liver development as a model, we identified thousands of enhancers that are bound by the master regulators HNF4A and FOXA2 in a differentiation-dependent manner, subject to chromatin remodeling, and associated with differentially expressed target genes. Enhancers exclusively occupied in the embryo were found to be responsive to developmentally regulated TEAD2 and coactivator YAP1. Our data suggest that Hippo signaling may affect hepatocyte differentiation by influencing HNF4A and FOXA2 interactions with temporal enhancers. In summary, transcription factor-enhancer interactions are not only tissue specific but also differentiation dependent, which is an important consideration for researchers studying cancer biology or mammalian development and/or using transformed cell lines.