[PMID: 10932008]
To study the gene mutation of Chinese patients with achondroplasia(ACH) and to set up a simple and rapid molecular diagnostic method to differentiate ACH from other similar genetic dwarfism. The specific fragment of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3(FGFR3) transmembrane domain was amplified from dried blood spots of 21 patients with ACH and 6 suspicious patients with ACH by polymerase chain reaction, then mutation was screened and detected by restrictive enzyme analysis, single strand conformation polymorphism(SSCP) and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis(DGGE). One out of 6 suspicious cases was ACH and 5 were pseudoachondroplasia(PSACH). Twenty-one out of 22 patients with ACH bore a G to A transition at nucleotide 1138 and 1 bore a G to C transversion at this same position. The nucleotide 1138 of FGFR3 gene is also the hotspot of mutation in Chinese patients with ACH. A simple and rapid molecular diagnostic method has been set up to differentiate ACH from other similar genetic dwarfism.

[PMID: 10881785]
We report the case of a boy with achondroplasia and i(21q) Down syndrome. Besides craniofacial features typical in Down syndrome, the skeletal findings of achondroplasia dominate the clinical picture. The diagnosis of Down syndrome was based on clinical features and the cytogenetic finding of i(21q) trisomy 21. The diagnosis of achondroplasia was based on the presence of clinical and radiographic findings and confirmed by the presence of a common FGFR3 gene mutation (Gly380Arg) detected by restriction enzyme analysis and sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction products. This is the first report of achondroplasia associated with i(21q) Down syndrome.

[PMID: 9115628]
Achondroplasia (ACH) is the most frequent form of short-limb dwarfism. Recently, the gene mutation responsible for ACH has been identified in the transmembrane domain of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene. The cause of ACH is a point mutation at nucleotide 1138 of the cDNA, resulting in the substitution of an arginine residue for a glycine. For the purpose of prenatal diagnosis of ACH, we have used the nested polymerase chain reaction to ensure the gene amplification. Although the normal allele has no restriction site around the causative sequence, we have devised an unique method to incorporate a restriction site of SplI into the normal allele only using modified primer sets. We report here the use of this polymerase chain reaction methodology which can ensure the gene amplification and omit the complicated steps of sequencing for prenatal diagnosis.

[PMID: 7702086]
Achondroplasia is the most common type of genetic dwarfism. It is characterized by disproportionate short stature and other skeletal anomalies resulting from a defect in the maturation of the chondrocytes in the growth plate of the cartilage. Recent studies mapped the achondroplasia gene on chromosome region 4p16.3 and identified a common mutation in the gene encoding the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). In an analysis of 19 achondroplasia families from a variety of ethnic backgrounds we confirmed the presence of the G380R mutation in 21 of 23 achondroplasia chromosomes studied. In contrast, the G380R mutation was not found in any of the 8 hypochondroplasia chromosomes studied. Furthermore, linkage studies in a 3-generation family with hypochondroplasia show discordant segregation with markers in the 4p16.3 region suggesting that at least some cases of hypochondroplasia are caused by mutations in a gene other than FGFR3.

[PMID: 9949234]
To evaluate whether mutation in the exon 10 of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3(FGFR3) gene in common in Chinese patients with achondroplasia. Genomic DNA from seven sporadic cases of achondroplasia was studied by using PCR-SSCP and restriction enzymes. All patients carried the same glycine-to-arginine mutation at codon 380(G380R) of the transmembrane domain of FGFR3. The results suggest that the G380R mutation of FGFR3 is also a frequent mutation causing achondroplasia in Chinese. Detecting FGFR 3 gene mutation with PCR-SSCP and restriction enzymes analysis is a convenient, rapid and reliable molecular diagnostic assay for prenatal and early diagnosis of achondroplasia.

[PMID: 15221641]
Achondroplasia is a common form of human dwarfism with characteristically rhizomelic shortening of extremities and relative macrocephaly. It is transmitted as an autosomally dominant inheritance, and about 80% of affected individuals result from sporadic mutations without positive family histories. Achondroplasia comes from the genetic point mutations in the fibroblastic growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3), which enables abnormal cartilage growth-plate differentiation and insufficient bony development. The most common genetic mutations in this receptor are G to A at position 1138 (G1138A), which result in the substitution of glycine to arginine at codon 380. Based on genetic information, molecular genetic testing can provide an exact diagnosis comparing to radiological and prenatal ultrasound evaluations. Here we introduce denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) for the detection of 17 cases of achondroplasia and 120 unaffected cases. After coupling heteroduplex and fluorescence-enhanced primer-extension analysis, all affected patients with G1138A were identified successfully. In conclusion, we demonstrated that DHPLC is an efficient, accurate, and sensitive technique to detect the single gene mutation of achondroplasia in clinical applications.

[PMID: 12048679]
[corrected] To investigate the mutation at the transmembrane domain of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) nucleotide 1138 site for identifying the major pathologic mechanism of achondroplasia (ACH) and to evaluate the efficacy of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis(DGGE) method for screening the point mutations. The genomic DNA from 17 clinically diagnosed ACH patients where analysed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism(PCR-RFLP) with Sfc I and Msp I restriction endonucleases and by PCR-DGGE technique for screening. G to A transition mutation at nucleotide 1138 was detected in 14/17 of the ACH patients as heterozygotes by PCR-RFLP with Sfc I digestion. No 1138 G to C transition was detected by Msp I digestion. All of the 14 samples with G to A mutation were also found to be positive for point mutation by PCR-DGGE. No mutation was detected in 3 negative samples by PCR-RFLP, implying that there was actually no point mutation in this amplified region. Nucleotide 1138 in transmembrane domain of FGFR3 gene is the hot point for mutation in ACH and hence its major pathologic cause. PCR-DGGE is a sensitive and reliable technique for point mutation screening, especially for the heterozygotes.

[PMID: 21225389]
The simultaneous presence of Down syndrome and achondroplasia has rarely been reported in the literature, and our search revealed only six patients with such an association. We are reporting the first case of a patient with Down syndrome and hypochondroplasia. In this patient, Down syndrome was clinically recognised and confirmed by the cytogenetic finding of mosaic karyotype (47,XX,+21/46,XX) shortly after birth. She was subsequently diagnosed with hypochondroplasia at the age of 6 years when disproportional short stature, stocky habitus and macrocephaly were observed. These phenotypic findings were later confirmed by the presence of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene mutation N540K. The overlapping common clinical features of Down syndrome and hypochondroplasia resulted in delayed diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in our patient and the associated deleterious effect on her linear growth. Her final height is 126.5 cm, which is -3.76 standard deviations (SD) lower than the median height in patients with Down syndrome, and is under the lower borderline of the adult height range for women with hypochondroplasia.