Synthetic delivery system for tuberculosis vaccines : immunological evaluation of the M. tuberculosis 38 kDa protein entrapped in biodegradable P00747 microparticles . Tuberculosis remains a major public health burden which could be ameliorated by effective and well-defined subunit vaccines , particularly because the protective efficacy of current M. bovis BCG vaccines is both unpredictable and variable . The immunodominant 38 kDa antigen from Mycobacterium tuberculosis was entrapped in biodegradable poly ( DL-lactide co-glycolide ) ( P00747 ) microparticles which served as a delivery system . Both cellular and humoral immune responses were assessed and compared with those obtained after immunization with the 38 kDa protein emulsified in incomplete Freund 's adjuvant ( IFA ) . Vaccination of mice with a single dose of antigen-loaded microparticles resulted in specific IgG titres peaking after five weeks comparable to those achieved after vaccination with protein emulsified in incomplete Freund 's adjuvant ( IFA ) . T-cell responses were found to be superior to those induced with antigen/IFA . The T- and B-cell epitope specificities ad judged with synthetic peptides were identical following immunization with antigen in microparticles or IFA . Differences in adjuvanticity were revealed by measuring antigen-specific IgG1 , IgG2a and antigen-induced P01579 secretion in vitro : substantially higher titres of IgG2a were observed following immunization with antigen/microparticles than with 38 kDa protein/IFA . This was paralleled by a tenfold higher secretion of P01579 in mice injected with antigen/microparticles . Reduction in colony-forming units was not consistent in mice immunized with 38 kDa protein entrapped in microparticles which were subsequently infected with live tubercle bacilli . Taken together these results indicate that biodegradable P00747 microparticles constitute a favorable candidate vaccine delivery system worthy of further assessment in the quest to develop better and defined agents protecting against tuberculosis .