DB06366 monotherapy after trastuzumab-based treatment and subsequent reintroduction of trastuzumab : activity and tolerability in patients with advanced human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast cancer . PURPOSE : The combination of pertuzumab and trastuzumab resulted in a clinical benefit rate ( P16152 ) of 50 % in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ( P04626 ) -positive breast cancer whose disease progressed during prior trastuzumab-based therapy . To define whether this previously observed encouraging activity was a result of the combination of pertuzumab and trastuzumab or of pertuzumab alone , we recruited a third cohort of patients who received pertuzumab without trastuzumab . We then investigated the impact of reintroducing trastuzumab to patients whose disease progressed on pertuzumab monotherapy . PATIENTS AND METHODS : Twenty-nine patients with P04626 -positive breast cancer whose disease progressed during prior trastuzumab-based therapy received pertuzumab ( 840 mg loading dose , then 420 mg every 3 weeks ) until progressive disease or unacceptable toxicity . Seventeen patients with disease progression continued to receive pertuzumab ( at the same dose ) , with the addition of trastuzumab ( 4 mg/kg loading dose and then 2 mg/kg weekly or 8 mg/kg loading dose and then 6 mg/kg every 3 weeks ) . RESULTS : All 29 patients enrolled for pertuzumab monotherapy experienced disease progression . The objective response rate ( ORR ) and P16152 were 3.4 % and 10.3 % , respectively , during pertuzumab monotherapy . With the addition of trastuzumab , the ORR and P16152 were 17.6 % and 41.2 % , respectively . Progression-free survival was longer with combination therapy than pertuzumab monotherapy ( 17.4 v 7.1 weeks , respectively ) . Treatment was well tolerated with minimal cardiac dysfunction . CONCLUSION : Although pertuzumab has some activity in patients with P04626 -positive breast cancer that progressed during therapy with trastuzumab , the combination of pertuzumab and trastuzumab seems to be more active than monotherapy .