Reciprocal negative cross-talk between liver X receptors ( LXRs ) and P42224 : effects on IFN-γ-induced inflammatory responses and LXR-dependent gene expression . Liver X receptors ( LXRs ) exert key functions in lipid homeostasis and in control of inflammation . In this study we have explored the impact of LXR activation on the macrophage response to the endogenous inflammatory cytokine IFN-γ . Transcriptional profiling studies demonstrate that ∼38 % of the IFN-γ-induced transcriptional response is repressed by LXR activation in macrophages . LXRs also mediated inhibitory effects on selected IFN-γ-induced genes in primary microglia and in a model of IFN-γ-induced neuroinflammation in vivo . LXR activation resulted in reduced P42224 recruitment to the promoters tested in this study without affecting P42224 phosphorylation . A closer look into the mechanism revealed that SUMOylation of LXRs , but not the presence of nuclear receptor corepressor 1 , was required for repression of the NO synthase 2 promoter . We have also analyzed whether IFN-γ signaling exerts reciprocal effects on LXR targets . Treatment with IFN-γ inhibited , in a P42224 -dependent manner , the LXR-dependent upregulation of selective targets , including DB00171 -binding cassette A1 ( O95477 ) and sterol response element binding protein 1c . Downregulation of O95477 expression correlated with decreased cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein A1 in macrophages stimulated with IFN-γ . The inhibitory effects of IFN-γ on LXR signaling did not involve reduced binding of LXR/retinoid X receptor heterodimers to target gene promoters . However , overexpression of the coactivator Q92793 /p300 reduced the inhibitory actions of IFN-γ on the Abca1 promoter , suggesting that competition for Q92793 may contribute to P42224 -dependent downregulation of LXR targets . The results from this study suggest an important level of bidirectional negative cross-talk between IFN-γ/ P42224 and LXRs with implications both in the control of IFN-γ-mediated immune responses and in the regulation of lipid metabolism .