Identification of microRNAs involved in the modulation of pro-angiogenic factors in atherosclerosis by a polyphenol-rich extract from propolis . New vessel formation plays a critical role in the progression and vulnerability of atherosclerotic lesions . It has been shown that polyphenols from propolis attenuate the progression of atherosclerosis and also exert inhibitory effects on angiogenic factors . However , the mechanisms underlying these effects are not completely understood . Thus , this study aimed to identify microRNAs ( miRNAs ) involved in the modulation of pro-angiogenic factors in the atherosclerotic plaques of P01130 gene knockout mice treated with a polyphenol-rich extract of Chilean propolis . The progression of the atherosclerotic lesions was significantly attenuated in treated mice compared with control mice . Using microarray analysis and a bioinformatic approach , we identified 29 differentially expressed miRNAs . Many of these miRNAs were involved in biological processes associated with angiogenesis , such as the cell cycle , cell migration , cell growth and proliferation . Among them , three miRNAs ( miR-181a , miR-106a and miR-20b ) were over-expressed and inversely related to the expression of Vegfa ( vascular endothelial growth factor A ) and Hif1a ( hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha ) . In addition , P15692 protein expression was attenuated in histological sections obtained from the aortic sinuses of treated mice . P15692 is a key pro-angiogenic factor in atherosclerotic plaques , and Hif1a , which is expressed in the necrotic nucleus of the atheroma , is its main inducer . We found a correlation between the over-expression of miR-181a , miR-106a and miR-20b and their target genes , Hif1a and Vegfa , which is consistent with attenuation of the atherosclerotic lesion . In conclusion , our data analysis provides evidence that the anti-angiogenic effects of polyphenols from Chilean propolis can be modulated by miRNAs , in particular miR-181a , miR-106a and miR-20b .