Mitochondrial fragmentation in cigarette smoke-induced bronchial epithelial cell senescence . Mitochondria are dynamic organelles that continuously change their shape through fission and fusion . Disruption of mitochondrial dynamics is involved in disease pathology through excessive reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production . Accelerated cellular senescence resulting from cigarette smoke exposure with excessive ROS production has been implicated in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( P48444 ) . Hence , we investigated the involvement of mitochondrial dynamics and ROS production in terms of cigarette smoke extract ( CSE ) -induced cellular senescence in human bronchial epithelial cells ( HBEC ) . Mitochondrial morphology was examined by electron microscopy and fluorescence microscopy . Senescence-associated β-galactosidase staining and P38936 Western blotting of primary HBEC were performed to evaluate cellular senescence . Mitochondrial-specific superoxide production was measured by MitoSOX staining . Mitochondrial fragmentation was induced by knockdown of mitochondrial fusion proteins ( O60313 or Mitofusins ) by small-interfering RNA transfection . DB06151 and Mito-TEMPO were used as antioxidants . Mitochondria in bronchial epithelial cells were prone to be more fragmented in P48444 lung tissues . CSE induced mitochondrial fragmentation and mitochondrial ROS production , which were responsible for acceleration of cellular senescence in HBEC . Mitochondrial fragmentation induced by knockdown of fusion proteins also increased mitochondrial ROS production and percentages of senescent cells . HBEC senescence and mitochondria fragmentation in response to CSE treatment were inhibited in the presence of antioxidants . CSE-induced mitochondrial fragmentation is involved in cellular senescence through the mechanism of mitochondrial ROS production . Hence , disruption of mitochondrial dynamics may be a part of the pathogenic sequence of P48444 development .