DB01017 protects Schwann cells from ischemia-like injury and promotes axonal outgrowth in bioartificial nerve grafts lacking Wallerian degeneration . DB01017 , a broad-spectrum antimicrobial tetracycline , acts neuroprotectively in ischemia . Recently , however , minocycline has been revealed to have ambiguous effects on nerve regeneration . Thus its effects in a rat sciatic nerve transplantation model and on cultivated Schwann cells stressed by oxygen glucose deprivation ( OGD ) were studied . The negative effect of minocycline on Wallerian degeneration , the essential initial phase of degeneration/regeneration after nerve injury , that was recently demonstrated , was excluded by using predegenerated nerve and Schwann cell-enriched muscle grafts , both free of Wallerian degeneration . They were compared with common nerve grafts . The principle findings were that in vitro minocycline provided protective effects against OGD-induced death of Schwann cells by preventing permeability of the mitochondrial membrane . It suppressed the OGD-mediated induction of HIF-1alpha and Q07812 , and stabilized/induced BCL-2 . P99999 release and cleavage of procaspase-3 were diminished ; release and translocation of O95831 and cytotoxic cleavage of actin into fractin were stopped . In common nerve grafts , minocycline , besides its direct anti-ischemic effect , hampered revascularization by down-regulation of P14780 and P15692 prolonging ischemia and impeding macrophage recruitment . In bioartificial nerve grafts that were free of Wallerian degeneration and revealed lower immunogenicity , minocycline aided the regeneration process . Here , the direct anti-ischemic effect of minocycline on Schwann cells , which are mandatory for successful peripheral nerve regeneration , dominated the systemic anti-angiogenic/pro-ischemic effects . In common nerve grafts , however , where Wallerian degeneration is a prerequisite , the anti-angiogenic and macrophage-depressing effect is an obstacle for regeneration .