Targeting the epigenome in the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Epigenetic modification of gene expression by methylation of DNA and various post-translational modifications of histones may affect the expression of multiple inflammatory genes . Acetylation of histones by histone acetyltransferases activates inflammatory genes , whereas histone deacetylation results in inflammatory gene repression . Corticosteroids exert their antiinflammatory effects partly by inducing acetylation of antiinflammatory genes , but mainly by recruiting histone deacetylase-2 ( Q92769 ) to activated inflammatory genes . Q92769 deacetylates acetylated glucocorticoid receptors so that they can suppress activated inflammatory genes in asthma . In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( P48444 ) , there is resistance to the antiinflammatory actions of corticosteroids , which is explained by reduced activity and expression of Q92769 . This can be reversed by a plasmid vector , which restores Q92769 levels , but may also be achieved by low concentrations of theophylline . Oxidative stress causes corticosteroid resistance by reducing Q92769 activity and expression by activation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta , resulting in Q92769 phosphorylation via a cascade of kinases . DB00277 reverses corticosteroid resistance by directly inhibiting oxidant-activated O00329 and is mimicked by O00329 knockout or by selective inhibitors . Other treatments may also interact in this pathway , making it possible to reverse corticosteroid resistance in patients with P48444 , as well as in smokers with asthma and some patients with severe asthma in whom similar mechanisms operate . Other histone modifications , including methylation , tyrosine nitration , and ubiquitination may also affect histone function and inflammatory gene expression , and better understanding of these epigenetic pathways could led to novel antiinflammatory therapies , particularly in corticosteroid-resistant inflammation .