DB06693 reduces cartilage degradation in rabbit experimental osteoarthritis through inhibition of synovial inflammation . OBJECTIVE : To examine the therapeutic efficacy of an P04035 inhibitor ( statin ) in rabbit osteoarthritis ( OA ) in vitro and in vivo . METHODS : In the presence or absence of mevastatin , rabbit chondrocytes and synoviocytes were incubated with Interleukin-1beta ( IL-1beta ) , and analyzed by biochemical methods . Thirty-two mature rabbits that underwent bilateral anterior cruciate ligament transaction ( ACLT ) received six consecutive weekly intra-articular injections of mevastatin at three different concentrations or a control solution . All animals were sacrificed 6 weeks after ACLT , and the knee joints were assessed by morphological , histological , immunohistochemical , and biochemical methods . RESULTS : DB06693 inhibited IL-1beta stimulation of gene expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 ( P13500 ) and matrix-metalloproteinases 3 ( P08254 ) , in synoviocytes but not chondrocytes . The levels of P13500 and P08254 productions in synoviocytes were significantly reduced by statin-treatment . In rabbit with OA , intra-articular injection of mevastatin significantly reduced cartilage degradation , as assessed by morphological and histological examinations . Synovial tissues of knees treated with mevastatin showed less severe inflammatory responses with reduced thickness of synovial cell lining and less infiltration of subsynovial P34810 +monocyte lineage cells compared to untreated control knees . Relative mRNA expressions of P13500 , IL-1beta , P08254 , and P45452 were reduced in synovial tissues , but not articular cartilage , of knees treated with mevastatin compared with untreated control knees . CONCLUSION : During the development of experimental OA , intra-articular administration of P04035 inhibitor ( statin ) reduces inflammatory cell infiltration and matrix-degrading enzyme expression , thus limiting cartilage degradation .