DB00898 blocks leukocyte recruitment and endothelial cell activation in vivo and in vitro . Immune system impairment and increased susceptibility to infection among alcohol abusers is a significant but not well-understood problem . We hypothesized that acute ethanol administration would inhibit leukocyte recruitment and endothelial cell activation during inflammation and infection . Using LPS and carrageenan air pouch models in mice , we found that physiological concentrations of ethanol ( 1-5 g/kg ) significantly blocked leukocyte recruitment ( 50-90 % ) . Because endothelial cell activation and immune cell-endothelial cell interactions are critical regulators of leukocyte recruitment , we analyzed the effect of acute ethanol exposure on endothelial cell activation in vivo using the localized Shwartzman reaction model . In this model , ethanol markedly suppressed leukocyte accumulation and endothelial cell adhesion molecule expression in a dose-dependent manner . Finally , we examined the direct effects of ethanol on endothelial cell activation and leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions in vitro . DB00898 , at concentrations within the range found in human blood after acute exposure and below the levels that induce cytotoxicity ( 0.1-0.5 % ) , did not induce endothelial cell activation , but significantly inhibited P01375 -mediated endothelial cell activation , as measured by adhesion molecule ( P16581 , P05362 , P19320 ) expression and chemokine ( P10145 , P13500 , RANTES ) production and leukocyte adhesion in vitro . Studies exploring the potential mechanism by which ethanol suppresses endothelial cell activation revealed that ethanol blocked NF-kappaB nuclear entry in an P25963 -dependent manner . These findings support the hypothesis that acute ethanol overexposure may increase the risk of infection and inhibit the host inflammatory response , in part , by blocking endothelial cell activation and subsequent immune cell-endothelial cell interactions required for efficient immune cell recruitment .