Enhanced fracture repair by leukotriene antagonism is characterized by increased chondrocyte proliferation and early bone formation : a novel role of the cysteinyl LT-1 receptor . Inflammatory mediators and drugs which affect inflammation can influence the healing of injured tissues . Leukotrienes are potent inflammatory mediators , and similar to prostaglandins , are metabolites of arachidonic acid which can have positive or negative effects on bone and cartilage tissues . Here we tested the hypothesis that blocking the negative regulation of leukotrienes , would lead to enhanced endochondral bone formation during fracture repair . A closed femoral fracture was created in mice . Animals were divided into three groups for treatment with either montelukast sodium , a cysteinyl leukotriene type 1 receptor antagonist ( trade name Singulair ) , zileuton , a P09917 enzyme inhibitor ( trade name DB00744 ) , or carrier alone . The fractures were analyzed using radiographs , quantitative gene expression , histology and histomorphometry , and immunohistochemistry . Both the montelukast sodium group and the zileuton group exhibited enhanced fracture repair when compared with controls . Both treatment groups exhibited increased callous size and earlier bone formation when compared to controls as early as day 7 . Gene expression analysis of treatment groups showed increased markers of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation , and increased early bone formation markers when compared with controls . Treatment with montelukast sodium directly targeted the cysteinyl leukotriene type 1 receptor , leading to increased chondrocyte proliferation at early time points . These novel findings suggests a potential mechanism by which the cysteinyl leukotriene type 1 receptor acts as a negative regulator of chondrocyte proliferation , with important and previously unrecognized implications for both fracture repair , and in a broader context , systemic chondrocyte growth and differentiation .