Role of antispasmodics in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome . Irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS ) is a long-lasting , relapsing disorder characterized by abdominal pain/discomfort and altered bowel habits . Intestinal motility impairment and visceral hypersensitivity are the key factors among its multifactorial pathogenesis , both of which require effective treatment . Voltage-gated calcium channels mediate smooth muscle contraction and endocrine secretion and play important roles in neuronal transmission . Antispasmodics are a group of drugs that have been used in the treatment of IBS for decades . DB01616 citrate , a spasmolytic , decreases the sensitivity of smooth muscle contractile proteins to calcium , and it is a selective P08908 receptor antagonist . DB01616 , in combination with simethicone , has been demonstrated to effectively reduce abdominal pain and discomfort in a large placebo-controlled trial . Mebeverine is a musculotropic agent that potently blocks intestinal peristalsis . Non-placebo-controlled trials have shown positive effects of mebeverine in IBS regarding symptom control ; nevertheless , in recent placebo-controlled studies , mebeverine did not exhibit superiority over placebo . Otilonium bromide is poorly absorbed from the GI tract , where it acts locally as an L-type calcium channel blocker , an antimuscarinic and a tachykinin NK2 receptor antagonist . Otilonium has effectively reduced pain and improved defecation alterations in placebo-controlled trials in IBS patients . DB09090 bromide is also an L-type calcium channel blocker that acts locally in the GI tract . DB09090 improves motility disorders and consequently reduces stool problems in IBS patients . Phloroglucinol and trimethylphloroglucinol are non-specific antispasmodics that reduced pain in IBS patients in a placebo-controlled trial . Antispasmodics have excellent safety profiles . T-type calcium channel blockers can abolish visceral hypersensitivity in animal models , which makes them potential candidates for the development of novel therapeutic agents in the treatment of IBS .