P10275 is causally involved in the homeostasis of the human prostate endothelial cell . Androgen deprivation causes a reduction of blood flow in the prostate gland that precedes temporally apoptosis of the epithelium . The acute response of prostate endothelial cells to androgen deprivation suggested they represent a primary target for androgen . However , rat prostate endothelial cells were reported not to express androgen receptor ( AR ) , and the role of the androgen axis in human prostate endothelial cell ( HPEC ) homeostasis was poorly characterized . In this study AR expression was detected in HPEC in vivo in clinical specimens of benign prostate and prostate cancer , and AR function as a transcription factor was demonstrated in HPEC in primary xenografts of human benign prostate tissue transplanted into severe combined immunodeficient mice by iv administration of adenoviral mouse mammary tumor virus-driven luciferase expression vector . AR expression and functionality were maintained in vitro in primary cultures of HPEC that coexpressed CD31 , P28906 , P04275 , intercellular adhesion molecule , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 , and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 but did not express prostate-specific antigen . AR expression in primary cultures of HPEC isolated from surgical specimens of benign prostate was validated using RT-PCR , cDNA sequencing , immunocytochemistry , and Western blot analyses . Scatchard analyses demonstrated a single ligand-binding site for R1881 in primary cultures of HPEC , with dissociation constant of 0.25 nm , and AR-mediated transcriptional activity was demonstrated using adenoviral mouse mammary tumor virus-driven luciferase reporters . DB02901 increased proliferation in primary cultures of HPEC in a dose-dependent manner without modulating endothelial tube formation in Matrigel ( BD Biosciences , Bedford , MA ) . Therefore , HPECs express functional AR , and androgen plays a direct role in modulating HPEC biology .