The novel phospho-non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , P01178 -328 , MDC-22 and MDC-917 , inhibit adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats . BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE : The use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) is limited by their toxicity . We evaluated the anti-inflammatory efficacy and safety of three novel modified NSAIDs , phospho-aspirin , phospho-ibuprofen and phospho-sulindac . EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH : We determined the anti-inflammatory effects and gastrointestinal safety of the phospho-NSAIDs in the rat adjuvant arthritis model and studied their mechanism of action in cultured cells , Cytokines were measured with elisa and activation of nuclear factor-κB ( NF-κB ) by immunohistochemistry . KEY RESULTS : All three phospho-NSAIDs showed less gastrointestinal toxicity than their parent compounds and demonstrated strong anti-inflammatory effects , essentially reversing joint inflammation and oedema . They have a broad but not uniform effect on the expression of relevant cytokines , in general decreasing P05231 and IL-1β and increasing P22301 levels in rat plasma and cultured cells . Phospho-sulindac and phospho-ibuprofen but not phospho-aspirin suppressed PGE(2) production in vitro , whereas phospho-aspirin ( in contrast to aspirin ) showed the same effect in vivo . In joint tissues , phospho-aspirin inhibited NF-κB activation , and suppressed inflammation and bone resorption . Phospho-aspirin also inhibited Jurkat T cell proliferation . In general , phospho-aspirin had greater efficacy but different effects upon inflammatory mediators compared with aspirin . The chemical modification of the parent NSAIDs seems crucial for their safety and efficacy . CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS : Phospho-aspirin , phospho-ibuprofen and phospho-sulindac were safer than their parent NSAIDs , were highly effective in rat adjuvant arthritis and inhibited many key mediators in the pathophysiology of RA . These novel compounds are promising candidate drugs for the treatment of RA and merit further evaluation .