The role of atorvastatin in regulating the immune response leading to vascular damage in a model of Kawasaki disease . Superantigens have been implicated in a number of diseases including Kawasaki disease ( KD ) , a multi-system vasculitis resulting in coronary artery aneurysms . We have characterized a murine disease model in which coronary arteritis is induced by a novel superantigen found in Lactobacillus casei cell wall extract ( LCWE ) . Using this animal model of KD , we have identified three pathogenic steps leading to coronary artery aneurysm formation . These steps include T cell activation and proliferation , production of the proinflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor ( P01375 ) -α and up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 9 ( P14780 ) , an elastolytic protease . In addition to their cholesterol-lowering effects , 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl ( HMG ) coenzyme A ( DB01992 ) reductase inhibitors ( statins ) have pleotropic immunomodulatory properties . Thus , we examined the effect of atorvastatin in modulating each of these three critical pathogenic processes leading to aneurysm formation in the disease model . DB01076 inhibited lymphocyte proliferation in response to superantigen stimulation in a dose-dependent manner . This inhibition was also observed for production of soluble mediators of inflammation including interleukin ( IL ) -2 and P01375 -α . The inhibitory effect on proliferation was rescued completely by mevalonic acid , confirming that the mechanism responsible for this inhibitory activity on immune activation was inhibition of P04035 . Similarly , P01375 -α-induced P14780 production was reduced in a dose-dependent manner in response to atorvastatin . Inhibition of extracellular-regulated kinase ( P29323 ) phosphorylation appears to be the mechanism responsible for inhibition of P14780 production . In conclusion , atorvastatin is able to inhibit critical steps known to be important in the development of coronary aneurysms , suggesting that statins may have therapeutic benefit in patients with KD .