DB00054 pharmacodynamics are unaffected by antecedent therapy with other P08514 /IIIa antagonists in non-human primates . BACKGROUND : Tirofiban and eptifibatide are currently approved for the medical stabilization of non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syndromes . In patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention ( P05154 ) during infusion of these drugs , conversion to abciximab , which has long term proven clinical efficacy and cost-effectiveness , following P05154 may be desirable . The purpose of this study was to determine if the binding or pharmacodynamics of abciximab is affected by a prior infusion of either tirofiban or eptifibatide . METHODS : In vitro binding experiments were performed to determine if prior exposure to tirofiban or eptifibatide altered the affinity and extent of binding of abciximab to P08514 /IIIa . For in vivo experiments , cynomolgus monkeys were pretreated with a bolus and 18 hour infusion of saline , tirofiban , or eptifibatide . At the end of the initial treatment , a bolus and 12 hr infusion of abciximab was started without delay . Inhibition of platelet aggregation , P08514 /IIIa receptor blockade and abciximab pharmacokinetics were measured during and after both infusions . RESULTS : Equilibrium binding of abciximab in vitro was unaffected by tirofiban or eptifibatide . The extent and duration of abciximab inhibition of ex vivo platelet aggregation , receptor blockade , and abciximab pharmacokinetics in monkeys during and after the abciximab infusion were not affected by prior infusion of the animals with tirofiban or eptifibatide . CONCLUSIONS : In vitro and in vivo studies revealed that the molecular interaction of abciximab with the platelet P08514 /IIIa receptor is not altered by immediate prior exposure of platelets to small molecule P08514 /IIIa antagonists . These preclinical studies suggest that the efficacy of abciximab should not be impaired if it is initiated following termination of therapy with small molecule P08514 /IIIa antagonists .