Drug insight : cyclo-oxygenase 2 inhibitors and cardiovascular risk -- where are we now ? Cyclo-oxygenase ( P36551 ) 1 mediates the production of thromboxane A2 in platelets , leading to platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction . Conversely , P35354 catalyzes endothelial prostacyclin synthesis , which effectively counteracts thromboxane A2 , triggering vasodilation and platelet inhibition . Selective P35354 inhibitors decrease prostacyclin production , potentially disrupting homeostasis and creating a prothrombotic state . The VIGOR study findings of increased cardiovascular risk with rofecoxib were subsequently confirmed by large meta-analyses , observational studies and recent APPROVe trial publication . The P25054 trial findings of increased cardiovascular risk with DB00482 ( celecoxib ) conflict with those in the ADAPT trial , the upcoming PreSAP publication , a case-control study by Graham et al. and prior large clinical trials , meta-analyses and observational studies of this drug . Therefore , while an adverse class effect is a possibility for P35354 inhibitors , the published data are inconsistent . Baseline cardiovascular risk in patients might contribute significantly to these findings . In light of the negative Vioxx ( rofecoxib ) publicity , however , P35354 inhibitors might forever remain underinvestigated . The relative selectivity of these compounds for P35354 is extremely variable , casting significant doubt on the class-effect hypothesis . Improved endothelial function has also been reported with celecoxib , leading to endothelium-dependent vasodilation , and associated decreases in P02741 and LDL cholesterol . The addition of meloxicam to low-dose aspirin and heparin has improved clinical outcomes after acute coronary syndromes . These are the first studies suggesting improvement in endothelial function and reduction of inflammation with P35354 inhibition . Thus , more randomized controlled trials are needed to study the relative cardiovascular effects of different P35354 inhibitors , alone and in combination with aspirin .