Catecholamine-producing cells in the synovial tissue during arthritis : modulation of sympathetic neurotransmitters as new therapeutic target . BACKGROUND : The proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory role of the sympathetic nervous system in early and late inflammation is an unresolved paradox . A drastic loss of sympathetic nerve fibres in the synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) has previously been demonstrated . The presence of tyrosine hydroxylase ( TH ) -positive cells in RA and osteoarthritis ( OA ) has been determined , but the role of these cells in inflammation is still unclear . OBJECTIVE : To characterise TH-positive cells in inflamed RA and OA synovial tissue and to study their role in inflammation . METHODS : Synovial samples were obtained from 32 patients with OA and 19 patients with RA and from 10 control patients . Synovial tissue samples were used for immunofluorescence staining . Synovial cells were isolated by tissue digestion and immediately used for cell culture . For in vivo experiments , collagen type-II arthritis in DBA/1J mice was induced . RESULTS : TH+ cells were present only in inflamed tissue and not in controls . Catecholamine-storing vesicles and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 ( Q05940 ) were identified in the synovial tissue . Experimental increase of cytoplasmic catecholamines by Q05940 blockade strongly reduced tumour necrosis factor ( P01375 ) independently of canonical extracellular β-adrenergic signalling . In addition , Q05940 blockade increased cyclic AMP ( DB02527 ) and DB02527 responsive element binding protein , responsible for P01375 inhibition . In vivo , appearance of Q05940 positive cells was confirmed . Q05940 blockade ameliorated inflammation also in vivo . CONCLUSIONS : This study demonstrates that local catecholamine-producing cells start to replace sympathetic nerve fibres around the onset of disease , and modulation of locally produced catecholamines has strong anti-inflammatory effects in vivo and in vitro .