Bradykinin B2 receptor in the adrenal medulla of male rats and mice : glucocorticoid-dependent increase with immobilization stress . Bradykinin , acting via the bradykinin B2 receptor ( P30411 ) , is a potent stimulator of adrenomedullary catecholamine biosynthesis and release and likely plays an important role in the adrenomedullary stress response . However , the effects of stress on the expression of this receptor in the adrenal medulla are currently unclear . Here , we examined the changes in adrenomedullary P30411 gene expression in male rats in response to single ( 1 time ) and repeated ( 6 times ) exposure to 2 hours immobilization stress ( IMO ) . Immediately after 1 or 6 times IMO , P30411 mRNA levels were increased by 9-fold and 7-fold , respectively , and returned to unstressed control levels 3 hours later . This large , but transient , increase in mRNA elicited a doubling of protein levels 3 hours after the stress exposure . Next , the role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in the stress-induced upregulation of P30411 gene expression was examined . Treatment with endogenous ( corticosterone ) and synthetic ( dexamethasone ) glucocorticoids dose-dependently increased P30411 mRNA levels in adrenomedullary-derived PC12 cells . Furthermore , cortisol supplementation at levels mimicking stress exposure elevated P30411 mRNA levels in the adrenal medulla of hypophysectomized rats . In response to 1 exposure to IMO , the stress-triggered rise in plasma corticosterone and adrenomedullary P30411 mRNA levels was attenuated in P06850 -knockout mice and absent in pharmacologically adrenalectomized rats , indicating a requirement for glucocorticoids in the upregulation of P30411 gene expression with stress . Overall , the increase in P30411 gene expression in response to the stress-triggered rise in glucocorticoids likely enhances catecholamine biosynthesis and release and may serve as an adaptive response of the adrenomedullary catecholaminergic system to stress .