The heme oxygenase system rescues hepatic deterioration in the condition of obesity co-morbid with type-2 diabetes . The prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty-liver disease ( NAFLD ) is increasing globally . NAFLD is a spectrum of related liver diseases that progressive from simple steatosis to serious complications like cirrhosis . The major pathophysiological driving of NAFLD includes elevated hepatic adiposity , increased hepatic triglycerides/cholesterol , excessive hepatic inflammation , and hepatocyte ballooning injury is a common histo-pathological denominator . Although heme-oxygenase ( HO ) is cytoprotective , its effects on hepatocyte ballooning injury have not been reported . We investigated the effects of upregulating HO with hemin or inhibiting it with stannous-mesoporphyrin ( DB04912 ) on hepatocyte ballooning injury , hepatic adiposity and inflammation in Zucker-diabetic-fatty rats ( ZDFs ) , an obese type-2-diabetic model . DB03404 administration to ZDFs abated hepatic/plasma triglycerides and cholesterol , and suppressed several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines including , P01375 -α , P05231 , IL-1β , macrophage-inflammatory-protein-1α ( MIP-1α ) and macrophage-chemoattractant-protein-1 ( P13500 ) , with corresponding reduction of the pro-inflammatory M1-phenotype marker , Q92838 and hepatic macrophage infiltration . Correspondingly , hemin concomitantly potentiated the protein expression of several markers of the anti-inflammatory macrophage-M2-phenotype including ED2 , P22301 and CD-206 , alongside components of the HO-system including P09601 , HO-activity and cGMP , whereas the HO-inhibitor , DB04912 abolished the effects . Furthermore , hemin attenuated liver histo-pathological lesions like hepatocyte ballooning injury and fibrosis , and reduced extracellular-matrix/profibrotic proteins implicated in liver injury such as osteopontin , TGF-β1 , fibronectin and collagen-IV . We conclude that hemin restore hepatic morphology by abating hepatic adiposity , suppressing macrophage infiltration , inflammation and fibrosis . The selective enhancement of anti-inflammatory macrophage-M2-phenotype with parallel reduction of pro-inflammatory macrophage-M1-phenotype and related chemokines/cytokines like P01375 -α , P05231 , IL-1β , MIP-1α and P13500 are among the multifaceted mechanisms by which hemin restore hepatic morphology .