Modulation of the P22301 /IL-12 cytokine circuit by interferon-beta inhibits the development of epitope spreading and disease progression in murine autoimmune encephalomyelitis . IFN-beta has been shown to be effective in the treatment of multiple sclerosis ( MS ) . However , the primary mechanism by which IFN-beta mediates its therapeutic effect remains unclear . Recent studies indicate that under defined conditions , IFN-beta may downregulate DC expression of IL-12 . We and others have shown that IFN-beta may also downregulate P22301 . In light of the recently proposed paradigm that an P22301 /IL-12 immunoregulatory circuit controls susceptibility to autoimmune disease , we examined the effect of IFN-beta on the development and behavior of the autoreactive T cell repertoire during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ( EAE ) , an animal model sharing many features with MS . SWXJ mice were immunized with the immunodominant p139-151 determinant of myelin proteolipid protein ( PLP ) , and at onset of EAE were treated every other day with IFN-beta . After eight weeks of treatment , we assessed autoreactivity and observed no significant IFN-beta effect on splenocyte proliferation or splenocyte production of P01579 , P60568 , P05112 , or P05113 in response to the priming determinant used to initiate disease . However , in IFN-beta treated mice , the cytokine profile in response to the priming immunogen was significantly skewed toward an increased production of P22301 and a concurrent decreased production of IL-12 . Moreover , the in vivo modulation of the P22301 /IL-12 immunoregulatory circuit in response to the priming immunogen was accompanied by an aborted development of epitope spreading . Our results indicate that IFN-beta induces a reciprocal modulation of the P22301 /IL-12 cytokine circuit in vivo . This skewed autoreactivity establishes an inflammatory microenvironment that effectively prevents endogenous self-priming thereby inhibiting the progression of disease associated with epitope spreading .