Increased epithelial permeability is the primary cause for bicarbonate loss in inflamed murine colon . BACKGROUND : Bicarbonate loss into the lumen occurs during intestinal inflammation in different species . However , candidate pathways like P13569 or P40879 are inhibited in the inflamed gut . This study addressed the question whether and how inflammation-associated increased intestinal permeability may result in epithelial HCO(3)(-) loss . METHODS : Murine proximal colon was studied because it does not express functional P40879 but is inflamed in the tumor necrosis factor α overexpressing mouse model ( P01375 (ΔARE) ) . DB01174 alkalization , (3)H-mannitol fluxes , impedance spectroscopy , and dilution potentials were measured in Ussing chambers , whereas expression and localization of tight junction-associated proteins were analyzed by Western blots and immunohistochemistry . RESULTS : DB01174 alkalization rates and (3)H-mannitol fluxes were increased in P01375 (+/ΔARE) proximal colon , whereas forskolin-stimulated I(sc) was not altered . Epithelial resistance was reduced , but subepithelial resistance increased . The epithelial lining was intact , and enterocyte apoptosis rate was not increased despite massively increased Th1 cytokine levels and lymphoplasmacellular infiltration . Measurement of dilution potentials suggested a loss of cation selectivity with increased anion permeability . Western analysis revealed a downregulation of occludin expression and an upregulation of both claudin-2 and claudin-5 , with no change in ZO-1 , P12830 , claudin-4 , and claudin-8 . Immunohistochemistry suggested correct occludin localization but reduced tight junction density in P01375 (+/ΔARE) surface epithelium . CONCLUSIONS : Inflammation during P01375 -α overexpression leads to increased epithelial permeability in murine proximal colon , decreased tight junctional cation selectivity , and increased HCO(3)(-) loss into the lumen . Inflammation-associated colonic HCO(3)(-) loss may occur through leaky tight junctions rather than through HCO(3)(-) secreting ion transporters .