20-Hydroxycholecalciferol , product of vitamin D3 hydroxylation by P450scc , decreases NF-kappaB activity by increasing IkappaB alpha levels in human keratinocytes . The side chain of vitamin D3 is hydroxylated in a sequential manner by cytochrome P450scc ( P05108 ) to form 20-hydroxycholecalciferol , which can induce growth arrest and differentiation of both primary and immortalized epidermal keratinocytes . Since nuclear factor-kappaB ( NF-kappaB ) plays a pivotal role in the regulation of cell proliferation , differentiation and apoptosis , we examined the capability of 20-hydroxycholecalciferol to modulate the activity of NF-kappaB , using DB00136 ( calcitriol ) as a positive control . 20-hydroxycholecalciferol inhibits the activation of NFkappaB DNA binding activity as well as NF-kappaB-driven reporter gene activity in keratinocytes . Also , 20-hydroxycholecalciferol induced significant increases in the mRNA and protein levels of the NF-kappaB inhibitor protein , IkappaB alpha , in a time dependent manner , while no changes in total NF-kappaB-p65 mRNA or protein levels were observed . Another measure of NF-kappaB activity , p65 translocation from the cytoplasm into the nucleus was also inhibited in extracts of 20-hydroxycholecalciferol treated keratinocytes . Increased IkappaB alpha was concomitantly observed in cytosolic extracts of 20-hydroxycholecalciferol treated keratinocytes , as determined by immunoblotting and immunofluorescent staining . In keratinocytes lacking vitamin D receptor ( P11473 ) , 20-hydroxycholecalciferol did not affect IkappaB alpha mRNA levels , indicating that it requires P11473 for its action on NF-kappaB activity . Comparison of the effects of calcitrol , hormonally active form of vitamin D3 , with 20-hydrocholecalciferol show that both agents have a similar potency in inhibiting NF-kappaB . Since NF-kappaB is a major transcription factor for the induction of inflammatory mediators , our findings indicate that 20-hydroxycholecalciferol may be an effective therapeutic agent for inflammatory and hyperproliferative skin diseases .