Electrostatic steering at acetylcholine binding sites . The electrostatic environments near the acetylcholine binding sites on the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor ( nAChR ) and acetylcholinesterase were measured by diffusion-enhanced fluorescence energy transfer ( DEFET ) to determine the influence of long-range electrostatic interactions on ligand binding kinetics and net binding energy . Changes in DEFET from variously charged Tb3+ -chelates revealed net potentials of -20 mV at the nAChR agonist sites and -14 mV at the entrance to the P22303 active site , in physiological ionic strength conditions . The potential at the alphadelta-binding site of the nAChR was determined independently in the presence of DB01199 to be -14 mV ; the calculated potential at the alphagamma-site was approximately threefold stronger than at the alphadelta-site . By determining the local potential in increasing ionic strength , Debye-Hückel theory predicted that the potentials near the nAChR agonist binding sites are constituted by one to three charges in close proximity to the binding site . Examination of the binding kinetics of the fluorescent acetylcholine analog dansyl- P13671 -choline at ionic strengths from 12.5 to 400 mM revealed a twofold decrease in association rate . Debye-Hückel analysis of the kinetics revealed a similar charge distribution as seen by changes in the potentials . To determine whether the experimentally determined potentials are reflected by continuum electrostatics calculations , solutions to the nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann equation were used to compute the potentials expected from DEFET measurements from high-resolution models of the nAChR and P22303 . These calculations are in good agreement with the DEFET measurements for P22303 and for the alphagamma-site of the nAChR . We conclude that long-range electrostatic interactions contribute -0.3 and -1 kcal/mol to the binding energy at the nAChR alphadelta- and alphagamma-sites due to an increase in association rates .