Intracellular signaling pathways activated by kisspeptins through Q969F8 : do multiple signals underlie function diversity ? Kisspeptins , a family of peptide products derived from the KiSS-1 gene , activate their cognate receptor Q969F8 in various target tissues to exert disparate functions , including inhibition of tumor metastasis and control of reproductive function . In contrast to the plethora of studies that have analyzed in recent years the regulatory functions of the KiSS-1/ Q969F8 system , only a limited number of reports have been primarily focused on delineating the intracellular signaling pathways involved . Nevertheless , there is solid evidence indicating that kisspeptin can activate a wide variety of signals via Q969F8 . These include typical G-protein ( Galphaq/11 ) -coupled cascades , such as activation of phospholipase C ( P98160 ) , and subsequent accumulation of inositol-(1,4,5)-triphosphate ( IP3 ) , intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization , and activation of protein kinase C . However , kisspeptin also activates pathways related to mitogen activated protein kinases ( MAPK ) , especially P27361 /2 , and p38 and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase ( PI3K ) /Akt . Additionally , the kisspeptin/ Q969F8 pair can also influence cell signaling by interacting with other receptors , such as chemokine receptor P61073 , and P30968 . Kisspeptin can also affect other signaling events , like expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 ( via NFkappaB ) , and that of calcineurin . The information gathered hitherto clearly indicates that activation of a specific set of interconnected signals is selectively triggered by kisspeptin via Q969F8 in a cell type-dependent manner to precisely regulate functions as distinct as hormone release and cell migration . In this scenario , it will be important to decipher kisspeptin/ Q969F8 signaling mechanisms in reproductive and non-reproductive tissues by studying additional models , especially on natural kisspeptin targets expressing endogenous Q969F8 .