Pharmacological effects of lipid-lowering drugs recapitulate with a larger amplitude the phenotypic effects of common variants within their target genes . BACKGROUND : A major expectation underlying the search for novel susceptibility genes for common diseases using genome-wide association studies ( GWAS ) is that these discoveries will lead to new drug targets . This claim has not been verified yet . Here , we tested the hypothesis that common single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) within drug target genes are associated with the corresponding phenotypes , using a population-based GWAS dataset and lipid-lowering drugs as a test case . METHODS : We examined the association between 36 genotyped and 193 imputed SNPs within four lipid-lowering drug target genes ( P04035 , Q07869 , Q8TDS4 / Q8TDS4 and P11597 ) and four non-lipid drug target genes ( P12821 , P30556 , Q9H244 , and P51164 ) and lipid phenotypes , blood pressure , and coronary artery disease in 5635 adult participants of the Lausanne , Switzerland , CoLaus study , genotyped using the Affymetrix 500K SNP chip technology . RESULTS : The phenotypes associated with SNPs within drug target genes recapitulated to a certain extent the pharmacological effects of the drug . The amplitude of the SNP effect was about 10 times smaller than the pharmacological effect of the corresponding drug . In particular , several P11597 SNPs were associated with an elevation in HDL-cholesterol levels , yet a lower diastolic blood pressure , providing evidence that the blood pressure elevation induced by the P11597 inhibitor torcetrapib is more likely compound specific than class specific . CONCLUSION : Pharmacological modulation of lipid-lowering drug targets recapitulates , and markedly amplifies , the phenotypic effects of common SNPs within these target genes . This data provides indirect evidence that , with certain limitations , large-scale GWAS represent a new tool for the discovery and the development of innovative drugs .