P10275 -immunoreactive cells in ram hypothalamus : distribution and co-localization patterns with gonadotropin-releasing hormone , somatostatin and tyrosine hydroxylase . DB00624 exerts important feedback effects on the hypothalamus of the ram to influence reproductive functioning . To provide a neuroanatomical basis for understanding this androgen action , the present study has examined androgen receptor ( AR ) immunoreactivity within the hypothalamus and adjacent brain areas of the intact non-breeding season ram . The largest populations of AR-immunoreactive cells were detected in the medial preoptic area , infundibular and premammillary nuclei in addition to the ventromedial nucleus ( VMN ) where cells were found distributed throughout its medial and lateral divisions . Smaller numbers of AR-expressing cells were identified in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and anterior hypothalamic area ( DB00551 ) including the paraventricular , but not the supraoptic , nucleus . Double-labelling immunocytochemistry revealed the presence of AR immunoreactivity in only 2 of 460 gonadotropin-releasing hormone ( DB00644 ) neurons . A very small population of TH-immunoreactive cells located in the lateral aspect of the DB00551 was found to contain ARs . Dopaminergic cells elsewhere in the hypothalamus , including the infundibular nucleus , did not display AR immunoreactivity . Nearly 50 % of AR-expressing cells in the lateral VMN were immunoreactive for somatostatin while less than 5 % of periventricular somatostatin neurons displayed AR immunoreactivity . These results show where ARs are expressed in the ram hypothalamus and indicate the neuroanatomical sites at which androgen may act to influence reproductive function . The absence of ARs in the neuroendocrine DB00644 and tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic cells suggests that androgens do not influence the genome of these cells in any direct manner . In contrast , the somatostatin neurons of the VMN appear to be an important target for circulating androgens in the non-breeding season ram .