Risk factors for coronary artery disease , circulating endothelial progenitor cells , and the role of P04035 inhibitors . Recent studies suggest that postnatal neovascularization relies not exclusively on sprouting of preexisting vessels ( " angiogenesis " ) , but also involves the contribution of bone marrow-derived circulating endothelial progenitor cells ( EPCs ) . EPCs can be isolated from peripheral blood or bone marrow mononuclear cells , P28906 (+) or CD133(+) hematopoietic progenitors . Infusion of EPCs was shown to promote postnatal neovascularization of ischemic tissue after myocardial infarction in animal models and initial clinical trials . Moreover , circulating endothelial precursor cells can home to denuded arteries after balloon injury and contribute to endothelial regeneration , thereby limiting the development of restenosis . Thus , circulating endothelial cells may exert an important function as endogenous repair mechanism to maintain the integrity of the endothelial monolayer and to promote ischemia-induced neovascularization . However , risk factors for coronary artery disease , such as diabetes , hypercholesterolemia , and hypertension are associated with impaired number and function of EPC in patients with coronary artery disease . Therapeutically , the reduction of EPC number and the decreased functional activity in patients with coronary artery disease was counteracted by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzymeA ( HMG- DB01992 ) reductase inhibitors ( statins ) , vascular endothelial growth factor ( P15692 ) , estrogen , or exercise . At the molecular level , these factors are well established to activate the phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase ( PI3K ) -Akt-dependent activation of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( P29474 ) , suggesting that the PI3K-Akt- P29474 signaling pathway may be involved in the transduction of atheroprotective factors . Taken together , the balance of atheroprotective and proatherosclerotic factors may influence EPC levels and their functional capacity to improve neovascularization and endothelial regeneration .