Living patches engineered from human umbilical cord derived fibroblasts and endothelial progenitor cells . OBJECTIVE : A major shortcoming in contemporary congenital heart surgery is the lack of viable replacement materials with the capacity of growth and regeneration . Here we focused on living autologous patches engineered from human umbilical cord derived fibroblasts and endothelial progenitor cells ( EPCs ) as a ready-to-use cell source for paediatric cardiovascular tissue engineering . METHODS : EPCs were isolated from 20 ml fresh umbilical cord blood by density gradient centrifugation and myofibroblasts were harvested from umbilical cord tissue . Cells were differentiated and expanded in vitro using nutrient media containing growth factors . Before seeding , cell-phenotypes were assessed by immuno-histochemistry . Biodegradable patches fabricated from synthetic polymers ( DB00158 / P07237 ) were seeded with myofibroblasts followed by endothelialization with EPCs . All patches were cultured in a perfusion bioreactor . A subgroup of patches was additionally stimulated by cyclic strain . Analysis of the neo-tissues comprised histology , immuno-histochemistry , extracellular matrix ( Q13201 ) analysis and biomechanical testing . RESULTS : Endothelial phenotypes of EPCs before seeding were confirmed by Ac-Dil-LDL , CD 31 , von-Willebrand-Factor and P29474 staining . Histology of the seeded patches demonstrated layered viable tissue formation in all samples . The cells in the newly formed tissues expressed myofibroblast markers , such as desmin and alpha-SMA . The EPCs derived neo-endothelia showed constant endothelial phenotypes ( CD 31 , P04275 ) . major constituents of Q13201 such as collagen and proteoglycans were biochemically detected . Stress-strain properties of the patches showed features of native-analogous tissues . CONCLUSIONS : Living tissue engineered patches can be successfully generated from human umbilical cord derived myofibroblasts and EPCs . This new cell source may enable the tissue engineering of versatile , living , autologous replacement materials for congenital cardiac interventions .