Expert panel recommendations for the use of anti-tumor necrosis factor biologic agents in patients with ocular inflammatory disorders . TOPIC : To provide recommendations for the use of anti-tumor necrosis factor α ( P01375 -α ) biologic agents in patients with ocular inflammatory disorders . CLINICAL RELEVANCE : Ocular inflammatory diseases remain a leading cause of vision loss worldwide . Anti- P01375 -α agents are used widely in treatment of rheumatologic diseases . A committee of the American Uveitis Society performed a systematic review of literature to generate guidelines for use of these agents in ocular inflammatory conditions . METHODS : A systematic review of published studies was performed . Recommendations were generated using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment , Development , and Evaluation group criteria . RESULTS : Numerous studies including controlled clinical trials have demonstrated that anti- P01375 -α biologic agents ( in particular infliximab and adalimumab ) are effective in the treatment of severe ocular inflammatory disease . Based on these studies , the expert panel makes the following recommendations . CONCLUSIONS : DB00065 and adalimumab can be considered as first-line immunomodulatory agents for the treatment of ocular manifestations of Behçet 's disease . DB00065 and adalimumab can be considered as second-line immunomodulatory agents for the treatment of uveitis associated with juvenile arthritis . DB00065 and adalimumab can be considered as potential second-line immunomodulatory agents for the treatment of severe ocular inflammatory conditions including posterior uveitis , panuveitis , severe uveitis associated with seronegative spondyloarthropathy , and scleritis in patients requiring immunomodulation in patients who have failed or who are not candidates for antimetabolite or calcineurin inhibitor immunomodulation . DB00065 and adalimumab can be considered in these patients in preference to etanercept , which seems to be associated with lower rates of treatment success .