Lycopene binding compromised PDGF-AA/-AB signaling and migration in smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts : prediction of the possible lycopene binding site within PDGF . Platelet-derived growth factor ( PDGF ) is a potent stimulator of growth and motility of smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) and fibroblasts . Abnormalities of PDGF/PDGF receptor ( P09619 ) are thought to contribute to vascular diseases and malignancy . We previously showed that natural carotenoid lycopene can directly bind to DB00102 and affect its related functions in vascular SMCs . In this study we examined lycopene effect on PDGF-AA/-AB-induced signaling and migration in SMCs and fibroblasts . We found that lycopene inhibited PDGF-AA-induced SMC and fibroblast migration in a concentration-dependent manner . Lycopene reduced PDGF-AA signaling , including phosphorylation in P16234 and its downstream protein kinases/enzymes . It also inhibited PDGF-AB-induced signaling and cell migration . However , lycopene did not affect PDGF-induced reactive oxygen species production and H2O2-induced P09619 phosphorylation . The binding analysis revealed that lycopene but not beta-carotene could directly bind to PDGF-AA in vitro and in plasma and this binding competitively inhibited lycopene interaction with DB00102 , suggesting that lycopene bound to PDGF-AA/-BB at a homologous/similar region within PDGF . Moreover , the docking and binding analyses predicted that the lycopene-binding region within PDGF was located at loop 2 region . Taken together , we provide here evidence that lycopene interacts with PDGF-AA/-AB and compromises their intracellular signaling , leading to a marked inhibition on PDGF-AA/-AB-induced migration in both SMCs and fibroblasts . We also predicted its binding region within PDGF and proved its anti-vascular injury effect in vivo . The results , together with our previous findings , suggest lycopene special affinity/effect for PDGF family and its possible application in prevention in vascular diseases and malignancy .