beta-Arrestin-2 interaction and internalization of the human P47900 receptor are dependent on C-terminal phosphorylation sites . The nucleotide receptor P2Y(1) regulates a variety of physiological processes and is involved in platelet aggregation . Using human P2Y(1)-receptors C-terminally fused with a fluorescent protein , we studied the role of potential receptor phosphorylation sites in receptor internalization and beta-arrestin-2 translocation by means of confocal microscopy . Three receptor constructs were generated that lacked potential phosphorylation sites in the third intracellular loop , the proximal C terminus , or the distal C terminus . The corresponding receptor constructs were expressed in human embryonic kidney ( P29320 ) -293 cells and stimulated with 100 muM ADP . Rapid receptor internalization was observed for the wild-type receptor and from those constructs mutated in the third intracellular loop and the proximal C terminus . However , the construct lacking phosphorylation sites at the distal C terminus did not show receptor internalization upon stimulation . The microscopic data were validated by HA-tagged receptor constructs using a cell surface enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay . P2Y(1)-receptor stimulated beta-arrestin-2-yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) translocation followed the same pattern as receptor internalization . Hence , no beta-arrestin-2-YFP translocation was observed when the distal C-terminal phosphorylation sites were mutated . Individual mutations indicate that residues Ser352 and Thr358 are essential for receptor internalization and beta-arrestin-2-YFP translocation . In contrast , protein kinase C ( PKC ) -mediated receptor desensitization was not affected by mutation of potential phosphorylation sites in the distal C terminus but was prevented by mutation of potential phosphorylation sites in the proximal C terminus . P2Y(1)-receptor internalization in P29320 -293 cells was not blocked by inhibitors of PKC and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase . Thus , we conclude that P2Y(1)-receptor desensitization and internalization are mediated by different phosphorylation sites and kinases .