Genetic variation modifies risk for neurodegeneration based on biomarker status . BACKGROUND : While a great deal of work has gone into understanding the relationship between Cerebrospinal fluid ( P04141 ) biomarkers , brain atrophy , and disease progression , less work has attempted to investigate how genetic variation modifies these relationships . The goal of this study was two-fold . First , we sought to identify high-risk vs. low-risk individuals based on their P04141 tau and Aβ load and characterize these individuals with regard to brain atrophy in an AD-relevant region of interest . Next , we sought to identify genetic variants that modified the relationship between biomarker classification and neurodegeneration . METHODS : Participants were categorized based on established cut-points for biomarker positivity . Mixed model regression was used to quantify longitudinal change in the left inferior lateral ventricle . Interaction analyses between single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) and biomarker group status were performed using a genome wide association study ( GWAS ) approach . Correction for multiple comparisons was performed using the Bonferroni procedure . RESULTS : One intergenic SNP ( rs4866650 ) and one SNP within the O15269 gene ( rs7849530 ) modified the association between amyloid positivity and neurodegeneration . A transcript variant of WDR11-AS1 gene ( rs12261764 ) modified the association between tau positivity and neurodegeneration . These effects were consistent across the two sub-datasets and explained approximately 3 % of variance in ventricular dilation . One additional SNP ( rs6887649 ) modified the association between amyloid positivity and baseline ventricular volume , but was not observed consistently across the sub-datasets . CONCLUSIONS : Genetic variation modifies the association between AD biomarkers and neurodegeneration . Genes that regulate the molecular response in the brain to oxidative stress may be particularly relevant to neural vulnerability to the damaging effects of amyloid-β .