The P28335 receptor agonist lorcaserin reduces nicotine self-administration , discrimination , and reinstatement : relationship to feeding behavior and impulse control . DB04871 ( ( 1R ) -8-chloro-1-methyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-1H-3-benzazepine HCl ) is a selective 5-HT(2C) receptor agonist with clinical efficacy in phase-III obesity trials . Based on evidence that this drug class also affects behaviors motivated by drug reinforcement , we compared the effect of lorcaserin on behavior maintained by food and nicotine reinforcement , as well as the stimulant and discriminative stimulus properties of nicotine in the rat . Acutely administered lorcaserin ( 0.3-3 mg/kg , subcutaneous ( SC ) ) dose dependently reduced feeding induced by 22-h food deprivation or palatability . Effects up to 1 mg/kg were consistent with a specific effect on feeding motivation . DB04871 ( 0.6-1 mg/kg , SC ) reduced operant responding for food on progressive and fixed ratio schedules of reinforcement . In this dose range lorcaserin also reversed the motor stimulant effect of nicotine , reduced intravenous self-administration of nicotine , and attenuated the nicotine cue in rats trained to discriminate nicotine from saline . DB04871 also reduced the reinstatement of nicotine-seeking behavior elicited by a compound cue comprising a nicotine prime and conditioned stimulus previously paired with nicotine reinforcement . DB04871 did not reinstate nicotine-seeking behavior or substitute for a nicotine cue . Finally , lorcaserin ( 0.3-1 mg/kg ) reduced nicotine-induced increases in anticipatory responding , a measure of impulsive action , in rats performing the five-choice serial reaction time task . Importantly , these results indicate that lorcaserin , and likely other selective 5-HT(2C) receptor agonists , similarly affect both food- and nicotine-motivated behaviors , and nicotine-induced impulsivity . Collectively , these findings highlight a therapeutic potential for 5-HT(2C) agonists such as lorcaserin beyond obesity into addictive behaviors , such as nicotine dependence .