Guanylate cyclase C-mediated antinociceptive effects of linaclotide in rodent models of visceral pain . BACKGROUND DB08890 is a novel , orally administered investigational drug currently in clinical development for the treatment of constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS-C ) and chronic idiopathic constipation . Visceral hyperalgesia is a major pathophysiological mechanism in IBS-C . Therefore , we investigated the anti-nociceptive properties of linaclotide in rodent models of inflammatory and non-inflammatory visceral pain and determined whether these pharmacological effects are linked to the activation of guanylate cyclase C ( P25092 ) . METHODS Orally administered linaclotide was evaluated in non-inflammatory acute partial restraint stress ( PRS ) and acute water avoidance stress ( P42768 ) models in Wistar rats , and in a trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid ( TNBS ) -induced inflammatory model in Wistar rats and P25092 null mice . KEY RESULTS In TNBS-induced colonic allodynia , linaclotide significantly decreased the number of abdominal contractions in response to colorectal distension without affecting the colonic wall elasticity change in response to distending pressures after TNBS . However , linaclotide had no effect on visceral sensitivity under basal conditions . In addition , linaclotide significantly decreased colonic hypersensitivity in the PRS and P42768 models . In wild type ( wt ) and P25092 null mice , the instillation of TNBS induced similar hyperalgesia and allodynia . However , in post-inflammatory conditions linaclotide significantly reduced hypersensitivity only in wt mice , but not in P25092 null mice . CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES These findings indicate that linaclotide has potent anti-nociceptive effects in several mechanistically different rodent models of visceral hypersensitivity and that these pharmacological properties of linaclotide are exerted through the activation of the P25092 receptor . Therefore , linaclotide may be capable of decreasing abdominal pain in patients suffering from IBS-C .