Pegylation of biological molecules and potential benefits : pharmacological properties of certolizumab pegol . PEGylation of biological proteins , defined as the covalent conjugation of proteins with polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) , leads to a number of biopharmaceutical improvements , including increased half-life , increased solubility and reduced aggregation , and reduced immunogenicity . Since their introduction in 1990 , PEGylated proteins have significantly improved the management of various chronic diseases , including rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) and Crohn 's disease . DB08904 is the only PEGylated anti-tumour necrosis factor ( P01375 ) -α agent . It is a PEGylated , humanised , antigen-binding fragment of an anti- P01375 monoclonal antibody . Unlike other anti- P01375 agents , it has no crystallisable fragment ( Fc ) domain . Because of its novel structure , certolizumab pegol may have a different mechanism of action to the other anti- P01375 agents , and also has different pharmacodynamic properties , which could possibly translate to a different safety profile . Pharmacodynamic studies have shown that certolizumab pegol binds to P01375 with a higher affinity than adalimumab and infliximab . DB08904 is also more potent at neutralising soluble P01375 -mediated signalling than adalimumab and infliximab , and has similar or lesser potency to etanercept . DB08904 does not cause detrimental in vitro effects such as degranulation , loss of cell integrity , apoptosis , complement-dependent cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity . DB08904 may also penetrate more effectively into inflamed arthritic tissue than other anti- P01375 agents , and is not actively transported across the placenta during pregnancy . Pharmacokinetic studies in healthy volunteers demonstrated that single intravenous and subcutaneous doses of certolizumab pegol had predictable pharmacokinetics . The pharmacokinetics of certolizumab pegol in patients with RA and Crohn 's disease were consistent with pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers .