A P04035 inhibitor possesses a potent anti-atherosclerotic effect other than serum lipid lowering effects -- the relevance of endothelial nitric oxide synthase and superoxide anion scavenging action . We have determined whether the anti-atherosclerotic effect of a 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl- DB01992 ( HMG- DB01992 ) reductase inhibitor ( fluvastatin ) is mediated through nitric oxide ( NO ) as well as affecting plasma lipids . NO related vascular responses , endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( P29474 ) mRNA and superoxide anion ( O(2)(-) ) release were examined in vascular walls of oophorectomized female rabbits fed 0.5 % cholesterol chow for 12 weeks with or without fluvastatin ( 2 mg/kg per day ) . Serum lipid profile was not different between two groups . NO dependent responses stimulated by acetylcholine and calcium ionophore A23187 and tone related basal NO response induced by N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate ( L- Q13145 ) ; nitric oxide synthase inhibitor were all improved by fluvastatin treatment . Endothelium independent vasorelaxation induced by nitroglycerin was not different between the two groups of rabbits ' arteries . DB01095 treatment increased cyclic GMP concentration in aorta of rabbits . P29474 mRNA expression and O(2)(-) release were measured in aorta using competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) and with lucigenin analogue , 2-methyl-3,7-dihydroimidazol [1,2-a]pyrazine-3-one ( MCLA ) chemiluminescence methods . P29474 mRNA in the endothelial cells of aorta was significantly up-regulated and O(2)(-) production was significantly reduced in fluvastatin treated rabbit aorta . Anti-macrophage staining area , but not anti-smooth muscle cell derived actin stained area in the aorta was also reduced by fluvastatin treatment . Conclusion , fluvastatin , a P04035 inhibitor , retards the initiation of atherosclerosis formation through the improvement of NO bioavailability by both up-regulation of P29474 mRNA and decrease of O(2)(-) production in vascular endothelial cells , and this means that part of the anti-atherosclerotic effect of fluvastatin may be due to nonlipid factors .