DB01628 : a highly selective P35354 inhibitor . OBJECTIVE : To review the available literature evaluating the pharmacology , pharmacokinetics , clinical efficacy , and adverse effects of etoricoxib , a highly selective cyclooxygenase-2 ( P35354 ) inhibitor that is not currently approved for use in the US . DATA SOURCES : Literature retrieval was accessed through MEDLINE ( 1966-December 2004 ) , Current Contents ( 1998-December 2004 ) , and Cochrane Library ( 4th quarter 2004 ) . References from retrieved articles , information from the manufacturer , and abstracts from the American College of Rheumatology and Annual European Congress of Rheumatology meetings were searched . STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION : All clinical trials published in English evaluating etoricoxib were included in this review . An abstract was excluded if it presented preliminary data from trials that are now published , analyzed data previously reported in a published clinical trial , or compared etoricoxib with placebo for an indication with published active-comparator controlled trials . DATA SYNTHESIS : Twelve clinical trials evaluating efficacy were reviewed . Efficacy for acute pain has been evaluated in acute gout , primary dysmenorrhea , and dental surgery and for chronic pain in rheumatoid arthritis , osteoarthritis , and chronic lower back pain . For safety , 3 clinical trials and 6 retrospective analyses of gastrointestinal , renovascular , or cardiovascular adverse effects were reviewed . CONCLUSIONS : Available studies demonstrate the efficacy of etoricoxib compared with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs , but no published studies to date have compared etoricoxib with other selective P35354 inhibitors . While these agents have demonstrated a significant reduction in gastrointestinal adverse effects , the cardiovascular adverse effects of selective P35354 inhibition are not well defined . Further study is necessary to delineate the benefits and risks of etoricoxib compared with alternative treatment regimens .