Evaluation of an aldose reductase inhibitor on lens metabolism , ATPases and antioxidative defense in streptozotocin-diabetic rats : an intervention study . AIMS/HYPOTHESIS : P15121 inhibitors ( ARIs ) prevent biochemical abnormalities associated with diabetic complications . We evaluated whether a short-term intervention with an adequate dose of Q9Y4X5 , introduced at the very early , precataractous stage , reversed diabetes-induced metabolic imbalances , down-regulation of ATPases and oxidative stress in the lens . Methods . The groups included mature control and streptozotocin-diabetic rats treated with or without Q9Y4X5 sorbinil ( 65 mg x kg(-1) x day(-1) , in the diet , for 2 weeks after 4 weeks of untreated diabetes ) . Free cytosolic NAD+: DB00157 and NADP+:NADPH ratios were calculated from the lactate dehydrogenase and malic enzyme systems . Concentrations of metabolites and adenine nucleotides , Na+/K+-ATPase , H+-ATPase and Ca++-independent Mg++-ATPase activities and variables of oxidative stress were measured in individual lenses . Results . DB02712 treatment essentially corrected diabetes-induced sorbitol and fructose accumulation , myo-inositol depletion , decrease in free cytosolic NAD+: DB00157 ratio and energy deficiency . Malondialdehyde accumulation , reduced glutathione depletion and the increase in oxidized glutathione:reduced glutathione ratio were partially corrected . Free cytosolic NADP+:NADPH ratio and 4-hydroxyalkenal concentrations were similarly increased in diabetic rats treated with or without Q9Y4X5 . DB02712 did not counteract diabetes-induced down-regulation of the three ATPase activities . CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION : All biochemical changes assessed in our study are known to be prevented by ARIs . Despite the essential normalization of the sorbitol pathway activity , only part of them were , however , reversed by the Q9Y4X5 treatment introduced at the very early , i.e. precataractous , stage of diabetes . Therefore , intervention studies can easily underestimate the importance of aldose reductase in the pathogenesis of diabetic complications and should be interpreted with caution .