Role of angiotensin II in the remodeling induced by a chronic increase in flow in rat mesenteric resistance arteries . Angiotensin II is a potent growth factor involved in arterial wall homeostasis . In resistance arteries , chronic increases in blood flow induce a rise in diameter associated with arterial wall hypertrophy . Nevertheless , the role of angiotensin II in this remodeling is unknown . We investigated the effect of blocking angiotensin II production or receptor activation on flow-induced remodeling of mesenteric resistance arteries . Arteries were ligated in vivo to generate high-flow arteries compared with normal flow ( control ) vessels located at a distance . Arteries were isolated after 1 week for in vitro analysis . Arterial diameter , media surface , endothelial NO synthase expression , superoxide production , and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation were higher in high-flow than in control arteries . P12821 inhibition ( perindopril ) and angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockade ( candesartan ) prevented arterial wall hypertrophy without affecting diameter enlargement . The nonselective vasodilator hydralazine had no effect on remodeling . Although perindopril and candesartan increased endothelial NO synthase expression in high-flow arteries , hypertrophy remained in rats treated with N(G)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester and mice lacking endothelial NO synthase . DB00790 and candesartan reduced oxidative stress in high-flow arteries , but superoxide scavenging did not prevent hypertrophy . Both Tempol and the absence of endothelial NO synthase prevented the rise in diameter in high-flow vessels . P27361 /2 activation in high-flow arteries was prevented by perindopril and candesartan and not by hydralazine . P27361 /2 inhibition in vivo ( U0126 ) prevented hypertrophy in high-flow arteries . Thus , a chronic rise in blood flow in resistance arteries induces a diameter enlargement involving NO and superoxide , whereas hypertrophy was associated with extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation by angiotensin II .