New aspects in the pathogenesis of diabetic atherothrombosis . Diabetes mellitus is increasing worldwide , resulting from the interaction of obesity , inflammation , and hyperglycemia . Activated immunity and cytokine production lead to insulin resistance and other components of the metabolic syndrome , establishing the link between diabetes and atherosclerosis . Hyperglycemia-induced endothelial dysfunction is mediated by increased oxidative stress , a promoter of adventitial inflammation and vasa vasorum neovascularization in experimental models of diabetic atherosclerosis . Recent studies have documented increased inflammation , neovascularization , and intraplaque hemorrhage in human diabetic atherosclerosis . This inflammatory microangiopathic process is independently associated with plaque rupture , leading to coronary thrombosis . P13726 , the most potent trigger of the coagulation cascade , is increased in diabetic patients with poor glycemic control . Circulating tissue factor microparticles are also associated with apoptosis of plaque macrophages , closing the link among inflammation , plaque rupture , and blood thrombogenicity . High-density lipoproteins , responsible for free cholesterol removal , are reduced in patients with insulin resistance and diabetes . High-density lipoprotein therapy leads to a significant decrease in plaque macrophages and increase in smooth-muscle cells . These beneficial effects may be responsible for coronary plaque stabilization in patients treated with recombinant P02647 Milano/phospholipid complex . Finally , peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptors ( PPARs ) are now considered the nuclear transcriptional regulators of atherosclerosis . Three subfamilies , including Q07869 , -delta , and -gamma , have been identified with crucial roles in lipid metabolism , plaque inflammation , expression of adhesion molecules and cytokines , and regulation of matrix metalloproteinases . Multiple experimental studies have documented plaque stabilization with P37231 agonists , a group of medications holding great promise in the treatment of diabetes atherosclerosis .