Signalling pathways involved in retinal endothelial cell proliferation induced by advanced glycation end products : inhibitory effect of gliclazide . AIM : We have previously demonstrated that advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) stimulate bovine retinal endothelial cell ( BREC ) proliferation through induction of vascular endothelial growth factor ( P15692 ) production by these cells . We have also shown that gliclazide , a sulfonylurea which decreases oxidative stress , inhibits this effect . The aim of the present study was to characterize the signalling pathways involved in P51606 -induced BREC proliferation and P15692 production and mediating the inhibitory effect of gliclazide on these biological events . METHODS : BRECs were treated or not treated with AGEs in the presence or absence of gliclazide , antioxidants , protein kinase C ( PKC ) , mitogen-activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) or nuclear factor-kappaB ( NF-kappaB ) inhibitors . BREC proliferation was assessed by measuring [ 3H ] -thymidine incorporation into DNA . Activation of PKC , MAPK and NF-kappaB signal transduction pathways and determination of P15692 expression were assessed by Western blot analysis using specific antibodies . MAPK activity was also determined by an in vitro kinase assay . RESULTS : Treatment of BRECs with AGEs significantly increased cell proliferation and P15692 expression . AGEs induced P05771 translocation , extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 and NF-kappaB activation in these cells . Pharmacological inhibition of these signalling pathways abolished P51606 effects on cell proliferation and P15692 expression . Exposure of BRECs to gliclazide or antioxidants such as vitamin E or N-acetyl-l-cysteine resulted in a significant decrease in P51606 -induced activation of PKC- , MAPK- and NF-kappaB-signalling pathways . CONCLUSIONS : Our results demonstrate the involvement of PKC , MAPK and NF-kappaB in P51606 -induced BREC proliferation and P15692 expression . DB01120 inhibits BREC proliferation by interfering with these intracellular signal transduction pathways .