Blocking dopamine D2 receptors by haloperidol curtails the beneficial impact of calorie restriction on the metabolic phenotype of high-fat diet induced obese mice . Calorie restriction is the most effective way of expanding life-span and decreasing morbidity . It improves insulin sensitivity and delays the age-related loss of dopamine receptor D(2) ( P14416 ) expression in the brain . Conversely , high-fat feeding is associated with obesity , insulin resistance and a reduced number of P14416 binding sites . We hypothesised that the metabolic benefit of calorie restriction involves the preservation of appropriate P14416 transmission . The food intake of wild-type C57Bl6 male mice was restricted to 60 % of ad lib. intake while they were treated with the P14416 antagonist haloperidol or vehicle using s.c. implanted pellets . Mice with ad lib. access to food receiving vehicle treatment served as controls . All mice received high-fat food throughout the experiment . After 10 weeks , an i.p. glucose tolerance test was performed and , after 12 weeks , a hyperinsulinaemic euglycaemic clamp . Hypothalamic P14416 binding was also determined after 12 weeks of treatment . Calorie-restricted ( CR ) vehicle mice were glucose tolerant and insulin sensitive compared to ad lib . ( AL ) fed vehicle mice . CR mice treated with haloperidol were slightly heavier than vehicle treated CR mice . DB00502 completely abolished the beneficial impact of calorie restriction on glucose tolerance and partly reduced the insulin sensitivity observed in CR vehicle mice . The metabolic differences between AL and CR vehicle mice were not accompanied by alterations in hypothalamic P14416 binding . In conclusion , blocking P14416 curtails the metabolic effects of calorie restriction . Although this suggests that the dopaminergic system could be involved in the metabolic benefits of calorie restriction , restricting access to high-fat food does not increase ( hypothalamic ) P14416 binding capacity , which argues against this inference .