Regulatory roles of sex hormones in cutaneous biology and immunology . Recent studies have revealed that sex hormones manifest a variety of biological and immunological effects in the skin . Pregnancy , menstruation and the menopause modulate the natural course of psoriasis , indicating a female hormone-induced regulation of skin inflammation . Estrogen in vitro down-regulates the production of the neutrophil , type 1 T cell and macrophage-attracting chemokines , P10145 , P02778 , P13501 , by keratinocytes , and suppresses IL-12 production and antigen-presenting capacity while enhancing anti-inflammatory P22301 production by dendritic cells . These data indicate that estrogen may attenuate inflammation in psoriatic lesions . Estrogen , alone or together with progesterone , prevents or reverses skin atrophy , dryness and wrinkles associated with chronological or photo-aging . Estrogen and progesterone stimulate proliferation of keratinocytes while estrogen suppresses apoptosis and thus prevents epidermal atrophy . Estrogen also enhances collagen synthesis , and estrogen and progesterone suppress collagenolysis by reducing matrix metalloproteinase activity in fibroblasts , thereby maintaining skin thickness . Estrogen maintains skin moisture by increasing acid mucopolysaccharide or hyaluronic acid levels in the dermis . Progesterone increases sebum secretion . Estrogen accelerates cutaneous wound healing stimulating P01138 production in macrophages , GM- P04141 production in keratinocytes and P09038 and TGF-beta1 production in fibroblasts , leading to the enhancement of wound re-innervation , re-epithelialization and granulation tissue formation . In contrast , androgens prolong inflammation , reduce deposition of extracellular matrix in wounds , and reduce the rate of wound healing . Estrogen enhances P15692 production in macrophages , an effect that is antagonized by androgens and which may be related to the development of granuloma pyogenicum during pregnancy . These regulatory effects of sex steroids may be manipulated as therapeutic or prophylactic measures in psoriasis , aging , chronic wounds or granuloma pyogenicum .