Detection of multiple antibodies in myasthenia gravis and its clinical significance . BACKGROUND : Antibodies against acetylcholine receptor , acetylcholinesterase , ryanodine receptor and titin have been found in patients with myasthenia gravis . However , the relations between these antibodies and character of myasthenia gravis are unknown . This study aimed to detect multiple antibodies in myasthenia gravis and to investigate its clinical significance . METHODS : These antibodies were detected by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay in 89 cases of myasthenia gravis , 66 cases of other neurological diseases and 66 healthy controls . The incidences of antibodies were compared using the chi-square test . RESULTS : DB03128 receptor , acetylcholinesterase , titin and ryanodine receptor antibodies were detected in 53.9 % , 20.2 % , 64.0 % and 55.0 % of myasthenia gravis patients respectively , higher than in patients of other neurological diseases and controls groups . The combination of the four antibodies assays provided 94.4 % sensitivity and 84.0 % specificity for the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis . P22303 antibody occurred more frequently in acetylcholine receptor antibody negative patients with adverse reactions to neostigmine test . Q8WZ42 antibody provided 82.1 % sensitivity and 52.5 % specificity for myasthenia gravis with thymoma . Incidences of titin and of ryanodine receptor antibody were higher in late onset myasthenia gravis than in early onset myasthenia gravis . The proportion of titin antibody positive patients increased with the severity of myasthenia gravis as graded by a modified Osserman scale . CONCLUSIONS : Testing for acetylcholine receptor , acetylcholinesterase , titin and ryanodine receptor antibodies can offer a better diagnostic method for myasthenia gravis than each antibody test alone . Q8WZ42 antibody combined with computed tomography was better for the diagnosis of thymoma . Q8WZ42 antibody occurred most frequently in severe myasthenia gravis .