Protease-activated receptor-1 and platelet-derived growth factor in spinal cord neurons are implicated in neuropathic pain after nerve injury . Recently , it has been reported that both thrombin-sensitive protease-activated receptor 1 ( P25116 ) and platelet-derived growth factor ( PDGF ) are present not only in platelets , but also in the CNS , which indicates that they have various physiological functions . In this study , we evaluated whether P25116 /PDGF in the spinal cord could contribute to the development of a neuropathic pain-like state in mice . Thermal hyperalgesia and tactile allodynia induced by sciatic nerve ligation were significantly suppressed by repeated intrathecal injection of hirudin , which is characterized as a specific and potent thrombin inhibitor . Furthermore , a single intrathecal injection of thrombin produced long-lasting hyperalgesia and allodynia , and these effects were also inhibited by hirudin in normal mice . In nerveligated mice , the increase in the binding of [35S]GTPgammaS to membranes of the spinal cord induced by thrombin and P25116 -like immunoreactivity ( IR ) in the spinal cord were each greater than those in sham-operated mice . Thermal hyperalgesia and tactile allodynia induced by sciatic nerve ligation were also suppressed by repeated intrathecal injection of either the PDGF alpha receptor ( PDGFRalpha ) /Fc chimera protein or the P09619 -dependent tyrosine kinase inhibitor AG17 [ (3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxybenzylidene)-malononitrile ] . Moreover , thermal hyperalgesia and tactile allodynia induced by thrombin in normal mice were virtually eliminated by intrathecal pretreatment with PDGFRalpha/Fc . In immunohistochemical studies , P25116 -like IR-positive cells in the spinal dorsal horn were mostly colocated on PDGF-like IR-positive neuronal cells . These data provide novel evidence that P25116 and PDGF-A-mediated signaling pathway within spinal cord neurons may be directly implicated in neuropathic pain after nerve injury in mice .