DB05294 improves anti-tumor effects of L19mTNFalpha in xenograft models of esophageal cancer . PURPOSE : Targeting the tumor vasculature by vascular disrupting agents ( VDAs ) has shown therapeutic activity in mouse models . In most cases , however , VDA efficacy is substantially compromised by the inability of these drugs to completely kill tumor cells located at the periphery of the tumor mass . In this study , we investigated anti-tumor effects of L19mTNFα , a fusion protein composed of Q9Y2K2 ( scFv ) , specific for the angiogenesis-associated ED-B containing fibronectin isoform , and murine TNFα , in xenograft models of esophageal cancer . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN : We evaluated ED-B expression in esophageal cancer samples . Subsequently , we generated subcutaneous xenografts from primary tumors , treated them with the L19mTNFα scFv , and determined effects on tumor vasculature , viability and proliferation , and P15692 expression and infiltration by hematopoietic cells . To overcome tumor resistance , L19mTNFα scFv was combined with vandetanib , a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of P15692 receptor , epidermal growth factor receptor , and P07949 signaling . RESULTS : ED-B was broadly expressed by esophageal cancer cell lines , as well as xenografts and primary surgical samples of esophageal cancer . Administration of L19mTNFα acutely damaged tumor vasculature and increased necrosis , indicating a VDA-like activity of this immunoconjugate . This event was followed , however , by rapid tumor growth recovery associated with increased expression of P15692 and recruitment of CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells into tumors . Combination of L19mTNFα with vandetanib severely impaired vascular functions in tumors , leading to a reduction of cell proliferation and increased necrosis , without apparent signs of toxicity . CONCLUSION : These findings indicate that a combination of vascular damaging agents with anti-angiogenic drugs could represent a promising therapeutic strategy for esophageal cancer .