A mixed treatment comparison of the efficacy of anti- P01375 agents in rheumatoid arthritis for methotrexate non-responders demonstrates differences between treatments : a Bayesian approach . BACKGROUND : A number of tumour necrosis factor α ( TNFα ) antagonists ( anti-TNFα ) are available to treat rheumatoid arthritis . All of these have demonstrated considerable efficacy in placebo controlled trials , but few head-to-head comparisons exist to date . This work 's objective is to estimate the relative efficacy among licensed anti-TNFs in patients who have had an inadequate response to methotrexate ( MTX ) . Different outcome measures are used to highlight the advantages of continuous measures in such analyses . METHODS : A systematic review identified randomised controlled trials comparing the efficacy of licensed anti-TNFα agents with placebo at 24 weeks in patients who have had an inadequate response to MTX . Relative efficacy was estimated using Bayesian mixed treatment comparison ( P04629 ) models . Three different outcome measures were used : RR of achieving an American College of Rheumatology ( P10323 ) 20 and ACR50 response and the percentage improvement in Health Assessment Questionnaire ( HAQ ) score . RESULTS : 16 published trials were included in the analysis . All anti-TNFs show considerably improved efficacy over placebo . The P04629 results also provide evidence of some differences in efficacy of the TNFα antagonists . DB00005 appears superior to infliximab and DB06674 , and certolizumab to infliximab and adalimumab . P10323 results indicate improved efficacy of certolizumab over DB06674 . On HAQ analysis , adalimumab , certolizumab , etanercept and DB06674 appear superior to infliximab , and etanercept shows improved efficacy compared with adalimumab . CONCLUSIONS : There are differences in efficacy among the TNFα antagonists . In a P04629 , a continuous outcome measure has more strength to detect such differences than a binomial outcome measure because of its enhanced sensitivity to change .