Effects of dopamine D2 receptor Ser311Cys polymorphism and clinical factors on risperidone efficacy for positive and negative symptoms and social function . DB00734 is an atypical antipsychotic agent with efficacy for both positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia . However , what makes an antipsychotic ' atypical ' remains unclear . We recently found that the T102C polymorphism in the 5- Q13049 receptor gene could affect risperidone 's efficacy for negative symptoms . The present study investigated the effect of the Ser311Cys polymorphism in the dopamine D2 receptor ( P14416 ) gene on risperidone treatment response . A total of 123 Han Chinese patients with acutely exacerbated schizophrenia were given risperidone for up to 42 days . Clinical manifestations were measured bi-weekly with Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale ( PANSS ) and Nurses ' Observation Scale for Inpatients Evaluation ( NOSIE , for assessment of social function ) . For adjusting the within-subject dependence over repeated assessments , multiple linear regression with generalized estimating equation methods was utilized to analyse the effects of Ser311Cys polymorphism and other covariates on clinical performance . Compared with patients who had the Ser311Ser genotype , patients with the Ser311Cys genotype had lower scores on PANSS Positive , Negative , General Psychopathology and Cognitive subscales and NOSIE , after adjustment for 5- Q13049 T102C polymorphisms and other confounders . The 5- Q13049 T102C polymorphism had marginal influences on PANSS Total and Negative subscale scores . Male gender , fewer previous hospitalizations , and higher risperidone dose predicted better treatment response after control for other variables . The preliminary results suggest that variations in the P14416 gene influence risperidone treatment response for positive , negative , and cognitive symptoms , general psychopathology , and social functioning . Several clinical factors may also contribute to inter-individual differences in risperidone treatment response .