The postnatal rat aorta contains pericyte progenitor cells that form spheroidal colonies in suspension culture . Pericytes play an important role in modulating angiogenesis , but the origin of these cells is poorly understood . To evaluate whether the mature vessel wall contains pericyte progenitor cells , nonendothelial mesenchymal cells isolated from the rat aorta were cultured in a serum-free medium optimized for stem cells . This method led to the isolation of anchorage-independent cells that proliferated slowly in suspension , forming spheroidal colonies . This process required basic fibroblast growth factor ( P09038 ) in the culture medium , because P09038 withdrawal caused the cells to attach to the culture dish and irreversibly lose their capacity to grow in suspension . Immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR analysis revealed the expression of the precursor cell markers P28906 and Tie-2 and the absence of endothelial cell markers ( CD31 and endothelial nitric oxide synthase , P29474 ) and smooth muscle cell markers ( alpha-smooth muscle actin , alpha-SMA ) . In addition , spheroid-forming cells were positive for Q99942 , nestin , PDGF receptor ( P09619 ) -alpha , and P09619 . Upon exposure to serum , these cells lost P28906 expression , acquired alpha-SMA , and attached to the culture dish . Returning these cells to serum-free medium failed to restore their original spheroid phenotype , suggesting terminal differentiation . When embedded in collagen gels , spheroid-forming cells rapidly migrated in response to DB00102 and became dendritic . Spheroid-forming cells cocultured in collagen with angiogenic outgrowths of rat aorta or isolated endothelial cells transformed into pericytes . These results demonstrate that the rat aorta contains primitive mesenchymal cells capable of pericyte differentiation . These immature cells may represent an important source of pericytes during angiogenesis in physiological and pathological processes . They may also provide a convenient supply of mural cells for vascular bioengineering applications .