Temporal and pharmacological characterization of angiostatin release and generation by human platelets : implications for endothelial cell migration . Platelets play an important role in thrombosis and in neo-vascularisation as they release and produce factors that both promote and suppress angiogenesis . Amongst these factors is the angiogenesis inhibitor angiostatin , which is released during thrombus formation . The impact of anti-thrombotic agents and the kinetics of platelet angiostatin release are unknown . Hence , our objectives were to characterize platelet angiostatin release temporally and pharmacologically and to determine how angiostatin release influences endothelial cell migration , an early stage of angiogenesis . We hypothesized anti-platelet agents would suppress angiostatin release but not generation by platelets . Human platelets were aggregated and temporal angiostatin release was compared to vascular endothelial growth factor ( P15692 ) . Immuno-gold electron microscopy and immunofluorescence microscopy identified α-granules as storage organelles of platelet angiostatin . Acetylsalicylic acid , MRS2395 , P08514 /IIIa blocking peptide , and aprotinin were used to characterize platelet angiostatin release and generation . An endothelial cell migration assay was performed under hypoxic conditions to determine the effects of pharmacological platelet and angiostatin inhibition . Compared to P15692 , angiostatin generation and release from α-granules occurred later temporally during platelet aggregation . Consequently , collagen-activated platelet releasates stimulated endothelial cell migration more potently than maximally-aggregated platelets . Platelet inhibitors prostacyclin , S-nitroso-glutathione , acetylsalicylic acid , and P08514 /IIIa blocking peptide , but not a Q9H244 inhibitor , suppressed angiostatin release but not generation . Suppression of angiostatin generation in the presence of acetylsalicylic acid enhanced platelet-stimulated endothelial migration . Hence , the temporal and pharmacological modulation of platelet angiostatin release may have significant consequences for neo-vascularization following thrombus formation .