Ellagic acid inhibits DB00102 -induced vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and prevents atheroma formation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats . Plant-derived polyphenolic compounds have beneficial health effects . In the present study , we determined the ability of ellagic acid ( EA ) to prevent platelet-derived growth factor-BB ( DB00102 ) -induced proliferation of primary cultures of rat aortic smooth muscle cells ( RASMCs ) . We also determined the ability of EA to prevent atherosclerosis in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats . Proliferation of cells was measured via Alamar Blue assay and through propidium iodide-based cell cycle analysis in flow cytometer . Reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) were measured via 2',7'-dichlorofluorescin diacetate and Amplex red methods . Expression of proliferation markers and activation of kinases were assessed by immunoblot analysis . Cotreatment of primary cultures of RASMCs with 25 μmol/L of EA significantly reduced DB00102 ( 20 ng/ml ) -induced proliferation by blocking S-phase entry . EA effectively blocked PDGF receptor-β ( P09619 -β ) tyrosine phosphorylation , generation of intracellular ROS and downstream activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 . It also blocked DB00102 -induced expression of cyclin D1 . Computational molecular docking of EA with the P09619 -β- DB00102 complex revealed two putative inhibitor binding sites which showed similar binding energies with the known P09619 -β inhibitor AG1295 . In diabetic rats , supplementation of diet with 2 % EA significantly blocked diabetes-induced medial thickness , and lipid and collagen deposition in the arch of aorta . These were assessed through haematoxylin and eosin , Oil Red O and Masson 's trichome staining , respectively . EA treatment also blocked cyclin D1 expression in medial smooth muscle cells in experimental animals . Thus , EA is effective in reducing atherosclerotic process by blocking proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells .