Evidence for an interaction between P21554 cannabinoid and melanocortin P08235 -4 receptors in regulating food intake . P32245 ( MCR4 ) and CB(1) cannabinoid receptors independently modulate food intake . Although an interaction between the cannabinoid and melanocortin systems has been found in recovery from hemorrhagic shock , the interaction between these systems in modulating food intake has not yet been examined . The present study had two primary purposes : 1 ) to examine whether the cannabinoid and melanocortin systems act independently or synergistically in suppressing food intake ; and 2 ) to determine the relative position of the CB(1) receptors in the chain of control of food intake in relation to the melanocortin system . Rats were habituated to the test environment and injection procedure and then received intracerebroventicular injections of various combinations of the MCR4 receptor antagonist JKC-363 , the CB(1) receptor agonist Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol , the MCR4 receptor agonist alpha-MSH , or the cannabinoid CB(1) receptor antagonist SR 141716 . Food intake and locomotor activity were then recorded for 120 min . When administrated alone , SR 141716 and alpha-MSH dose-dependently attenuated baseline feeding , whereas sub-anorectic doses of SR 141716 and alpha-MSH synergistically attenuated baseline feeding when combined . Delta(9)- DB00470 -induced feeding was not blocked by alpha-MSH , whereas SR 141716 dose-dependently attenuated JKC-363-induced feeding . Locomotor activity was not significantly affected by any drug treatment , suggesting that the observed effects on feeding were not due to a nonspecific reduction in motivated behavior . These findings revealed a synergistic interaction between the cannabinoid and melanocortin systems in feeding behavior . These results further suggested that CB(1) receptors are located downstream from melanocortin receptors and CB(1) receptor signaling is necessary to prevent the melanocortin system from altering food intake .