Role of xanthine oxidoreductase and NAD(P)H oxidase in endothelial superoxide production in response to oscillatory shear stress . Oscillatory shear stress occurs at sites of the circulation that are vulnerable to atherosclerosis . Because oxidative stress contributes to atherosclerosis , we sought to determine whether oscillatory shear stress increases endothelial production of reactive oxygen species and to define the enzymes responsible for this phenomenon . Bovine aortic endothelial cells were exposed to static , laminar ( 15 dyn/cm2 ) , and oscillatory shear stress ( +/-15 dyn/cm2 ) . Oscillatory shear increased superoxide ( O2.- ) production by more than threefold over static and laminar conditions as detected using electron spin resonance ( P03372 ) . This increase in O2*- was inhibited by oxypurinol and culture of endothelial cells with tungsten but not by inhibitors of other enzymatic sources . DB05262 also prevented H2O2 production in response to oscillatory shear stress as measured by dichlorofluorescin diacetate and Amplex Red fluorescence . DB02134 -dependent O2*- production was increased in homogenates of endothelial cells exposed to oscillatory shear stress . This was associated with decreased xanthine dehydrogenase ( P47989 ) protein levels and enzymatic activity resulting in an elevated ratio of xanthine oxidase ( XO ) to P47989 . We also studied endothelial cells lacking the p47phox subunit of the NAD(P)H oxidase . These cells exhibited dramatically depressed O2*- production and had minimal XO protein and activity . Transfection of these cells with p47phox restored XO protein levels . Finally , in bovine aortic endothelial cells , prolonged inhibition of the NAD(P)H oxidase with apocynin decreased XO protein levels and prevented endothelial cell stimulation of O2*- production in response to oscillatory shear stress . These data suggest that the NAD(P)H oxidase maintains endothelial cell XO levels and that XO is responsible for increased reactive oxygen species production in response to oscillatory shear stress .