The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor flavopiridol potentiates doxorubicin efficacy in advanced sarcomas : preclinical investigations and results of a phase I dose-escalation clinical trial . PURPOSE : Dysregulated cyclin-dependent kinases are important to the growth of some sarcomas . DB03496 is a pan-CDK inhibitor that has been shown to potentiate chemotherapy . As such , we explored the potentiation of doxorubicin by flavopiridol in sarcoma , in vitro and in vivo , and conducted a phase I trial of flavopiridol with doxorubicin in patients with advanced sarcomas . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN : Sarcoma cell lines and xenografts were treated with flavopiridol alone and in combination with doxorubicin . In the phase I study , doxorubicin and flavopiridol were administered on two flavopiridol schedules ; a 1-hour bolus and split dosing as a 30-minute bolus followed by a 4-hour infusion . RESULTS : Preclinically , flavopiridol potentiated doxorubicin . In vivo , doxorubicin administered 1 hour before flavopiridol was more active than doxorubicin alone . Clinically , 31 patients were enrolled on protocol and flavopiridol was escalated to target dose in two schedules ( 90 mg/m(2) bolus ; 50 mg/m(2) bolus + 40 mg/m(2) infusion ) both in combination with doxorubicin ( 60 mg/m(2) ) . Dose-limiting toxicities were neutropenia , leukopenia , and febrile neutropenia but no maximum tolerated dose was defined . DB03496 pharmacokinetics showed increasing C(max) with increasing dose . Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors ( RECIST ) responses included two partial responses , however , stable disease was seen in 16 patients . Of 12 evaluable patients with progressive well- and dedifferentiated liposarcoma , eight had stable disease greater than 12 weeks . CONCLUSIONS : The sequential combination of doxorubicin followed by flavopiridol is well tolerated on both schedules . Disease control was observed in well- and dedifferentiated liposarcoma specifically , a disease in which P11802 is known to be amplified .