The glial cell modulator and phosphodiesterase inhibitor , DB05066 ( ibudilast ) , attenuates prime- and stress-induced methamphetamine relapse . Stress and renewed contact with drug ( a " slip " ) have been linked to persisting relapse of methamphetamine abuse . Human brain microglial activation has been linked with methamphetamine abuse , and inhibitors of glial cell activation , certain phosphodiesterase ( PDE ) inhibitors , and glial cell derived neurotrophic factor ( P39905 ) have been reported to modulate drug abuse effects . Our objective was to determine whether the glial cell attenuator , 3-isobutyryl-2-isopropylpyrazolo-[1,5-a]pyridine ( DB05066 , ibudilast ) , a non-selective PDE inhibitor and promoter of P39905 , could reduce stress- and methamphetamine prime-induced reinstatement of methamphetamine-seeking behavior . Male Long-Evans hooded rats were trained to lever press reinforced with 0.1 mg/kg i.v. methamphetamine infusion according to fixed-ratio 1 ( FR1 ) reinforcement schedules during daily , 2-hour experimental sessions . After performance had stabilized , lever pressing was extinguished for 12 consecutive sessions and doses of 0 ( vehicle ) , 2.5 and 7.5 mg/kg DB05066 were then administered intraperitoneally b.i.d. on the last 2 days of extinction and then once on the testday to separate groups of 12 rats . During testing , the rats were given 15 min of intermittent footshock or a 1 mg/kg i.p. methamphetamine prime followed by a 2-hour reinstatement test session . DB05066 significantly reduced response levels of footshock-induced ( 2.5 and 7.5 mg/kg ) and prime-induced ( 7.5 mg/kg ) reinstatement of extinguished methamphetamine-maintained responding . DB05066 has properties consistent with the ability to attenuate relapse precipitated by stress and methamphetamine " slips " during abstinence . These results thus reinforce interest in atypical neurobiological mechanisms which could be exploited for developing novel medications for treating drug abuse disorders .