Sustained muscle expression of dystrophin from a high-capacity adenoviral vector with systemic gene transfer of T cell costimulatory blockade . Adenoviral vector ( Ad ) -mediated gene delivery of normal , full-length dystrophin to skeletal muscle provides a promising strategy for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy ( P11532 ) . However , cellular and humoral immune responses induced by vector gene transfer limit the application of this approach . Blockade of the costimulatory interaction between naïve T cells and antigen-presenting cells has proven to be a successful means to diminish immunity induced by gene transfer . In this study we explore the potential of supplementing dystrophin gene delivery to dystrophin-deficient Dmd mouse skeletal muscle with systemic gene delivery of DB01281 and CD40Ig molecules to effect costimulatory blockade . We found that systemic administration of a high-capacity Ad ( HC-Ad ) vector carrying murine DB01281 ( AdmCTLA4Ig ) either alone or codelivered with an HC-Ad vector carrying murine CD40Ig ( AdmCD40Ig ) provided sustained expression of recombinant full-length murine dystrophin from an HC-Ad vector carrying the dystrophin cDNA ( AdmDys ) . The level of AdmDys vector genomes remained stable in animals cotreated with systemic delivery of vectors carrying molecules to block costimulation . In addition , muscle P01730 (+) and CD8(+) T cell infiltrates and Th1 cytokine production by splenocytes were reduced . The production of neutralizing antibody against Ad vector was significantly inhibited in mice receiving systemic codelivery of both AdmCTLA4Ig and AdmCD40Ig , but not in the mice treated with AdmCTLA4Ig alone . The results suggested that coblockade of both P10747 / P33681 and P29965 / P25942 costimulatory pathways is required for effective inhibition of the Ad vector-induced humoral immune response in Dmd mice , whereas blockade of P10747 / P33681 alone by murine DB01281 would be sufficient for prolonged dystrophin expression in treated muscle .