Alterations in molecular chaperones and eIF2alpha during lung endothelial cell apoptosis . We have previously demonstrated that inhibition of CAAX carboxyl methylation with AGGC caused redistribution and condensation of the ER molecular chaperones , glucose-regulated protein ( GRP ) -94 and calnexin ; an effect that was attenuated by overexpression of dominant active RhoA . We have also shown that AGGC decreased P14625 protein level ; an effect that was dependent on caspase activity . In the present study , we tested the effects of inhibition of posttranslational processing of CAAX proteins on localization and protein levels of molecular chaperones and phosphorylation and protein level of eIF2alpha . We found that both AGGC , which inhibits CAAX carboxyl methylation , and simvastatin , which inhibits CAAX geranylgeranylation , caused relocalization of P14625 , calnexin , and calreticulin , effects that were not seen during endothelial apoptosis induced by P01375 or ultraviolet ( UV ) irradiation . These results suggest that posttranslational processing of CAAX proteins is important in maintaining localization of molecular chaperones normally found in the ER . We also noted that AGGC , but not simvastatin , P01375 , or UV irradiation , decreased protein levels of most molecular chaperones . Increased eIF2alpha phosphorylation was observed in the early stages of apoptosis , which was independent of the cause of apoptosis . These results suggest that eIF2alpha phosphorylation is a common early response to apoptosis-inducing stimuli . Interestingly , eIF2alpha protein level was decreased in the late stages of apoptosis induced by AGGC , P01375 , and UV irradiation : an effect that was prevented by caspase inhibition . Thus we speculate that caspase(s)-dependent proteolysis of molecular chaperones and eIF2alpha may be novel signaling pathways of apoptosis . We also speculate that increased eIF2alpha phosphorylation is a defensive response against endothelial cell apoptosis .