Genetic demonstration of intestinal Q9UHC9 as a major determinant of hepatic cholesterol and blood atherogenic lipoprotein levels . OBJECTIVE : The correlation between intestinal cholesterol absorption values and plasma low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol ( LDL-C ) levels remains controversial . Niemann-Pick-C1-Like 1 ( Q9UHC9 ) is essential for intestinal cholesterol absorption , and is the target of ezetimibe , a cholesterol absorption inhibitor . However , studies with Q9UHC9 knockout mice or ezetimibe can not definitively clarify this correlation because Q9UHC9 expression is not restricted to intestine in humans and mice . In this study we sought to genetically address this issue . METHODS AND RESULTS : We developed a mouse model that lacks endogenous ( Q9UHC9 ) and P01130 ( P01130 ) ( DKO ) , but transgenically expresses human Q9UHC9 in gastrointestinal tract only ( DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice ) . Our novel model eliminated potential effects of non-intestinal Q9UHC9 on cholesterol homeostasis . We found that human Q9UHC9 was localized at the intestinal brush border membrane of DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice . DB04540 feeding induced formation of Q9UHC9 -positive vesicles beneath this membrane in an ezetimibe-sensitive manner . Compared to DKO mice , DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice showed significant increases in cholesterol absorption and blood/hepatic/biliary cholesterol . Increased blood cholesterol was restricted to very low-density lipoprotein ( VLDL ) and LDL fractions , which was associated with increased secretion and plasma levels of apolipoproteins B100 and B48 . Additionally , DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice displayed decreased fecal cholesterol excretion and hepatic/intestinal expression of cholesterologenic genes . DB00973 treatment virtually reversed all of the transgene-related phenotypes in DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice . CONCLUSION : Our findings from DKO/ Q9NUQ9 (IntOnly) mice clearly demonstrate that Q9UHC9 -mediated cholesterol absorption is a major determinant of blood levels of apolipoprotein B-containing atherogenic lipoproteins , at least in mice .