Biomarker analysis of neoadjuvant doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide followed by ixabepilone or Paclitaxel in early-stage breast cancer . PURPOSE : Predictive biomarkers offer the potential to improve the benefit:risk ratio of a therapeutic agent . DB04845 achieves comparable pathologic complete response ( pCR ) rates to other active drugs in the neoadjuvant setting . This phase II trial was designed to investigate potential biomarkers that differentiate response to this agent . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN : Women with untreated , histologically confirmed primary invasive breast adenocarcinoma received neoadjuvant doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide , followed by 1:1 randomization to ixabepilone ( n = 148 ) or paclitaxel ( n = 147 ) . Rates of pCR were compared between treatment arms based on predefined biomarker sets : Q13509 , Q9Y6A5 , and CAPG gene expression , a 20- and 26-gene expression model , P08183 protein expression , and other potential markers of sensitivity . βIII-tubulin protein expression is reported separately but is referred to here for completeness . All patients underwent a core needle biopsy of the primary cancer for molecular marker analysis before chemotherapy . Gene expression profiling data were used for molecular subtyping . RESULTS : There was no significant difference in the rate of pCR in both treatment arms in βIII-tubulin-positive patients . Higher pCR rates were observed among βIII-tubulin-positive patients than in βIII-tubulin-negative patients . Furthermore , no correlation was evident between Q13509 , Q9Y6A5 , and CAPG gene expression , P08183 protein expression , multi-gene expression models , and the efficacy of ixabepilone or paclitaxel , even within the estrogen receptor-negative subset . CONCLUSION : These results indicate that βIII-tubulin protein and mRNA expression , P08183 protein expression , Q9Y6A5 and CAPG gene expression , and multigene expression models ( 20- and 26-gene ) are not predictive markers for differentiating treatment benefit between ixabepilone and paclitaxel in early-stage breast cancer .