Adulthood nicotine treatment alleviates behavioural impairments in rats neonatally treated with quinpirole : possible roles of acetylcholine function and neurotrophic factor expression . Increases in dopamine D(2) receptor sensitivity are known to be common in drug abuse and neurological disorders . Past data from this laboratory have shown that long-term increases in D(2) sensitivity can be produced by quinpirole treatment ( a D(2)/D(3) agonist ) during early development . The present investigation was designed to test the hypothesis that nicotine administration in adulthood would reduce both cognitive and skilled reaching impairments produced by increases in D(2) sensitivity . Female Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with quinpirole ( 1 mg/kg ) or saline from postnatal day 1 ( PD 1 ) to PD 21 . Beginning in adulthood ( PD 61 ) , rats were treated with nicotine ( 0.3 mg/kg free base ) or saline twice daily for 14 consecutive days before behavioural testing commenced . Animals neonatally treated with quinpirole demonstrated performance deficits on the Morris water task and a skilled reaching task compared to controls . Deficits on both tasks were completely alleviated by adulthood nicotine treatment . Animals neonatally treated with quinpirole demonstrated a significant 36 % decrease of P28329 in the hippocampus compared to saline controls that was partially eliminated by nicotine . Additionally , neonatal quinpirole produced a significant decrease in hippocampal P01138 content compared to controls , however , nicotine failed to alleviate this decrease in P01138 . The results of this investigation demonstrate that long-term increases in dopamine D(2) receptor sensitivity produce significant decreases in hippocampal cholinergic and P01138 expression that may result in cognitive impairment . DB00184 alleviates both cognitive and skilled reaching impairments caused by increases in D(2) sensitivity , but the mechanism through which nicotine is acting is currently unknown .