Broadening of transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate ( TRAMP ) model to represent late stage androgen depletion independent cancer . BACKGROUND : The transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate ( TRAMP ) model closely mimics PC-progression as it occurs in humans . However , the timing of disease incidence and progression ( especially late stage ) makes it logistically difficult to conduct experiments synchronously and economically . The development and characterization of androgen depletion independent ( ADI ) TRAMP sublines are reported . METHODS : Sublines were derived from androgen-sensitive TRAMP-C1 and TRAMP- P06681 cell lines by androgen deprivation in vitro and in vivo . Epithelial origin ( cytokeratin ) and expression of late stage biomarkers ( P12830 and KAI-1 ) were evaluated using immunohistochemistry . P10275 ( AR ) status was assessed through quantitative real time PCR , Western blotting , and immunohistochemistry . Coexpression of AR and P12830 was also evaluated . Clonogenicity and invasive potential were measured by soft agar and matrigel invasion assays . Proliferation/survival of sublines in response to androgen was assessed by WST-1 assay . In vivo growth of subcutaneous tumors was assessed in castrated and sham-castrated C57BL/6 mice . RESULTS : The sublines were epithelial and displayed ADI in vitro and in vivo . Compared to the parental lines , these showed ( 1 ) significantly faster growth rates in vitro and in vivo independent of androgen depletion , ( 2 ) greater tumorigenic , and invasive potential in vitro . All showed substantial downregulation in expression levels of tumor suppressor , P12830 , and metastatis suppressor , KAI-1 . Interestingly , the percentage of cells expressing AR with downregulated P12830 was higher in ADI cells , suggesting a possible interaction between the two pathways . CONCLUSIONS : The TRAMP model now encompasses ADI sublines potentially representing different phenotypes with increased tumorigenicity and invasiveness .