Alterations in brain extracellular dopamine and glycine levels following combined administration of the glycine transporter type-1 inhibitor Org-24461 and risperidone . The most dominant hypotheses for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia have focused primarily upon hyperfunctional dopaminergic and hypofunctional glutamatergic neurotransmission in the central nervous system . The therapeutic efficacy of all atypical antipsychotics is explained in part by antagonism of the dopaminergic neurotransmission , mainly by blockade of D(2) dopamine receptors . N-methyl-D-aspartate ( DB01221 ) receptor hypofunction in schizophrenia can be reversed by glycine transporter type-1 ( P48067 ) inhibitors , which regulate glycine concentrations at the vicinity of DB01221 receptors . Combined drug administration with P14416 blockade and activation of hypofunctional DB01221 receptors may be needed for a more effective treatment of positive and negative symptoms and the accompanied cognitive deficit in schizophrenia . To investigate this type of combined drug administration , rats were treated with the atypical antipsychotic risperidone together with the P48067 inhibitor Org-24461 . Brain microdialysis was applied in the striatum of conscious rats and determinations of extracellular dopamine , DOPAC , HVA , glycine , glutamate , and serine concentrations were carried out using HPLC/electrochemistry . DB00734 increased extracellular concentrations of dopamine but failed to influence those of glycine or glutamate measured in microdialysis samples . Org-24461 injection reduced extracellular dopamine concentrations and elevated extracellular glycine levels but the concentrations of serine and glutamate were not changed . When risperidone and Org-24461 were added in combination , a decrease in extracellular dopamine concentrations was accompanied with sustained elevation of extracellular glycine levels . Interestingly , the extracellular concentrations of glutamate were also enhanced . Our data indicate that coadministration of an antipsychotic with a P48067 inhibitor may normalize hypofunctional DB01221 receptor-mediated glutamatergic neurotransmission with reduced dopaminergic side effects characteristic for antipsychotic medication .