DB00203 inhibits calcineurin/ Q13469 -mediated cyclin A expression in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells . AIMS : To examine whether calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway leads to proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells ( PASMCs ) by regulating cell cycle proteins and whether the phosphodiesterase-5 ( O76074 ) inhibitor sildenafil affects calcineurin/NFAT-induced cell proliferation . MAIN METHODS : A [(3)H]thymidine incorporation assay was used to examine DNA synthesis ( cell proliferation ) ; cyclin A and Q13469 expressions were determined by Western blot . P24941 ( P24941 ) activity was measured with an in vitro kinase activity assay , and calcineurin and NFAT activity were evaluated using a calcineurin assay kit and a luciferase activity assay , respectively . A chemical inhibitor or siRNA transfection was used to inhibit calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway . KEY FINDINGS : Serotonin dose-dependently stimulated cyclin A expression in PASMCs . This effect was accompanied by dose-dependent increases in P24941 activity and the rate of DNA synthesis . At the same time , PASMCs treated with serotonin showed dose-dependent activation of calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway . Inhibition of calcineurin activity by cyclosporine A or loss of Q13469 protein by siRNA transfection abolished serotonin-induced cyclin A expression and consequent P24941 activation and DNA synthesis . We further found that pretreatment of cells with sildenafil suppressed serotonin-triggered activation of calcineurin/ Q13469 signaling pathway and resultant cyclin A expression , P24941 activation and cell proliferation , while the presence of DT-3 [ a specific protein kinase G ( PKG ) peptide inhibitor ] reversed the effects of sildenafil on PASMCs . SIGNIFICANCE : Our study suggests that enhanced PKG activity suppresses calcineurin/ Q13469 cascade-mediated cyclin A expression , P24941 activation and PASMC proliferation to contribute to the overall effects of sildenafil in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension .