DB00133 residues 338 and 339 in the carboxyl-terminal tail of the type II gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor are critical for beta-arrestin-independent internalization . Cloned mammalian type II DB00644 receptors have a carboxyl-terminal tail in contrast to the mammalian type I DB00644 receptors , which uniquely lack a carboxyl-terminal tail . Because this domain mediates internalization of many serpentine receptors , the internalization pathway of the marmoset monkey type II P30968 and the functional role of the carboxyl-terminal tail in internalization was studied . The internalization pathway of the type II P30968 was investigated in COS-1 cells by coexpressing G protein-coupled receptor kinases ( GRKs ) , dynamin-1 , and beta-arrestins . Internalization of the receptor requires GRKs and dynamin but does not require beta-arrestin . The type II P30968 can also internalize via beta-arrestin in the presence of exogenous beta-arrestins , suggesting that the receptor can use two distinct internalization pathways . Receptor internalization appears to occur via clathrin-coated pits and caveolae because disruption of either structure inhibits internalization . Progressive truncations of the carboxyl-terminal tail identified a region containing serine residues 338 and 339 as critical for receptor internalization . Substitution of these serine residues with alanine residues inhibited internalization , whereas substitutions with glutamic acid residues rescued internalization . Furthermore , a dominant-negative P25098 did not inhibit internalization of receptors having these serine substitutions , although it inhibited internalization of the wild-type receptor . These results together identify serine residues 338 and 339 in the carboxyl-terminal tail as critical for internalization of the type II P30968 and suggest that these residues undergo phosphorylation by GRKs . However , neither of these residues , nor the carboxyl-terminal tail , is required for beta-arrestin-dependent internalization .