Substance P promotes expansion of human mesenteric preadipocytes through proliferative and antiapoptotic pathways . White adipose tissue is intimately involved in the regulation of immunity and inflammation . We reported that human mesenteric preadipocytes express the DB05875 ( SP ) -mediated neurokinin-1 receptor ( P25103 ) , which signals proinflammatory responses . Here we tested the hypothesis that SP promotes proliferation and survival of human mesenteric preadipocytes and investigated responsible mechanism(s) . Preadipocytes were isolated from mesenteric fat biopsies during gastric bypass surgery . Proliferative and antiapoptotic responses were delineated in 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium ( MTS ) , bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) , caspase-3 , and TUNEL assays , as well as Western immunoanalysis . SP ( 10(-7) M ) increased MTS and proliferation ( BrdU ) and time dependently ( 15-30 min ) induced Akt , P01133 receptor , IGF receptor , integrin alphaVbeta3 , phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase , and PKC-theta phosphorylation . Furthermore , pharmacological antagonism of Akt and PKC-theta activation significantly attenuated SP-induced preadipocyte proliferation . Exposure of preadipocytes to the proapoptotic P48023 ( P48023 , 100 microM ) resulted in nuclear DNA fragmentation ( TUNEL assay ) , as well as increased cleaved poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase , cleaved caspase-7 , and caspase-3 expression . Cotreatment with SP almost completely abolished these responses in a P25103 -dependent fashion . SP ( 10(-7) M ) also time dependently stimulated expression 4E binding protein 1 and phosphorylation of P08133 S6 kinase , which increased protein translation efficiency . SP increases preadipocyte viability , reduces apoptosis , and stimulates proliferation , possibly via cell cycle upregulation and increased protein translation efficiency . SP-induced proliferative and antiapoptotic pathways in fat depots may contribute to development of the creeping fat and inflammation characteristic of Crohn 's disease .