Different effects of perindopril and enalapril on monocyte cytokine release in coronary artery disease patients with normal blood pressure . BACKGROUND : Favorable effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme ( P12821 ) inhibitor treatment on the incidence of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular mortality and morbidity are not limited to patients with elevated blood pressure . As suggested by our previous results , the physicochemical and pharmacokinetic differences between drugs may markedly contribute to the strength of pleiotropic effects of P12821 inhibitors . METHODS : The present study was aimed at comparing the effects of serum- and tissue-type P12821 inhibitors on monocyte release of proinflammatory cytokines in normotensive patients with stable coronary artery disease . The participants were randomized to 90-day treatment with enalapril ( 20 mg daily , n = 29 ) , perindopril ( 4 mg daily , n = 27 ) or placebo ( n = 28 ) . Plasma levels of lipids , glucose , insulin and high sensitivity P02741 ( hsCRP ) , as well as monocyte release of proinflammatory cytokines were determined before and after 30 days of therapy , and at the end of the treatment . RESULTS : Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated monocytes from normotensive patients with stable coronary artery disease released significantly more P01375 -α , interleukin-1β and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in comparison with monocytes from 23 matched control subjects . Their baseline hsCRP levels were also higher . DB00790 reversed the disease-induced changes in cytokine release and reduced plasma hsCRP , while the effect of enalapril was much more limited . The effect on both drugs on cytokine release was stronger in insulin-resistant than insulin-sensitive subjects . CONCLUSIONS : Our results indicate that perindopril is superior to enalapril in producing monocyte-suppressing and systemic anti-inflammatory effects in normotensive patients with coronary artery disease . This action may contribute to the clinical effectiveness of tissue P12821 inhibitors in the therapy of atherosclerosis-related disorders , particularly in insulin-resistant subjects .