Dynamic regulation of platelet-derived growth factor receptor α expression in alveolar fibroblasts during realveolarization . Although the importance of platelet-derived growth factor receptor ( P09619 ) -α signaling during normal alveogenesis is known , it is unclear whether this signaling pathway can regulate realveolarization in the adult lung . During alveolar development , P09619 -α-expressing cells induce α smooth muscle actin ( α-SMA ) and differentiate to interstitial myofibroblasts . Fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signaling regulates myofibroblast differentiation during alveolarization , whereas peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( Q07869 ) -γ activation antagonizes myofibroblast differentiation in lung fibrosis . Using left lung pneumonectomy , the roles of FGF and Q07869 -γ signaling in differentiation of myofibroblasts from P09619 -α-positive precursors during compensatory lung growth were assessed . FGF receptor ( FGFR ) signaling was inhibited by conditionally activating a soluble dominant-negative P21802 transgene . Q07869 -γ signaling was activated by administration of rosiglitazone . Changes in α-SMA and P09619 -α protein expression were assessed in P09619 -α-green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) reporter mice using immunohistochemistry , flow cytometry , and real-time PCR . Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry demonstrated that the cell ratio and expression levels of P09619 -α-GFP changed dynamically during alveolar regeneration and that α-SMA expression was induced in a subset of P09619 -α-GFP cells . Expression of a dominant-negative P21802 and administration of rosiglitazone inhibited induction of α-SMA in P09619 -α-positive fibroblasts and formation of new septae . Changes in gene expression of epithelial and mesenchymal signaling molecules were assessed after left lobe pneumonectomy , and results demonstrated that inhibition of P21802 signaling and increase in Q07869 -γ signaling altered the expression of Shh , FGF , Wnt , and Bmp4 , genes that are also important for epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk during early lung development . Our data demonstrate for the first time that a comparable epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk regulates fibroblast phenotypes during alveolar septation .