Chronic methamphetamine exposure alters immune function in normal and retrovirus-infected mice . Methamphetamine ( MA ) abuse represents a growing problem in the USA with an increase of sudden death . To evaluate the immune function alterations due to chronic methamphetamine use , we examined C57BL/C mice with LP-BM5 retrovirus infection plus methamphetamine exposure . Mice were randomly assigned to the following groups : placebo , placebo retrovirus-infected , uninfected MA treated and retrovirus-infected MA treated . Placebo , MA-treated groups were intraperitoneally injected with saline , MA , respectively , with a gradually increasing dose from 15 to 40 mg/kg for 12 weeks ( 5 days/week ) . Con A- and LPS-induced mitogenesis of splenocytes , cytokine production by splenocytes culture and lipid peroxides in the liver were measured . Heart tissue histopathology was analyzed in all the groups with murine cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) superinfection . Our data showed that MA treatment significantly decreased production of P60568 and interferon gamma ( P01579 ) in uninfected mice but did not further suppress the reduced Th1 cytokines in retrovirus-infected mice . There were no significant effects on cytokines P05112 and P05231 . However , tumor necrosis factor ( P01375 ) was significantly increased in both uninfected and infected mice due to MA treatment . Lipid peroxides in liver were significantly increased both in uninfected and retrovirus-infected mice due to MA exposure . DB00163 levels in liver were significantly decreased in uninfected mice due to MA treatment . CMV superinfection greatly increased the cardiac lesions in retrovirus-infected mice while no significant histopathology changes were detected due to MA treatment . Our data suggest that MA has immunomodulation activity , suppressing Th1 cytokine production and enhancing some Th2 cytokine secretion , as well as increasing lipid peroxides in uninfected mice . The interaction between LP-BM5 and MA remains unclear .