Disorders of carnitine transport and the carnitine cycle . DB00583 plays an essential role in the transfer of long-chain fatty acids across the inner mitochondrial membrane . This transfer requires enzymes and transporters that accumulate carnitine within the cell ( O76082 carnitine transporter ) , conjugate it with long chain fatty acids ( carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1 , CPT1 ) , transfer the acylcarnitine across the inner plasma membrane ( carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase , O43772 ) , and conjugate the fatty acid back to DB01992 for subsequent beta oxidation ( carnitine palmitoyl transferase 2 , P23786 ) . Deficiency of the O76082 carnitine transporter causes primary carnitine deficiency , characterized by increased losses of carnitine in the urine and decreased carnitine accumulation in tissues . Patients can present with hypoketotic hypoglycemia and hepatic encephalopathy , or with skeletal and cardiac myopathy . This disease responds to carnitine supplementation . Defects in the liver isoform of CPT1 present with recurrent attacks of fasting hypoketotic hypoglycemia . The heart and the muscle , which express a genetically distinct form of CPT1 , are usually unaffected . These patients can have elevated levels of plasma carnitine . O43772 deficiency presents in most cases in the neonatal period with hypoglycemia , hyperammonemia , and cardiomyopathy with arrhythmia leading to cardiac arrest . Plasma carnitine levels are extremely low . Deficiency of P23786 present more frequently in adults with rhabdomyolysis triggered by prolonged exercise . More severe variants of P23786 deficiency present in the neonatal period similarly to O43772 deficiency associated or not with multiple congenital anomalies . Treatment for deficiency of CPT1 , P23786 , and O43772 consists in a low-fat diet supplemented with medium chain triglycerides that can be metabolized by mitochondria independently from carnitine , carnitine supplements , and avoidance of fasting and sustained exercise .