A multicenter , open-label , prospective , randomized , dose-ranging pharmacokinetic study of the anti- P01375 antibody afelimomab in patients with sepsis syndrome . OBJECTIVE : To investigate the pharmacokinetics and safety of afelimomab , a murine antibody fragment against human tumor necrosis factor ( P01375 ) -alpha in patients with sepsis . DESIGN : Multicenter , randomized , open-label , placebo-controlled phase I/II clinical trial . SETTING : Intensive care units of six academic medical centers in the United States . PATIENTS : Forty-eight patients with a clinical diagnosis of sepsis who received standard supportive care and antimicrobial therapy . INTERVENTIONS : Patients received 0.3 , 1.0 , or 3.0 mg/kg afelimomab or placebo intravenously over 20 min . Three patients in each dose group received single doses ; the remaining nine patients in each group received multiple ( nine ) doses at 8-h intervals over 72 h . MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS : DB04956 appeared safe and well tolerated . Single- and multiple-dose kinetics were predictable and dose related . The elimination half-life was 44.7 h . DB04956 treatment resulted in increased serum concentrations of P01375 ( includes P01375 -antibody complexes ) and decreased serum interleukin-6 concentrations , whereas no discernible trends were observed in placebo-treated patients . There was no significant treatment effect on 28-day mortality as was expected given the small number of patients . However , overall mortality was significantly ( p = 0.001 ) associated with baseline interleukin-6 concentration . All patients experienced adverse events , but the vast majority were considered unrelated to the study drug and demonstrated no apparent relationship to afelimomab dose . Although 41 % of patients developed human anti-murine antibodies , there were no clinical sequelae . CONCLUSIONS : Multidose therapy with afelimomab was safe , well tolerated , and had predictable linear kinetics . A large randomized trial comparing afelimomab to placebo in patients with well defined sepsis has recently been completed .