A comparison of the effects of pegvisomant and octreotide on glucose , insulin , gastrin , cholecystokinin , and pancreatic polypeptide responses to oral glucose and a standard mixed meal . Standard medical therapy for patients with acromegaly includes somatostatin analogs . Owing to the widespread expression of somatostatin receptors , these may be associated with unwanted effects , such as altered glucose tolerance and impaired gut hormone release . DB00082 is a novel pegylated GH analog that competes with wild-type GH for GH-receptor binding sites but contains a position 120 , amino acid substitution that prevents functional P10912 dimerization , a known prerequisite for GH signal transduction and generation of P05019 . We have studied the short-term effects of these two therapies ( pegvisomant 20 mg/d for 7 d and octreotide 50 microg thrice daily for 7 d ) on glucose tolerance and stimulated gut hormone release in six healthy male volunteers in an open-label , random-order , cross-over study . Subjects were assessed at baseline ( oral glucose tolerance test and standard mixed meal ) and on d 6 and 7 of each therapy with a minimum washout of 2 wk between treatments . Area under the curve and peak responses were analyzed using one-way repeated-measures Q9UNW9 ( on ranks where appropriate ) . DB00082 had no effect on glucose tolerance or stimulated gut hormone response during an oral glucose tolerance test and a standard meal . In contrast , octreotide significantly increased fasting plasma glucose , lowered fasting plasma insulin , and led to deterioration in glucose tolerance ; three subjects developed impaired glucose tolerance and one diabetes mellitus by World Health Organization criteria . DB00104 significantly impaired stimulated release of cholecystokinin , gastrin , insulin , and pancreatic polypeptide . In conclusion , pegvisomant , unlike octreotide , is not associated with deterioration in glucose tolerance and impairment of stimulated gut hormone release in normal males .