Sense p16 and antisense Q03405 bicistronic construct inhibits angiogenesis and induces glioma cell death . High-grade gliomas comprise the most malignant type of primary brain tumor and are relatively frequent in adults . Recent studies have indicated that the loss of p16 , an inhibitor of P11802 , promotes the acquisition of malignant characteristics in gliomas . A correlation between overexpression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor ( Q03405 ) and glioblastoma invasion has also been established . Moreover , Q03405 /integrin binding has been shown to initiate or potentiate integrin signaling through focal adhesion kinase and/or src kinases . Our previous studies demonstrated that downregulation of Q03405 expression and restoration of p16 regress glioma growth in nude mice and downregulate alphavbeta3 integrin receptor expression . Here , we show the effect of a bicistronic construct on alphavbeta5 integrin receptor expression , angiogenesis and the biochemical pathway that causes glioma cell death . The U251 glioblastoma and a glioblastoma xenograft cell line transduced with a recombinant replication-defective adenovirus vector containing the cDNA of wild-type p16 and antisense RNA of Q03405 significantly inhibited human mammary epithelial cell capillary formation and vascular endothelial growth factor ( P15692 ) expression . Inactivation of anti-apoptotic molecules such as Akt , PARP , activation of caspases and accumulation of heteroduplex chromosomal DNA in pre- P55008 phase of the cell cycle was demonstrated by Western blotting , caspase activity assay and FACS analysis . Nuclear DNA fragmentation upon induction of apoptosis was scored using the TUNEL assay . Significant downregulation of alphavbeta5 integrin receptor expression was also confirmed by FACS analysis , immunoprecipitation and RT-PCR . Taken together , the results demonstrate that the sense p16 and anti-sense Q03405 bicistronic construct significantly inhibits angiogenesis , induces apoptosis by deregulation of the PI3K-Akt pathway and downregulates alphavbeta5 integrin receptor expression .