DB05773 : a P04626 -positive targeted antibody-drug conjugate . OBJECTIVE : To review the pharmacology , pharmacokinetics , efficacy , adverse effects , drug-drug interactions , dosage and administration , and formulary considerations for ado-trastuzumab emtansine . DATA SOURCES : Sources of information were identified through a PubMed search ( 1966 to June 2014 ) using the key terms ado-trastuzumab emtansine , trastuzumab-DM1 , trastuzumab-MCC-DM1 , and DB05773 . Other information was obtained from clinicaltrials.gov , product labeling , and press releases . STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION : All English-language clinical trials and abstracts evaluating ado-trastuzumab emtansine in humans were reviewed for inclusion . DATA SYNTHESIS : Overexpression or amplification of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ( P04626 ) occurs in approximately 20 % of breast cancers and is associated with more aggressive tumors and poorer prognosis in the absence of treatment . Although effective therapies for the initial management of P04626 -positive metastatic breast cancer ( MBC ) exist , many patients will experience disease progression . Most second-line therapies are associated with either significant toxicities or limited improvements in overall survival ( OS ) . DB05773 is a P04626 -positive directed antibody drug conjugate ( ADC ) approved in February 2013 . In phase III clinical trials comparing the efficacy and safety of ado-trastuzumab emtansine with lapatinib-capecitabine or physician 's choice , ado-trastuzumab emtansine had a better tolerability profile and improved progression-free survival compared with lapatinib-capecitabine or physician 's choice and increased OS compared with lapatinib-capecitabine . CONCLUSION : DB05773 is a novel ADC effective for P04626 -positive MBC in patients previously treated with trastuzumab , lapatinib , and a taxane . Further studies will determine its use in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant setting and in combination with pertuzumab .