Tumour suppressor Fus1 provides a molecular link between inflammatory response and mitochondrial homeostasis . Fus1 , encoded by a 3p21.3 tumour suppressor gene , is down-regulated , mutated or lost in the majority of inflammatory thoracic malignancies . The mitochondrial localization of Fus1 stimulated us to investigate how Fus1 modulates inflammatory response and mitochondrial function in a mouse model of asbestos-induced peritoneal inflammation . Asbestos treatment resulted in a decreased Fus1 expression in wild-type ( WT ) peritoneal immune cells , suggesting that asbestos exposure may compromise the Fus1-mediated inflammatory response . Untreated Fus1(-/-) mice had an ~eight-fold higher proportion of peritoneal granulocytes than Fus1(+/+) mice , pointing at ongoing chronic inflammation . Fus1(-/-) mice exhibited a perturbed inflammatory response to asbestos , reflected in decreased immune organ weight and peritoneal fluid protein concentration , along with an increased proportion of peritoneal macrophages . Fus1(-/-) immune cells showed augmented asbestos-induced activation of key inflammatory , anti-oxidant and genotoxic stress response proteins P27361 /2 , NFκB , P04179 , γ P16104 , etc . Moreover , Fus1(-/-) mice demonstrated altered dynamics of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine expression , such as IFNγ , TNFα , IL-1A , IL-1B and P22301 . ' Late ' response cytokine Ccl5 was persistently under-expressed in Fus1(-/-) immune cells at both basal and asbestos-activated states . We observed an asbestos-related difference in the size of CD3(+) P01730 (-) CD8(-) DN T cell subset that was expanded four-fold in Fus1(-/-) mice . Finally , we demonstrated Fus1-dependent basal and asbestos-induced changes in major mitochondrial parameters ( ROS production , mitochondrial potential and P55851 expression ) in Fus1(-/-) immune cells and in Fus1-depleted cancer cells , thus supporting our hypothesis that Fus1 establishes its immune- and tumour-suppressive activities via regulation of mitochondrial homeostasis .