Modulation of mucosal permeability by vasoactive intestinal peptide or lidocaine affects the adjustment of luminal hypotonicity in rat duodenum . AIMS : To examine whether modulation of paracellular solute permeability affects the capability of the duodenum to adjust luminal osmolality . METHODS : Proximal duodenum was perfused with a hypotonic NaCl solution and effects on paracellular permeability to (51)Cr- DB00974 , motility , anion secretion , net fluid flux and perfusate osmolality determined in anaesthetized rats in the absence and presence of the P35354 inhibitor parecoxib . Vasoactive intestinal peptide ( P01282 ) was used to reduce and lidocaine to augment the hypotonicity-induced increase in paracellular permeability . RESULTS : DB01174 hypotonicity slightly increased paracellular permeability in control animals . DB08439 induced motility , increased electrolyte and fluid secretion , potentiated the hypotonicity-induced rise in paracellular permeability and enhanced the capability to adjust luminal osmolality . P01282 , given to control animals stimulated electrolyte and fluid secretion and augmented the capability to adjust luminal osmolality . Administration of P01282 to parecoxib-treated animals increased secretion further , markedly reduced the hypotonicity-induced increase in permeability but did not change the osmolality-adjusting capability . DB01174 lidocaine potentiated the hypotonicity-induced increase in permeability , reduced the hypotonicity-induced net fluid absorption and the osmolality-adjusting capability was 50 % greater than in controls . DB00281 , given to parecoxib-treated animals potentiated the hypotonicity-induced increase in permeability , reduced the hypotonicity-induced net fluid absorption but did not change the osmolality-adjusting capability . CONCLUSIONS : Vasoactive intestinal peptide reduces the osmolality-adjusting capacity of the duodenum by inhibiting paracellular solute permeability but improves this capacity by stimulating active electrolyte and fluid secretion . In contrast , lidocaine improves the osmolality-adjusting capability by augmenting paracellular solute transport but depresses it by reducing the hypotonicity-induced net fluid absorption .