Erosive arthritis and hepatic granuloma formation induced by peptidoglycan polysaccharide in rats is aggravated by prasugrel treatment . Administration of the thienopyridine Q9H244 receptor antagonist , clopidogrel , increased the erosive arthritis induced by peptidoglycan polysaccharide ( PG-PS ) in rats or by injection of the arthritogenic K/BxN serum in mice . To determine if the detrimental effects are caused exclusively by clopidogrel , we evaluated prasugrel , a third-generation thienopyridine pro-drug , that contrary to clopidogrel is mostly metabolized into its active metabolite in the intestine . Prasugrel effects were examined on the PG-PS-induced arthritis rat model . Erosive arthritis was induced in Lewis rats followed by treatment with prasugrel for 21 days . Prasugrel treated arthritic animals showed a significant increase in the inflammatory response , compared with untreated arthritic rats , in terms of augmented macroscopic joint diameter associated with significant signs of inflammation , histomorphometric measurements of the hind joints and elevated platelet number . Moreover , fibrosis at the pannus , assessed by immunofluorescence of connective tissue growth factor , was increased in arthritic rats treated with prasugrel . In addition to the arthritic manifestations , hepatomegaly , liver granulomas and giant cell formation were observed after PG-PS induction and even more after prasugrel exposure . Cytokine plasma levels of P01584 , P05231 , MIP1 alpha , MCP1 , Q16552 and RANTES were increased in arthritis-induced animals . P22301 plasma levels were significantly decreased in animals treated with prasugrel . Overall , prasugrel enhances inflammation in joints and liver of this animal model . Since prasugrel metabolites inhibit neutrophil function ex-vivo and the effects of both clopidogrel and prasugrel metabolites on platelets are identical , we conclude that the thienopyridines metabolites might exert non-platelet effects on other immune cells to aggravate inflammation .