99th Dahlem conference on infection , inflammation and chronic inflammatory disorders : immune therapies of type 1 diabetes : new opportunities based on the hygiene hypothesis . P01308 -dependent ( type 1 ) diabetes is a prototypic organ-specific autoimmune disease resulting from the selective destruction of insulin-secreting beta cells within pancreatic islets of Langerhans by an immune-mediated inflammation involving autoreactive P01730 (+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes which infiltrate pancreatic islets . Current treatment is substitutive , i.e. chronic use of exogenous insulin which , in spite of significant advances , is still associated with major constraints ( multiple daily injections , risks of hypoglycaemia ) and lack of effectiveness over the long term in preventing severe degenerative complications . Finding a cure for autoimmune diabetes by establishing effective immune-based therapies is a real medical health challenge , as the disease incidence increases steadily in industrialized countries . As the disease affects mainly children and young adults , any candidate immune therapy must therefore be safe and avoid a sustained depression of immune responses with the attendant problems of recurrent infection and drug toxicity . Thus , inducing or restoring immune tolerance to target autoantigens , controlling the pathogenic response while preserving the host reactivity to exogenous/unrelated antigens , appears to be the ideal approach . Our objective is to review the major progress accomplished over the last 20 years towards that aim . In addition , we would like to present another interesting possibility to access new preventive strategies based on the ' hygiene hypothesis ' , which proposes a causal link between the increasing incidence of autoimmune diseases , including diabetes , and the decrease of the infectious burden . The underlying rationale is to identify microbial-derived compounds mediating the protective activity of infections which could be developed therapeutically .