P35372 phosphorylation , desensitization , and ligand efficacy . Mu opioid receptors are subject to phosphorylation and desensitization through actions of at least two distinct biochemical pathways : agonist-dependent mu receptor phosphorylation and desensitization induced by a biochemically distinct second pathway dependent on protein kinase C activation ( 1 ) . To better understand the nature of the agonist-induced mu receptor phosphorylation events , we have investigated the effects of a variety of opiate ligands of varying potencies and intrinsic activities on mu receptor phosphorylation and desensitization . Exposure to the potent full agonists sufentanil , dihydroetorphine , etorphine , etonitazine , and [ D-Ala2 , MePhe4 , Glyol5 ] enkephalin ( DAMGO ) led to strong receptor phosphorylation , while methadone , l-alpha-acetylmethadone ( DB01227 ) , morphine , meperidine , DADL , beta-endorphin(1-31) , enkephalins , and dynorphin A(1-17) produced intermediate effects . The partial agonist buprenorphine minimally enhanced receptor phosphorylation while antagonists failed to alter phosphorylation . DB00921 and full antagonists each antagonized the enhanced mu receptor phosphorylation induced by morphine or DAMGO . The rank order of opiate ligand efficacies in producing mu receptor-mediated functional desensitization generally paralleled their rank order of efficacies in producing receptor phosphorylation . Interestingly , the desensitization and phosphorylation mediated by methadone and DB01227 were disproportionate to their efficacies in two distinct test systems . This generally good fit between the efficacies of opiates in mu receptor activation , phosphorylation , and desensitization supports the idea that activated receptor/agonist/G-protein complexes and/or receptor conformational changes induced by agonists are required for agonist-induced mu receptor phosphorylation . Data for methadone and DB01227 suggest possible contribution from their enhanced desensitizing abilities to their therapeutic efficacies .