Central role for hydrogen peroxide in P47900 ADP receptor-mediated cellular responses in vascular endothelium . ADP activates a family of cell surface receptors that modulate signaling pathways in a broad range of cells . ADP receptor antagonists are widely used to treat cardiovascular disease states . These studies identify a critical role for the stable reactive oxygen species hydrogen peroxide ( H2O2 ) in mediating cellular responses activated by the G protein-coupled P47900 receptor for ADP . We found that ADP-dependent phosphorylation of key endothelial signaling proteins -- including endothelial nitric oxide synthase , AMP-activated protein kinase , and the actin-binding P29966 protein -- was blocked by preincubation with PEG-catalase , which degrades H2O2 . ADP treatment promoted the H2O2-dependent phosphorylation of c-Abl , a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that modulates the actin cytoskeleton . Cellular imaging experiments using fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based biosensors revealed that ADP-stimulated activation of the cytoskeleton-associated small GTPase Rac1 was independent of H2O2 . However , Rac1-dependent activation of AMP-activated protein kinase , the signaling phospholipid phosphatidylinositol- ( 4 , 5 ) -bisphosphate , and the c-Abl-interacting protein CrkII are mediated by H2O2 . We transfected endothelial cells with differentially targeted HyPer2 H2O2 biosensors and found that ADP promoted a marked increase in H2O2 levels in the cytosol and caveolae , and a smaller increase in mitochondria . We performed a screen for P47900 receptor-mediated receptor tyrosine kinase transactivation and discovered that ADP transactivates P36888 ( Flt3 ) , a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in these cells . Our observation that P47900 receptor-mediated responses involve Flt3 transactivation may identify a unique mechanism whereby cancer chemotherapy with receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors promotes vascular dysfunction . Taken together , these findings establish a critical role for endogenous H2O2 in control of ADP-mediated signaling responses in the vascular wall .