Temporal molecular and biological assessment of an erlotinib-resistant lung adenocarcinoma model reveals markers of tumor progression and treatment response . Patients with lung cancer with activating mutations in the P01133 receptor ( P00533 ) kinase , who are treated long-term with tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( TKI ) , often develop secondary mutations in P00533 associated with resistance . Mice engineered to develop lung adenocarcinomas driven by the human P00533 T790M resistance mutation are similarly resistant to the P00533 TKI erlotinib . By tumor volume endpoint analysis , these mouse tumors respond to DB08916 ( an irreversible P00533 / P04626 TKI ) and rapamycin combination therapy . To correlate P00533 -driven changes in the lung with response to drug treatment , we conducted an integrative analysis of global transcriptome and metabolite profiling compared with quantitative imaging and histopathology at several time points during tumor progression and treatment . Responses to single-drug treatments were temporary , whereas combination therapy elicited a sustained response . During tumor development , metabolomic signatures indicated a shift to high anabolic activity and suppression of antitumor programs with 11 metabolites consistently present in both lung tissue and blood . Combination drug treatment reversed many of the molecular changes found in tumored lung . Data integration linking cancer signaling networks with metabolic activity identified key pathways such as glutamine and glutathione metabolism that signified response to single or dual treatments . Results from combination drug treatment suggest that metabolic transcriptional control through C-MYC and SREBP , as well as ELK1 , NRF1 , and Q16236 , depends on both P00533 and mTORC1 signaling . Our findings establish the importance of kinetic therapeutic studies in preclinical assessment and provide in vivo evidence that TKI-mediated antiproliferative effects also manifest in specific metabolic regulation .