Reduction of heart failure by pharmacological inhibition or gene deletion of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B . Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B ( P18031 ) regulates tyrosine kinase receptor-mediated responses , and especially negatively influences insulin sensitivity , thus P18031 inhibitors ( PTP1Bi ) are currently evaluated in the context of diabetes . We recently revealed another important target for PTP1Bi , consisting in endothelial protection . The present study was designed to test whether reduction of P18031 activity may be beneficial in chronic heart failure ( CHF ) . We evaluated the impact of either a 2 month pharmacological inhibition , or a gene deletion of P18031 ( P18031 (-/-) ) in CHF mice ( 2 months post-myocardial infarction ) . PTP1Bi and P18031 deficiency reduced adverse LV remodeling , and improved LV function , as shown by the increased LV fractional shortening and cardiac output ( measured by echocardiography ) , the increased LV end systolic pressure , and the decreased LV end diastolic pressure , at identical infarct sizes . This was accompanied by reduced cardiac fibrosis , myocyte hypertrophy and cardiac expression of P01160 . In vitro vascular studies performed in small mesenteric artery segments showed a restored endothelial function ( i.e. improved NO-dependent , flow-mediated dilatation , increased P29474 phosphorylation ) after either pharmacological inhibition or gene deletion . P18031 (-/-) CHF also displayed an improved insulin sensitivity ( assessed by euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp studies ) , when compared to wild-type CHF associated with an increased insulin mediated mesenteric artery dilation . Thus , chronic pharmacological inhibition or gene deletion of P18031 improves cardiac dysfunction and cardiac remodeling in the absence of changes in infarct size . Thus this enzyme may be a new therapeutic target in CHF . Diabetic patients with cardiac complications may potentially benefit from P18031 inhibition via two different mechanisms , reduced diabetic complications , and reduced heart failure .