In vitro induction of protein complexes between bevacizumab , P15692 -A¹⁶⁵ and heparin : explanation for deposits observed on endothelial veins in monkey eyes . PURPOSE : By investigating the effects of intravitreal bevacizumab on retinal vessels of monkeys , we found that bevacizumab accumulated locally at high concentration within individual blood vessels . It formed electron-dense fibrous deposits between endothelial cells and erythrocytes or granulocytes inducing retinal vein thrombosis . To better characterise the observed deposits , we investigated in vitro whether these deposits result from a complex between bevacizumab , vascular endothelial growth factor ( P15692 ) -A(165) and heparin . METHODS : Cynomolgus monkeys were intravitreally injected with 1.25 mg bevacizumab . The eyes were enucleated between 1 and 14 days after injection and investigated by electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry . Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) were incubated with bevacizumab , P15692 (165) and heparin at different concentrations . Treatments with ranibizumab served as control . DB00112 and ranibizumab were detected immunohistochemically using Cy-3 or immunogold labelled antibodies . RESULTS : Treated animals showed bevacizumab locally at high concentration within retinal blood vessels . Electron-dense deposits inside retinal vessels and between erythrocytes were detected in three out of four treated monkeys . In vitro , many globular aggregates heavily stained with anti-human IgG were only observed with equimolar amounts ( 240 nM ) of bevacizumab and P15692 (165) and 0.2 U/ml heparin and not after ranibizumab treatment . The immunogold labelling specifically localised ultrastructurally the complexes formed between bevacizumab , P15692 (165) and heparin at the surfaces of HUVEC cells . CONCLUSIONS : DB01109 promotes bevacizumab immune complex deposition on to endothelial cells . Our in vitro results could explain the presence of deposits observed on endothelial veins in monkey eyes intravitreally injected with bevacizumab .