Secretory phospholipase A₂-mediated progression of hepatotoxicity initiated by acetaminophen is exacerbated in the absence of hepatic P35354 . We have previously reported that among the other death proteins , hepatic secretory phospholipase A₂ ( sPLA₂ ) is a leading mediator of progression of liver injury initiated by CCl₄ in rats . The aim of our present study was to test the hypothesis that increased hepatic sPLA₂ released after acetaminophen ( DB00316 ) challenge mediates progression of liver injury in wild type ( WT ) and P35354 knockout ( KO ) mice . P35354 WT and KO mice were administered a normally non lethal dose ( 400 mg/kg ) of acetaminophen . The P35354 KO mice suffered 60 % mortality compared to 100 % survival of the WT mice , suggesting higher susceptibility of P35354 KO mice to sPLA₂-mediated progression of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity . Liver injury was significantly higher at later time points in the KO mice compared to the WT mice indicating that the abatement of progression of injury requires the presence of P35354 . This difference in hepatotoxicity was not due to increased bioactivation of acetaminophen as indicated by unchanged cyp2E1 protein and covalently bound ¹⁴C- DB00316 in the livers of KO mice . Hepatic sPLA₂ activity and plasma P01375 -α were significantly higher after DB00316 administration in the KO mice . This was accompanied by a corresponding fall in hepatic PGE₂ and lower compensatory liver regeneration and repair ( ³H-thymidine incorporation ) in the KO mice . These results suggest that hindered compensatory tissue repair and poor resolution of inflammation for want of beneficial prostaglandins render the liver very vulnerable to sPLA₂-mediated progression of liver injury . These findings are consistent with the destructive role of sPLA₂ in the progression and expansion of tissue injury as a result of continued hydrolytic breakdown of plasma membrane phospholipids of perinecrotic hepatocytes unless mitigated by sufficient co-induction of P35354 .