Steroid hormone receptors and coregulators in endocrine-resistant and estrogen-independent breast cancer cells . Resistance to hormonal therapy is often a problem in the treatment of breast cancer patients . It has been suggested that resistance could be explained by altered nuclear hormone receptor or coregulator levels or inappropriately increased agonist activity of selective estrogen receptor modulator ( SERM ) . To test these hypotheses , we have established novel MCF-7 cell line-derived in vitro models of anti-estrogen- and progestin-resistant and estrogen-independent breast cancer by long-term culture in the presence of toremifene and medroxyprogesterone acetate ( DB00603 ) and in the absence of estradiol , respectively . Using cell growth and multiprobe ribonuclease protection assays , the expression of 5 nuclear hormone receptors and 9 coregulators as well as the alterations in the cell proliferation and target gene transcription in response to hormonal treatments were studied . P06401 ( PR ) expression was decreased and silencing mediator for retinoid acid and thyroid hormone receptors ( Q9Y618 ) and amplified in breast cancer-1 ( Q9Y6Q9 ) expression increased in anti-estrogen-resistant cells . Estrogen caused PR and ERbeta upregulation in all cell lines , but we did not observe increased agonist activity of anti-estrogen measured by regulation of these estrogen target genes . Basal ERalpha levels and estrogenic growth response were decreased and p300/CBP-associated factor ( pCAF ) and Q9Y6Q9 upregulated by estrogen in progestin-resistant cells , but coregulator levels were unchanged . Estrogen-independent cells were still estrogen-responsive and PR , nuclear receptor corepressor ( O75376 ) and Q9Y618 expression was increased whereas steroid receptor coactivator-1 ( P12931 -1a ) and CBP-related protein p300 ( p300 ) expression decreased . Their growth was inhibited by toremifene , but estradiol was able to abrogate this effect , which might have interesting clinical implications concerning the use of postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy .