Gene expression results in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated monocytes depend significantly on the choice of reference genes . BACKGROUND : Gene expression in lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) -stimulated monocytes is mainly studied by quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR ( RT-qPCR ) using P04406 ( glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase ) or P60709 ( beta-actin ) as reference gene for normalization . Expression of traditional reference genes has been shown to vary substantially under certain conditions leading to invalid results . To investigate whether traditional reference genes are stably expressed in LPS-stimulated monocytes or if RT-qPCR results are dependent on the choice of reference genes , we have assessed and evaluated gene expression stability of twelve candidate reference genes in this model system . RESULTS : Twelve candidate reference genes were quantified by RT-qPCR in LPS-stimulated , human monocytes and evaluated using the programs geNorm , Normfinder and BestKeeper. geNorm ranked P23284 ( cyclophilin B ) , P61769 ( beta-2-microglobulin ) and P62937 ( cyclophilin A ) as the best combination for gene expression normalization in LPS-stimulated monocytes . Normfinder suggested P20226 ( TATA-box binding protein ) and P61769 as the best combination . Compared to these combinations , normalization using P04406 alone resulted in significantly higher changes of P01375 ( tumor necrosis factor-alpha ) and P22301 ( interleukin 10 ) expression . Moreover , a significant difference in P01375 expression between monocytes stimulated with equimolar concentrations of LPS from N. meningitides and E. coli , respectively , was identified when using the suggested combinations of reference genes for normalization , but stayed unrecognized when employing a single reference gene , P60709 or P04406 . CONCLUSIONS : Gene expression levels in LPS-stimulated monocytes based on RT-qPCR results differ significantly when normalized to a single gene or a combination of stably expressed reference genes . Proper evaluation of reference gene stabiliy is therefore mandatory before reporting RT-qPCR results in LPS-stimulated monocytes .