DB00197 regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and inducible nitric oxide synthase in murine ovarian macrophages . Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma ( P37231 ) and Q07869 ( Q07869 ) control metabolic processes in many cell types and act as anti-inflammatory regulators in macrophages . Q07869 -activating ligands include thiazolidinediones ( TZDs ) , such as troglitazone , once frequently used to treat insulin resistance as well as symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome ( PCOS ) . Since macrophages within the ovary mediate optimal follicle development , TZD actions to improve PCOS symptoms are likely to be partly mediated through these specifically localized immune cells . In mouse ovary , P37231 protein was expressed in granulosa cells and in isolated cells localized to theca , stroma , and corpora lutea , consistent with Q14246 + macrophages . Isolation of immune cells ( Q14246 + or H2+ ) showed that Pparg and Ppara were expressed in ovarian macrophages at much higher levels than in peritoneal macrophages . Ovulatory human chorionic gonadotropin downregulated expression of Pparg and Ppara in Q14246 + ovarian macrophages , but no hormonal responsiveness was observed in H2+ cells . Downstream anti-inflammatory effects of P37231 activation were analyzed by in vitro treatment of isolated macrophages with troglitazone . P01584 ( Il1b ) expression was not altered , and tumor necrosis factor-alpha ( Tnf ) expression was affected in peritoneal macrophages only . In ovarian macrophages , inducible nitric oxide synthase ( Nos2 ) , an important proinflammatory enzyme that regulates ovulation , was significantly reduced by troglitazone treatment , an effect that was restricted to cells from the preovulatory ovary . Thus , expression of PPARs within ovarian macrophages is hormonally regulated , reflecting the changing roles of these cells during the ovulatory cycle . Additionally , ovarian macrophages respond directly to troglitazone to downregulate expression of proinflammatory Nos2 , providing mechanistic information about ovarian effects of TZD treatment .