Direct intracerebral delivery of cintredekin besudotox ( P35225 -PE38QQR ) in recurrent malignant glioma : a report by the DB05305 Intraparenchymal Study Group . PURPOSE : Glioblastoma multiforme ( GBM ) is a devastating brain tumor with a median survival of 6 months after recurrence . Cintredekin besudotox ( CB ) is a recombinant protein consisting of interleukin-13 ( P35225 ) and a truncated form of Pseudomonas exotoxin ( PE38QQR ) . Convection-enhanced delivery ( DB01333 ) is a locoregional-administration method leading to high-tissue concentrations with large volume of distributions . We assessed the use of intracerebral DB01333 to deliver CB in patients with recurrent malignant glioma ( MG ) . PATIENTS AND METHODS : Three phase I clinical studies evaluated intracerebral DB01333 of CB along with tumor resection . The main objectives were to assess the tolerability of various concentrations and infusion durations ; tissue distribution ; and methods for optimizing delivery . All patients underwent tumor resection followed by a single intraparenchymal infusion ( in addition to the intraparenchymal one following resection ) , with a portion of patients who had a preresection intratumoral infusion . RESULTS : A total of 51 patients with MG were treated including 46 patients with GBM . The maximum tolerated intraparenchymal concentration was 0.5 microg/mL and tumor necrosis was observed at this concentration . Infusion durations of up to 6 days were well tolerated . Postoperative catheter placement appears to be important for optimal drug distribution . CB- and procedure-related adverse events were primarily limited to the CNS . Overall median survival for GBM patients is 42.7 weeks and 55.6 weeks for patients with optimally positioned catheters with patient follow-up extending beyond 5 years . CONCLUSION : CB appears to have a favorable risk-benefit profile . DB01333 is a complex delivery method requiring catheter placement via a second procedure to achieve accurate catheter positioning , better drug distribution , and better outcome .