Comparative transcriptional network modeling of three Q07869 -α/γ co-agonists reveals distinct metabolic gene signatures in primary human hepatocytes . AIMS : To compare the molecular and biologic signatures of a balanced dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( Q07869 ) -α/γ agonist , aleglitazar , with tesaglitazar ( a dual Q07869 -α/γ agonist ) or a combination of pioglitazone ( Pio ; Q07869 -γ agonist ) and fenofibrate ( Feno ; Q07869 -α agonist ) in human hepatocytes . METHODS AND RESULTS : Gene expression microarray profiles were obtained from primary human hepatocytes treated with EC(50)-aligned low , medium and high concentrations of the three treatments . A systems biology approach , Causal Network Modeling , was used to model the data to infer upstream molecular mechanisms that may explain the observed changes in gene expression . DB08915 , tesaglitazar and Pio/Feno each induced unique transcriptional signatures , despite comparable core Q07869 signaling . Although all treatments inferred qualitatively similar Q07869 -α signaling , aleglitazar was inferred to have greater effects on high- and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels than tesaglitazar and Pio/Feno , due to a greater number of gene expression changes in pathways related to high-density and low-density lipoprotein metabolism . Distinct transcriptional and biologic signatures were also inferred for stress responses , which appeared to be less affected by aleglitazar than the comparators . In particular , Pio/Feno was inferred to increase Q16236 activity , a key component of the stress response pathway , while aleglitazar had no significant effect . All treatments were inferred to decrease proliferative signaling . CONCLUSIONS : DB08915 induces transcriptional signatures related to lipid parameters and stress responses that are unique from other dual Q07869 -α/γ treatments . This may underlie observed favorable changes in lipid profiles in animal and clinical studies with aleglitazar and suggests a differentiated gene profile compared with other dual Q07869 -α/γ agonist treatments .