Activation of telomerase by ionizing radiation : differential response to the inhibition of DNA double-strand break repair by abrogation of poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation , by LY294002 , or by Wortmannin . PURPOSE : Telomerase activity represents a radiation-inducible function , which may be targeted by a double-strand break ( DSB ) -activated signal transduction pathway . Therefore , the effects of DNA-PK inhibitors ( Wortmannin and LY294002 ) on telomerase upregulation after irradiation were studied . In addition , the role of trans-dominant inhibition of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation , which strongly reduces DSB rejoining , was assessed in comparison with 3-aminobenzamide . METHODS AND MATERIALS : COM3 rodent cells carry a construct for the dexamethasone-inducible overexpression of the DNA-binding domain of P09874 and exhibit greatly impaired DSB rejoining after irradiation . Telomerase activity was measured using polymerase chain reaction ELISA 1 h after irradiation with doses up to 10 Gy . Phosphorylation status of P31749 /Akt and of PKCalpha/beta(II) was assessed by western blotting . RESULTS : No telomerase upregulation was detectable for irradiated cells with undisturbed DSB rejoining . In contrast , incubation with LY294002 or dexamethasone yielded pronounced radiation induction of telomerase activity that could be suppressed by Wortmannin . 3-Aminobenzamide not only was unable to induce telomerase activity but also suppressed telomerase upregulation upon incubation with LY294002 or dexamethasone . Phospho- P31749 was detectable independent of irradiation or dexamethasone pretreatment , but was undetectable upon incubations with LY294002 or Wortmannin , whereas phospho-PKC rested detectable . CONCLUSIONS : Telomerase activation postirradiation was triggered by different treatments that interfere with DNA DSB processing . This telomerase upregulation , however , was not reflected by the phosporylation status of the putative mediators of O14746 activation , P31749 and PKC . Although an involvement of P31749 in O14746 activation is not supported by the present findings , a respective role of PKC isoforms other than alpha/beta(II) can not be ruled out .