Imatinib and nilotinib inhibit hematopoietic progenitor cell growth , but do not prevent adhesion , migration and engraftment of human cord blood P28906 + cells . BACKGROUND : The availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( TKIs ) has considerably changed the management of Philadelphia chromosome positive leukemia . The P11274 - P00519 inhibitor imatinib is also known to inhibit the tyrosine kinase of the stem cell factor receptor , c-Kit . DB04868 is 30 times more potent than imatinib towards P11274 - P00519 in vitro . Studies in healthy volunteers and patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia or gastrointestinal stromal tumors have shown that therapeutic doses of nilotinib deliver drug levels similar to those of imatinib . The aim of this study was to compare the inhibitory effects of imatinib and nilotinib on proliferation , differentiation , adhesion , migration and engraftment capacities of human cord blood P28906 (+) cells . DESIGN AND METHODS : After a 48-hour cell culture with or without TKIs , Q15814 , LTC-IC , migration , adhesion and cell cycle analysis were performed . In a second time , the impact of these TKIs on engraftment was assessed in a xenotransplantation model using NOD/SCID/IL-2Rγ ( null ) mice . RESULTS : TKIs did not affect LTC-IC frequencies despite in vitro inhibition of Q15814 formation due to inhibition of P28906 (+) cell cycle entry . Adhesion of P28906 (+) cells to retronectin was reduced in the presence of either imatinib or nilotinib but only at high concentrations . Migration through a SDF-1α gradient was not changed by cell culture in the presence of TKIs . Finally , bone marrow cellularity and human chimerism were not affected by daily doses of imatinib and nilotinib in a xenogenic transplantation model . No significant difference was seen between TKIs given the equivalent affinity of imatinib and nilotinib for P10721 . CONCLUSIONS : These data suggest that combining non-myeloablative conditioning regimen with TKIs starting the day of the transplantation could be safe .