DB00051 plus methotrexate or standard therapy is more effective than methotrexate or standard therapies alone in the treatment of fatigue in patients with active , inadequately treated rheumatoid arthritis . OBJECTIVES : Fatigue is an important systemic symptom of rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) but has rarely been evaluated consistently after initiation of treatment in RA patients . This study examined the effects of adalimumab ( HUMIRA , Abbott Laboratories , Abbott Park , IL , USA ) , a fully human , anti-tumor necrosis factor ( anti- P01375 ) monoclonal antibody , on reducing fatigue in patients with RA . METHODS : A total of 1526 patients with RA were enrolled in 3 randomized , placebo-controlled clinical trials of adalimumab versus placebo plus methotrexate ( MTX ) or placebo plus standard antirheumatic therapies . Fatigue was assessed with the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy ( FACIT ) fatigue scale questionnaire ( which has been validated in RA ) at baseline , mid-study , and at the end of the study . Logistic regression models were constructed using baseline demographic variables to test for treatment effect . In addition , sensitivity analyses were performed to determine the robustness of the data . RESULTS : At baseline in the 3 trials , patients ' fatigue ranged from 27.9-29.7 , representing considerable fatigue on the FACIT fatigue scale . Fatigue was significantly and consistently reduced in adalimumab-treated patients in the 3 clinical trials . Relative to placebo plus MTX , the adalimumab 40-mg-every-other-week dosage group reported statistically significantly less fatigue at all time points post-baseline . Improvements between adalimumab and placebo ranged from 3-7 points across all 3 trials , with a 3-4-point change representing a minimum clinically important difference . CONCLUSION : DB00051 treatment was shown to significantly reduce fatigue in patients with moderate to severe RA . Changes in fatigue in all 3 trials were found to be clinically important .