A transgenic platform for testing drugs intended for reversal of cardiac remodeling identifies a novel 11βHSD1 inhibitor rescuing hypertrophy independently of re-vascularization . RATIONALE : Rescuing adverse myocardial remodeling is an unmet clinical goal and , correspondingly , pharmacological means for its intended reversal are urgently needed . OBJECTIVES : To harness a newly-developed experimental model recapitulating progressive heart failure development for the discovery of new drugs capable of reversing adverse remodeling . METHODS AND RESULTS : A P15692 -based conditional transgenic system was employed in which an induced perfusion deficit and a resultant compromised cardiac function lead to progressive remodeling and eventually heart failure . Ability of candidate drugs administered at sequential remodeling stages to reverse hypertrophy , enlarged LV size and improve cardiac function was monitored . Arguing for clinical relevance of the experimental system , clinically-used drugs operating on the P00797 -Angiotensin- DB04630 -System ( RAAS ) , namely , the P12821 inhibitor Enalapril and the direct renin inhibitor Aliskerin fully reversed remodeling . Remodeling reversal by these drugs was not accompanied by neovascularization and reached a point-of-no-return . Similarly , the PPARγ agonist Pioglitazone was proven capable of reversing all aspects of cardiac remodeling without affecting the vasculature . Extending the arsenal of remodeling-reversing drugs to pathways other than RAAS , a specific inhibitor of 11β-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase type 1 ( 11β HSD1 ) , a key enzyme required for generating active glucocorticoids , fully rescued myocardial hypertrophy . This was associated with mitigating the hypertrophy-associated gene signature , including reversing the myosin heavy chain isoform switch but in a pattern distinguishable from that associated with neovascularization-induced reversal . CONCLUSIONS : A system was developed suitable for identifying novel remodeling-reversing drugs operating in different pathways and for gaining insights into their mechanisms of action , exemplified here by uncoupling their vascular affects .