Effect of pioglitazone treatment on endoplasmic reticulum stress response in human adipose and in palmitate-induced stress in human liver and adipose cell lines . Obesity and elevated cytokine secretion result in a chronic inflammatory state and may cause the insulin resistance observed in type 2 diabetes . Recent studies suggest a key role for endoplasmic reticulum stress in hepatocytes and adipocytes from obese mice , resulting in reduced insulin sensitivity . To address the hypothesis that thiazolidinediones , which improve peripheral insulin sensitivity , act in part by reducing the endoplasmic reticulum stress response , we tested subcutaneous adipose tissue from 20 obese volunteers treated with pioglitazone for 10 wk . We also experimentally induced endoplasmic reticulum stress using palmitate , tunicamycin , and thapsigargin in the human HepG2 liver cell line with or without pioglitazone pretreatment . We quantified endoplasmic reticulum stress response by measuring both gene expression and phosphorylation . Pioglitazone significantly improved insulin sensitivity in human volunteers ( P = 0.002 ) but did not alter markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress . Differences in pre- and posttreatment endoplasmic reticulum stress levels were not correlated with changes in insulin sensitivity or body mass index . In vitro , palmitate , thapsigargin , and tunicamycin but not oleate induced endoplasmic reticulum stress in HepG2 cells , including increased transcripts P35638 , O75460 , O75807 , and Q9NZJ5 , and increased P17861 splicing along with phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2alpha , P45983 , and c-jun . Although patterns of endoplasmic reticulum stress response differed among palmitate , tunicamycin , and thapsigargin , pioglitazone pretreatment had no significant effect on any measure of endoplasmic reticulum stress , regardless of the inducer . Together , our data suggest that improved insulin sensitivity with pioglitazone is not mediated by a reduction in endoplasmic reticulum stress .