In vivo protection of activated Tyr22-dihydrofolate reductase gene-modified canine T lymphocytes from methotrexate . BACKGROUND : Nonmyeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell ( P19526 ) transplantation can cure malignant and nonmalignant diseases affecting the hematopoietic system , such as severe combined immunodeficiencies , aplastic anemia and hemoglobinopathies . Although nonmyeloablative is favored over myeloablative transplantation for many patients , graft rejection remains problematic . One strategy for decreasing rejection is to protect donor activated T cells in the graft from methotrexate ( MTX ) by genetically modifying the cells to express MTX-resistant dihydrofolate reductase ( Tyr22- P00374 ) , leaving the immunosuppressive effects of MTX to act solely on activated host T lymphocytes , shifting the balance to favor allogeneic engraftment . METHODS : To evaluate MTX resistance of Tyr22- P00374 (+) T lymphocytes in vivo , we transplanted dogs with autologous P28906 (+) cells modified with yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) and P00374 -green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) lentivirus vectors . Dogs were then treated with a standard MTX regimen days 1 , 3 , 6 and 11 ) following immune activation with a foreign antigen as a surrogate assay to mimic early transplantation . RESULTS : P00374 -GFP(+) gene marking was maintained in CD3(+) CD25(+) and P01730 (+) T lymphocytes after MTX treatment , whereas the level of T lymphocytes that expressed only a fluorescent reporter ( YFP(+) ) decreased . These data show that Tyr22- P00374 expression protects T lymphocytes from MTX toxicity in dogs , highlighting a clinically relevant application for preserving donor T lymphocytes during post-transplantation immunosuppression . CONCLUSIONS : The findings of the present study have implications for the clinical translation of MTX-resistant T cells to facilitate engraftment of allogeneic cells following nonmyeloablative conditioning and to minimize the risk of rejection . In summary , Tyr22- P00374 expression in T lymphocytes provides chemoprotection from MTX-mediated elimination in the context of immune activation in vivo .