Differential effects of P43220 agonists on components of dysglycaemia in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus . Metabolic consequences of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists ( P0C6A0 RAs ) are the result of enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion , inhibition of glucagon release , delayed gastric emptying and increased satiety . These attributes make P0C6A0 agonists a treatment option in type 2 diabetes mellitus ( T2DM ) . To optimise treatment choice , a detailed understanding of the effects of P0C6A0 RAs on glucose homeostasis in individuals with T2DM is necessary . Although the various P0C6A0 RAs share the same basic mechanisms of action , differences in pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic characteristics translate into differential effects on parameters of glycaemia . Head-to-head comparisons between long-acting non-prandial ( liraglutide once daily and exenatide once weekly ) and shorter-acting prandial ( exenatide twice daily and lixisenatide once daily prandial ) P0C6A0 RAs confirm their differential effects on fasting plasma glucose ( FPG ) and post-prandial glucose ( PPG ) . DB06655 once daily and exenatide once weekly demonstrate greater reductions in FPG but lesser impacts on PPG excursions plasma than exenatide twice daily . Prandial P0C6A0 RAs have a profound effect on post-prandial glycaemia , mediated by delaying gastric emptying , which is not subject to the tachyphylaxis occurring due to the sustained elevated plasma P0C6A0 concentrations after treatment with long-acting P0C6A0 RAs . DB09265 once-daily prandial , in contrast to liraglutide , strongly suppresses post-prandial glucagon secretion , further contributing to the more pronounced PPG-lowering effect found with lixisenatide . Evidence suggests that the P0C6A0 RAs that predominantly target the prandial glucose excursions , such as exenatide twice daily and lixisenatide once-daily prandial , are therefore best used as combination therapy with basal insulin and will form an important new treatment option for individuals with T2DM .