Molecular mechanisms governing different pharmacokinetics of ginsenosides and potential for ginsenoside-perpetrated herb-drug interactions on Q9NPD5 . BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE : Ginsenosides are bioactive saponins derived from Panax notoginseng roots ( Sanqi ) and ginseng . Here , the molecular mechanisms governing differential pharmacokinetics of 20(S)-protopanaxatriol-type ginsenoside Rg1 , ginsenoside Re and notoginsenoside Q96GN5 and 20(S)-protopanaxadiol-type ginsenosides Rb1 , Rc and Rd were elucidated . EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH : Interactions of ginsenosides with human and rat hepatobiliary transporters were characterized at the cellular and vesicular levels . A rifampin-based inhibition study in rats evaluated the in vivo role of organic anion-transporting polypeptide (Oatp)1b2 . Plasma protein binding was assessed by equilibrium dialysis . Drug-drug interaction indices were calculated to estimate potential for clinically relevant ginsenoside-mediated interactions due to inhibition of human OATP1Bs . KEY RESULTS : All the ginsenosides were bound to human Q9NPD5 and rat Oatp1b2 but only the 20(S)-protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides were transported . Human multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP)2/breast cancer resistance protein ( Q9UNQ0 ) /bile salt export pump ( O95342 ) /multidrug resistance protein-1 and rat Mrp2/Bcrp/Bsep also mediated the transport of the 20(S)-protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides . Glomerular-filtration-based renal excretion of the 20(S)-protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides was greater than that of the 20(S)-protopanaxadiol-type counterparts due to differences in plasma protein binding . DB01045 -impaired hepatobiliary excretion of the 20(S)-protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides was effectively compensated by the renal excretion in rats . The 20(S)-protopanaxadiol-type ginsenosides were potent inhibitors of Q9NPD5 . CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS : Differences in hepatobiliary and in renal excretory clearances caused markedly different systemic exposure and different elimination kinetics between the two types of ginsenosides . Caution should be exercised with the long-circulating 20(S)-protopanaxadiol-type ginsenosides as they could induce hepatobiliary herb-drug interactions , particularly when patients receive long-term therapies with high-dose i.v. Sanqi or ginseng extracts .