Direct anti-inflammatory mechanisms contribute to attenuation of experimental allograft arteriosclerosis by statins . BACKGROUND : Despite the development of effective immunosuppressive therapy , transplant graft arterial disease ( Q99259 ) remains the major limitation to long-term graft survival . The interplay between host inflammatory cells and donor vascular wall cells results in an intimal hyperplastic lesion , which leads to ischemia and graft failure . P04035 inhibitors ( statins ) reduce Q99259 in human cardiac allografts , although it is unclear whether this is secondary to cholesterol lowering or other mechanisms . This study tested the hypothesis that statins can suppress Q99259 by cholesterol-independent pathways . METHODS AND RESULTS : We performed heterotopic murine cardiac transplants in total allogeneic or major histocompatibility complex class II-mismatched combinations . Transplanted animals received either control chow , chow containing 25 ppm cerivastatin ( low dose ) , or chow containing 125 ppm cerivastatin ( high dose ) . Mean plasma cerivastatin concentrations were 0.0 ( control ) , 10.1 ( low dose ) , and 21.9 ( high dose ) nmol/L , respectively . Plasma cholesterol levels were the same in all groups . Q99259 scores decreased in low-dose ( P < 0.05 ) and high-dose ( P < 0.0001 ) cerivastatin groups compared with controls , with concomitant reduction in graft-infiltrating cells and significantly decreased intragraft RANTES and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 mRNA expression . DB00439 , as well as other statins , also reduced RANTES and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 production in mouse endothelial cells stimulated with interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in vitro . CONCLUSIONS : Clinically achievable levels of an P04035 inhibitor attenuate Q99259 in murine heart transplants , diminish host inflammatory cell recruitment , and do not alter cholesterol levels . These results indicate that statins can affect arterial biology and inflammation independently of their effects on cholesterol metabolism .