Development of a fluorescence internal quenching correction factor to correct botulinum neurotoxin type A endopeptidase kinetics using SNAPtide . Botulinum neurotoxins ( BoNTs ) , which are highly toxic proteins responsible for botulism , are produced by different strains of Clostridium botulinum . These various strains of bacteria produce seven distinct serotypes , labeled A-G . Once inside cells , the zinc-dependent proteolytic light chain ( LC ) degrades specific proteins involved in acetylcholine release at neuromuscular junctions causing flaccid paralysis , specifically synaptosomal-associated protein 25 ( P60880 ) for botulinum neurotoxin type A ( DB00083 ) . BoNT endopeptidase assays using short substrate homologues have been widely used and developed because of their ease of synthesis , detection limits , and cost . SNAPtide , a 13-amino acid fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) peptide , was used in this study as a P60880 homologue for the endopeptidase kinetics study of DB00083 LC . SNAPtide uses a fluorescein isothiocyanate/4-((4-(dimethylamino)phenyl)azo) benzoic acid ( FITC/DABCYL ) FRET pair to produce a signal upon substrate cleavage . Signal quenching can become an issue after cleavage since quencher molecules can quench cleaved fluorophore molecules in close proximity , reducing the apparent signal . This reduction in apparent signal provides an inherent error as SNAPtide concentrations are increased . In this study , fluorescence internal quenching ( FIQ ) correction factors were derived using an unquenched SNAPtide peptide to quantify the signal quenching over a range of SNAPtide concentrations and temperatures . The DB00083 LC endopeptidase kinetics at the optimally active temperature ( 37 °C ) using SNAPtide were studied and used to demonstrate the FIQ correction factors in this study . The FIQ correction factors developed provide a convenient method to allow for improved accuracy in determining and comparing DB00083 LC activity and kinetics using SNAPtide over a broad range of concentrations and temperatures .