Redox modification of platelet glycoproteins . Platelets contain several glycoprotein receptors including the adhesion receptor glycoprotein Ib and the fibrinogen receptor glycoprotein IIbIIIa , also know as the alphaIIb betaIIIa integrin . Both of these receptors contain thiol groups and vicinal thiols representing redox sensitive sites are present in alphaIIb betaIIIa . Disulfide isomerases such as protein disulfide isomerase ( P07237 ) that are on or recruited to the platelet surface have a role in platelet aggregation . Dynamic rearrangement of disulfide bonds in receptor signaling and platelet activation is a developing concept that requires an attacking thiol . Biochemically , a role for disulfide isomerization is suggested as the alphaIIb betaIIIa integrin undergoes major structural changes upon activation centered around a disulfide knot in the integrin . Additionally , the Q9H244 ADP receptor is involved in platelet activation by most platelet agonists and contains extracellular thiols , making it a possible site for redox modification of platelet aggregation . Various forms of redox modulation of thiols or disulfides in platelet glycoproteins exist . These include modification by low molecular weight thiols such as reduced glutathione or homocysteine , oxidized glutathione or by nitric oxide ( NO ) derived from s-nitrosothiols . Levels of these redox compounds change in various disease states and in some cases physiologic concentrations of these compounds have been shown to modify platelet responsiveness . Additionally , platelets themselves contain a transplasma membrane redox system capable of reducing extracellular disulfide bonds . It is likely that a redox homeostasis exists in blood with the redox environment being controlled in a way analogous to the control of ionized calcium levels or the pH of blood . Changes in this homeostasis induced by disease states or pharmacologic agents that modify the platelet redox environment will modify platelet function .