Anti-adipogenic action of pitavastatin occurs through the coordinate regulation of PPARgamma and Pref-1 expression . BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE : Adipocyte differentiation in vitro is coordinately activated by two transcription factors , peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ( PPARgamma ) and CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha ( C/EBPalpha ) , but it is inhibited by preadipocyte factor-1 ( pref-1 ) . Statins , inhibitors of P04035 and de novo cholesterol synthesis , can have pleiotropic effects which influence adipocyte phenotype by ill-defined mechanisms . We investigated the effects of pitavastatin ( NK-104 ) on adipocyte differentiation and the transcriptional pathways involved . EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH : The effects of pitavastatin on adipocyte differentiation were evaluated by the formation of oil droplets , content of cellular triglyceride and expression of adipocyte-specific genes . Regulatory mechanisms were assessed by analysis of PPARgamma , C/EBPalpha and pref-1 expression . KEY RESULTS : DB08860 significantly inhibited adipocyte differentiation of 3T3- Q9NUQ9 preadipocytes in response to adipogenic inducers . Evidence for inhibition included fewer Oil Red O positive droplets , less cellular triglyceride and decreased expression of adipocyte-specific genes , including fatty acid binding protein ( aP2 ) , P16671 , adipsin and glucose transporter 4 ( P14672 ) . The inhibitory effects of pitavastatin on adipocyte differentiation of 3T3- Q9NUQ9 preadipocytes were time and concentration dependent . DB08860 significantly blocked induction of PPARgamma expression , but not C/EBPalpha expression or DNA binding activity of PPARgamma . Also , pitavastatin induced pref-1 expression in preadipocytes and maintained expression of pref-1 at high levels in differentiated cells . CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS : Our data suggest that pitavastatin inhibits adipocyte differentiation by blocking PPARgamma expression and activating pref-1 expression . These studies may have implications in the regulation of adipogenesis in response to statins .