Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and inflammatory bowel disease : current perspectives . Mechanisms underlying the gastric toxicity of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) have been extensively investigated , whereas those leading to intestinal damage are not completely understood . Several hypotheses have been put forward on the pathophysiology of intestinal damage by NSAIDs : enhanced intestinal permeability , inhibition of cyclooxygenase ( P36551 ) , enterohepatic recirculation , and formation of adducts . The effects of P35354 selective inhibitors , which appear to have better gastric tolerability when compared to nonselective NSAIDs , on normal and inflamed intestinal mucosa ( as in Crohn 's disease or ulcerative colitis ) are still largely unexplored . If P35354 inhibition plays a key role in suppressing the inflammatory process , recent evidence suggests that P35354 products are involved in maintaining the integrity of intestinal mucosa , in the healing of gastrointestinal ulcers and in the modulation of inflammatory bowel disease ( Q9UKU7 ) . Animal models of intestinal inflammation have so far yielded conflicting results on the effects of P35354 selective inhibitors on the intestinal mucosa . It is now clear that NSAIDs do not act through cyclooxygenase inhibition , but also have different targets such as nuclear factor-kappaB and/or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors gamma . The peculiar pharmacological profile of each compound may help to explain the different impact of each NSAID on the inflammatory process and on Q9UKU7 . Notably , the salicylic acid derivative DB00244 is widely used in the treatment of Q9UKU7 and is believed to act through nuclear factor-kappaB inhibition . Although the use of P35354 selective inhibitors remains contraindicated in patients with Q9UKU7 , studying their effects on intestinal mucosa may offer new insights into their subcellulars mechanisms of action and open new avenues for the development of novel therapies for Q9UKU7 .