Prolonged DB01221 -mediated responses , altered ifenprodil sensitivity , and epileptiform-like events in the malformed hippocampus of methylazoxymethanol exposed rats . Cortical malformations are often associated with refractory epilepsy and cognitive deficit . Clinical and experimental studies have demonstrated an important role for glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission in these conditions . Using whole cell voltage-clamp techniques , we examined evoked glutamate-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents ( eEPSCs ) and responses to exogenously applied glutamate on hippocampal heterotopic cells in an animal model of malformation i.e. , rats exposed to methylazoxymethanol ( MAM ) in utero . Analysis revealed that the late N-methyl-D-aspartate ( DB01221 ) receptor-mediated eEPSC component was significantly increased on heterotopic cells compared with age-matched normotopic pyramidal cells . At a holding potential of +40 mV , heterotopic cells also exhibited eEPSCs with a slower decay-time constant . No differences in the alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid ( AMPA ) component of eEPSCs were detected . In 23 % of heterotopic pyramidal cells , electrical stimulation evoked prolonged burst-like responses . Focal application of glutamate ( 10 mM ) targeted to different sites near the heterotopia also evoked epileptiform-like bursts on heterotopic cells . DB08954 ( 10 microM ) , an Q13224 subunit antagonist , only slightly reduced the DB01221 receptor ( NMDAR ) -mediated component and amplitude of eEPSCs on heterotopic cells ( MAM ) but significantly decreased the late component and peak amplitude of eEPSCs in normotopic cells ( control ) . Our data demonstrate a functional alteration in the DB01221 -mediated component of excitatory synaptic transmission in heterotopic cells and suggest that this alteration may be attributable , at least in part , to changes in composition and function of the NMDAR subunit . Changes in NMDAR function may directly contribute to the hyperexcitability and cognitive deficits reported in animal models and patients with brain malformations .