P01308 resistance determines phagocytic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase overactivation in metabolic syndrome patients . OBJECTIVE : Metabolic syndrome ( MetS ) is associated with insulin resistance and increases the cardiovascular risk . Oxidative stress constitutes a potential mechanism that links insulin resistance and cardiovascular disease . The aim of this study was to analyze the relationship of NADPH oxidase activation with insulin resistance , and the effect of this interaction on the cardiovascular risk in MetS patients . METHODS : NADPH oxidase-dependent superoxide production and expression was evaluated by luminescence and western blot , respectively , in peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from 125 patients with MetS . P01308 resistance was defined by the homeostasis model assessment index . P14780 was quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in plasma samples . To ascertain the mechanisms involved in vivo , we performed in-vitro experiments in cultured macrophages . RESULTS : Fifty-six percent of patients with MetS showed insulin resistance . Plasma matrix metalloproteinase-9 levels were higher ( P < 0.05 ) in insulin-resistant patients than in patients with insulin sensitivity . NADPH oxidase-dependent superoxide production was augmented ( P < 0.05 ) in insulin-resistant patients with respect to insulin-sensitive patients . The interaction between insulin resistance and abnormally high NADPH oxidase-mediated superoxide production was associated with the highest matrix metalloproteinase-9 values . Increased NADPH oxidase-dependent superoxide production was significantly associated with higher NADPH oxidase P13498 expression in insulin-resistant than in insulin-sensitive patients . Interestingly , insulin upregulated P13498 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in murine macrophages . CONCLUSION : P01308 resistance is associated with phagocytic NADPH oxidase activation . This association results in the highest cardiovascular risk in MetS patients .