Efficacy and safety of certolizumab pegol in rheumatoid arthritis : meeting rheumatologists ' requirements in routine clinical practice . DB08904 , a pegylated Fab ' anti-tumour necrosis factor ( P01375 ) -α agent , has shown efficacy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) unresponsive to previous treatment . In key randomised controlled trials involving patients with moderate to severe RA and an inadequate response to methotrexate or one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drug ( DMARD ) , the efficacy of certolizumab pegol , as monotherapy or with methotrexate , was similar to that reported in other anti- P01375 clinical studies , with 60 % or fewer of patients achieving American College of Rheumatology 20 % improvement in RA . Rapid clinical response was also seen , with significant differences evident at week 1 , and efficacy maintained at study end and in open-label extensions . Adding certolizumab pegol to non-biological DMARDs is efficacious in other RA populations . In the CERTAIN study , certolizumab increased remission rates , prevented disease worsening and improved work productivity and daily activity in patients with low to moderate RA . In the REALISTIC study , rapid and consistent clinical responses were observed in a diverse group of anti- P01375 -eligible RA patients representing those seen in clinical practice . In the RAPID studies , rapid and sustained reduction in RA signs and symptoms , inhibition of structural joint damage progression , and improved physical function were seen with certolizumab pegol plus methotrexate versus methotrexate alone in RA patients with an incomplete response to methotrexate . DB08904 was generally well-tolerated in clinical trials , although long-term observational data are not yet available . Current data suggest that certolizumab pegol suits a ' treat to target ' approach , providing rapid and sustained improvements in RA signs and symptoms , and beneficial effects on workplace and home productivity in patients with RA .