The testis anion transporter TAT1 ( Q96RN1 ) physically and functionally interacts with the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator channel : a potential role during sperm capacitation . The Slc26 gene family encodes several conserved anion transporters implicated in human genetic disorders , including Pendred syndrome , diastrophic dysplasia and congenital chloride diarrhea . We previously characterized the TAT1 ( testis anion transporter 1 ; Q96RN1 ) protein specifically expressed in male germ cells and mature sperm and showed that in the mouse , deletion of Tat1 caused male sterility due to a lack of sperm motility , impaired sperm capacitation and structural defects of the flagella . Ca(2+) , Cl(-) and HCO(3)(-) influxes trigger sperm capacitation events required for oocyte fertilization ; these events include the intracellular rise of cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( DB02527 ) and protein kinase A ( PKA ) -dependent protein phosphorylation . The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( P13569 ) is expressed in mature sperm and has been shown to contribute to Cl(-) and HCO(3)(-) movements during capacitation . Furthermore , several members of the SLC26 family have been described to form complexes with P13569 , resulting in the reciprocal regulation of their activities . We show here that TAT1 and P13569 physically interact and that in Xenopus laevis oocytes and in CHO- P04264 cells , TAT1 expression strongly stimulates P13569 activity . Consistent with this , we show that Tat1 inactivation in mouse sperm results in deregulation of the intracellular DB02527 content , preventing the activation of PKA-dependent downstream phosphorylation cascades essential for sperm activation . These various results suggest that TAT1 and P13569 may form a molecular complex involved in the regulation of Cl(-) and HCO(3)(-) fluxes during sperm capacitation . In humans , mutations in P13569 and/or TAT1 may therefore be causes of asthenozoospermia and low fertilizing capacity of sperm .