Therapeutic implications of variable expression of P31358 on clonal cytotoxic T cells in CD8+ large granular lymphocyte leukemia . BACKGROUND : T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia is a clonal proliferation of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes which often results in severe cytopenia . Current treatment options favor chronic immunosuppression . DB00087 , a humanized monoclonal antibody against glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored P31358 , is approved for patients refractory to therapy in other lymphoid malignancies . DESIGN AND METHODS : We retrospectively examined treatment outcomes in 59 patients with CD8+ T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia , 41 of whom required therapy . Eight patients with severe refractory cytopenia despite multiple treatment regimens had been treated with subcutaneous alemtuzumab as salvage therapy . Flow cytometry was used to monitor expression of glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored P31358 , P08174 , and P13987 as well as to characterize T-cell clonal expansions by T-cell receptor variable beta-chain ( Vbeta ) repertoire . RESULTS : Analysis of the effects of alemtuzumab revealed remissions with restoration of platelets in one of one patient , red blood cell transfusion independence in three of five patients and improvement of neutropenia in one of three , resulting in an overall response rate of 50 % ( 4/8 patients ) . Clonal large granular lymphocytes exhibited decreased P31358 expression post-therapy in patients refractory to treatment . Samples of large granular lymphocytes collected prior to therapy also unexpectedly had a significant proportion of P31358 -negative cells while a healthy control population had no such P31358 deficiency ( p=0.026 ) . CONCLUSIONS : While alemtuzumab may be highly effective in large granular lymphocytic leukemia , prospective serial monitoring for the presence of P31358 -deficient clonal cytotoxic T-lymphocytes should be a component of clinical trials investigating the efficacy of this drug . P31358 deficiency may explain lack of response to alemtuzumab , and such therapy may confer a survival advantage to glycophosphatidylinositol-negative clonal cytotoxic T-lymphocytes .