Kinin-B2 receptor exerted neuroprotection after diisopropylfluorophosphate-induced neuronal damage . The kinin-B2 receptor ( B2BKR ) activated by its endogenous ligand bradykinin participates in various metabolic processes including the control of arterial pressure and inflammation . Recently , functions for this receptor in brain development and protection against glutamate-provoked excitotoxicity have been proposed . Here , we report neuroprotective properties for bradykinin against organophosphate poisoning using acute hippocampal slices as an in vitro model . Following slice perfusion for 10min with diisopropylfluorophosphate ( DB00677 ) to initiate the noxious stimulus , responses of pyramidal neurons upon an electric impulse were reduced to less than 30 % of control amplitudes . Effects on synaptic-elicited population spikes were reverted when preparations had been exposed to bradykinin 30min after challenging with DB00677 . Accordingly , bradykinin-induced population spike recovery was abolished by HOE-140 , a B2BKR antagonist . However , the kinin-B1 receptor ( B1BKR ) agonist Lys-des- DB00125 (9)-bradykinin , inducing the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase ( MEK/MAPK ) and cell death , abolished bradykinin-mediated neuroprotection , an effect , which was reverted by the P29323 inhibitor PD98059 . In agreement with pivotal B1BKR functions in this process , antagonism of endogenous B1BKR activity alone was enough for restoring population spike activity . On the other hand pralidoxime , an oxime , reactivating acetylcholinesterase ( P22303 ) after organophosphate poisoning , induced population spike recovery after DB00677 exposure in the presence of bradykinin and Lys-des- DB00125 (9)-bradykinin . Lys-des- DB00125 (9)-bradykinin did not revert protection exerted by pralidoxime , however when instead bradykinin and Ly-des- DB00125 (9)-bradykinin were superfused together , recovery of population spikes diminished . These findings again confirm the neuroprotective feature of bradykinin , which is , diminished by its endogenous metabolites , stimulating the B1BKR , providing a novel understanding of the physiological roles of these receptors .