P18089 genotype differentially modulates stress-induced neural activity in the amygdala and hippocampus during emotional memory retrieval . RATIONALE : DB00368 interacts with stress hormones in the amygdala and hippocampus to enhance emotional memory consolidation , but the noradrenergic-glucocorticoid interaction at retrieval , where stress impairs memory , is less understood . OBJECTIVES : We used a genetic neuroimaging approach to investigate whether a genetic variation of the noradrenergic system impacts stress-induced neural activity in amygdala and hippocampus during recognition of emotional memory . METHODS : This study is based on genotype-dependent reanalysis of data from our previous publication ( Li et al. Brain Imaging Behav 2014 ) . Twenty-two healthy male volunteers were genotyped for the P18089 gene encoding the α2B-adrenergic receptor . Ten deletion carriers and 12 noncarriers performed an emotional face recognition task , while their brain activity was measured with fMRI . During encoding , 50 fearful and 50 neutral faces were presented . One hour later , they underwent either an acute stress ( Trier Social Stress Test ) or a control procedure which was followed immediately by the retrieval session , where participants had to discriminate between 100 old and 50 new faces . RESULTS : A genotype-dependent modulation of neural activity at retrieval was found in the bilateral amygdala and right hippocampus . Deletion carriers showed decreased neural activity in the amygdala when recognizing emotional faces in control condition and increased amygdala activity under stress . Noncarriers showed no differences in emotional modulated amygdala activation under stress or control . Instead , stress-induced increases during recognition of emotional faces were present in the right hippocampus . CONCLUSION : The genotype-dependent effects of acute stress on neural activity in amygdala and hippocampus provide evidence for noradrenergic-glucocorticoid interaction in emotional memory retrieval .