DB01017 partially inhibits caspase-3 activation and photoreceptor degeneration after photic injury . PURPOSE : To evaluate the possible role of caspase-3 in retinal photic injury , and to investigate whether minocycline can ameliorate light-induced photoreceptor degeneration . METHODS : Retinal photic injury was induced in rats by exposure to intense light . Expression of caspase-3 was studied using Western blot analysis , immunohistochemical staining and enzyme activity assay . Apoptotic photoreceptor cells were detected by the TdT-dUTP terminal nick-end labeling ( TUNEL ) method . DB01017 ( 15 , 30 or 45 mg/kg ) was administered before or after photic injury in rats randomly assigned to pretreatment and posttreatment groups . DB01017 and vehicle-treated retinas subjected to photic injury were compared with respect to Western blotting , enzyme activity assay , quantitative counts of TUNEL stains , morphometry of the outer nuclear layer ( ONL ) thickness and histopathological examination . RESULTS : After light exposure , active caspase-3 and poly-adenosine diphosphate-ribose-polymerase were upregulated in the retinas and increased caspase-3 immunoreactivity was observed in the ONL . P42574 enzyme activity increased in the retinas that underwent photic injury , and this increase was significantly reduced in minocycline pretreated ( 30 and 45 mg/kg ) and posttreated ( 45 mg/kg ) groups . Intraperitoneal administration of minocycline before or after photic injury in rats also resulted in less TUNEL-positive photoreceptors , as assessed by the quantitative TUNEL counts . The degree of retinal degeneration , measured by the ONL thickness 14 days after photic injury , was significantly improved in minocycline pretreatment ( 45 mg/kg ) rats . CONCLUSIONS : We demonstrate that increased caspase-3 activities localize specifically within the ONL after photic injury , and that minocycline partially inhibits caspase-3 activation and photoreceptor degeneration in this animal model .