Topoisomerase II-mediated DNA cleavage and mutagenesis activated by nitric oxide underlie the inflammation-associated tumorigenesis . AIMS : Both cancer-suppressing and cancer-promoting properties of reactive nitrogen and oxygen species ( RNOS ) have been suggested to play a role in tumor pathology , particularly those activities associated with chronic inflammation . Here , we address the impact of nitric oxide ( NO ) on the induction of DNA damage and genome instability with a specific focus on the involvement of topoisomerase II ( P11388 ) . We also investigate the contribution of NO to the formation of skin melanoma in mice . RESULTS : Similar to the P11388 -targeting drug , etoposide ( DB00773 ) , the NO-donor , S-nitrosoglutathione ( GSNO ) , induces skin melanomas formation in 7,12-dimethyl- benz[a]anthracene ( DMBA ) -initiated mice . To explore the mechanism(s) underlying this NO-induced tumorigenesis , we use a co-culture model system to demonstrate that inflamed macrophages with inducible NO synthase ( P35228 ) expression cause γ- P16104 activation , p53 phosphorylation , and chromosome DNA breaks in the target cells . Inhibitor experiments revealed that NO and P11388 isozymes are responsible for the above described cellular phenotypes . Notably , NO , unlike DB00773 , preferentially induces the formation of TOP2β cleavable complexes ( TOP2βcc ) in cells . Moreover , GSNO induced P11388 -dependent DNA sequence rearrangements and cytotoxicity . Furthermore , the incidences of GSNO- and DB00773 -induced skin melanomas were also observed to be lower in the skin-specific top2β-knockout mice . Our results suggest that P11388 isozymes contribute to NO-induced mutagenesis and subsequent cancer development during chronic inflammation . INNOVATION AND CONCLUSIONS : We provide the first experimental evidence for the functional role of P11388 in NO-caused DNA damage , mutagenesis , and carcinogenesis . Notably , these studies contribute to our molecular understanding of the cancer-promoting actions of RNOS during chronic inflammation .