Activation of intestinal peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α increases high-density lipoprotein production . AIMS : Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( Q07869 ) -α is a transcription factor controlling lipid metabolism in liver , heart , muscle , and macrophages . Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α activation increases plasma HDL cholesterol and exerts hypotriglyceridaemic actions via the liver . However , the intestine expresses Q07869 -α , produces HDL and chylomicrons , and is exposed to diet-derived Q07869 -α ligands . Therefore , we examined the effects of Q07869 -α activation on intestinal lipid and lipoprotein metabolism . METHODS AND RESULTS : The impact of Q07869 -α activation was evaluated in term of HDL-related gene expression in mice , ex vivo in human jejunal biopsies and in Caco-2/TC7 cells . Apolipoprotein-AI/HDL secretion , cholesterol esterification , and trafficking were also studied in vitro . In parallel to improving plasma lipid profiles and increasing liver and intestinal expression of fatty acid oxidation genes , treatment with the dual Q07869 -α/δ ligand DB05187 resulted in a more pronounced increase in plasma HDL compared with fenofibrate in mice . DB05187 , but not fenofibrate , increased the expression of HDL production genes such as apolipoprotein-AI and DB00171 -binding cassette A1 transporter in murine intestines . A similar increase was observed upon Q07869 -α activation of human biopsies and Caco-2/TC7 cells . Additionally , HDL secretion by Caco-2/TC7 cells increased . Moreover , Q07869 -α activation decreased the cholesterol esterification capacity of Caco-2/TC7 cells , modified cholesterol trafficking , and reduced apolipoprotein-B secretion . CONCLUSION : Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α activation reduces cholesterol esterification , suppresses chylomicron , and increases HDL secretion by enterocytes . These results identify the intestine as a target organ of Q07869 -α ligands with entero-hepatic tropism to reduce atherogenic dyslipidaemia .