Thrombin has biphasic effects on the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway in endothelial cells and contributes to experimental pulmonary hypertension . BACKGROUND : A potential role for coagulation factors in pulmonary arterial hypertension has been recently described , but the mechanism of action is currently not known . Here , we investigated the interactions between thrombin and the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway in pulmonary endothelial cells and experimental pulmonary hypertension . PRINCIPAL FINDINGS : Chronic treatment with the selective thrombin inhibitor melagatran ( 0.9 mg/kg daily via implanted minipumps ) reduced right ventricular hypertrophy in the rat monocrotaline model of experimental pulmonary hypertension . In vitro , thrombin was found to have biphasic effects on key regulators of the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway in endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) . Acute thrombin stimulation led to increased expression of the cGMP-elevating factors endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( P29474 ) and soluble guanylate cyclase ( sGC ) subunits , leading to increased cGMP levels . By contrast , prolonged exposition of pulmonary endothelial cells to thrombin revealed a characteristic pattern of differential expression of the key regulators of the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway , in which specifically the factors contributing to cGMP elevation ( P29474 and sGC ) were reduced and the cGMP-hydrolyzing O76074 was elevated ( qPCR and Western blot ) . In line with the differential expression of key regulators of the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway , a reduction of cGMP by prolonged thrombin stimulation was found . The effects of prolonged thrombin exposure were confirmed in endothelial cells of pulmonary origin ( HPAECs and HPMECs ) . Similar effects could be induced by activation of protease-activated receptor-1 ( P25116 ) . CONCLUSION : These findings suggest a link between thrombin generation and cGMP depletion in lung endothelial cells through negative regulation of the nitric oxide-cGMP pathway , possibly mediated via P25116 , which could be of relevance in pulmonary arterial hypertension .