Effects of short- and long-duration hypothyroidism on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in rats : in vitro and in situ studies . The purpose of this study is to assess the effects of hypothyroidism on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal ( Q9Y251 ) axis ; the functional integrity of each component of the Q9Y251 axis was examined in short-term and long-term hypothyroidism . Neuropeptide synthesis , release , and content were evaluated in vitro both in the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary , and corticosterone release was assessed in primary adrenal cell cultures at 7 ( short-term ) and 60 days ( long-term hypothyroidism ) after thyroidectomy in male rats . Hypothyroid rats showed adrenal insufficiency in several parameters , which were associated with the duration of hypothyroidism . Cerebrospinal ( P04141 ) DB01285 was decreased in all hypothyroid animals , while P04141 corticosterone levels were significantly decreased only in long-term hypothyroidism . Long-term hypothyroid animals showed decreased corticotropin-releasing hormone ( P06850 ) mRNA expression in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus under both basal and stress conditions , decreased P06850 release from hypothalamic organ cultures after KCL and arginine vasopressin stimulation , as well as an increased number of anterior pituitary P06850 receptors . In contrast , short-term hypothyroid rats showed changes in anterior pituitary function with an increased responsiveness to P06850 that was associated with an increase in P06850 receptors . Although both short- and long-term hypothyroidism was associated with significant decreases in adrenal weights , only long-term hypothyroid rats showed changes in adrenal function with a significant decrease of DB01285 -induced corticosterone release from cultured adrenal cells . The data suggest that long-term hypothyroidism is associated with adrenal insufficiency with abnormalities in all three components of the Q9Y251 axis . Short-term hypothyroidism , on the other hand , is associated with increased pituitary corticotroph responsiveness to P06850 .