Genetic dissection of atypical antipsychotic-induced weight gain : novel preliminary data on the pharmacogenetic puzzle . Atypical antipsychotics such as clozapine represent a significant improvement over typical antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia , particularly regarding extrapyramidal symptoms . Despite their benefits , use is limited by the occurrence of adverse reactions such as sedation and weight gain . This article provides a comprehensive review and discussion of obesity-related pathways and integrates these with the known mechanisms of atypical antipsychotic action to identify candidate molecules that may be disrupted during antipsychotic treatment . Novel preliminary data are presented to genetically dissect these obesity pathways and elucidate the genetic contribution of these candidate molecules to clozapine-induced weight gain . There is considerable variability among individuals with respect to the ability of clozapine to induce weight gain . Genetic predisposition to clozapine-induced weight gain has been suggested . Therefore , genetic variation in these candidate molecules may predict patient susceptibility to clozapine-induced weight gain . This hypothesis was tested for 10 genetic polymorphisms across 9 candidate genes , including the serotonin 2C , 2A , and 1A receptor genes ( P28335 /2A/1A ) ; the histamine H1 and H2 receptor genes ( P35367 / P25021 ) ; the cytochrome P450 1A2 gene ( P05177 ) ; the beta3 and alpha,alpha-adrenergic receptor genes ( P13945 /ADRAIA ) ; and tumor necrosis factor alpha ( P01375 ) . Prospective weight gain data were obtained for 80 patients with schizophrenia who completed a structured clozapine trial . Trends were observed for P13945 , ADRA1A , P01375 , and P28335 ; however , replication in larger , independent samples is required . Although in its infancy , psychiatric pharmacogenetics will in the future aid clinical practice in the prediction of response and side effects , such as antipsychotic-induced weight gain , and minimize the current " trial and error " approach to prescribing .