Telomere shortening is associated with reduced duodenal HCOFormula secretory but normal gastric acid secretory capacity in aging mice . The incidence of duodenal ulcer , especially Helicobacter pylori-negative duodenal ulcer , strongly increases with age . In humans , telomere length shortening is considered to be one critical factor in cellular senescence and organ survival . In this study , we compared basal and stimulated gastric acid and duodenal HCO(3)(-) secretory rates in aged late-generation ( G(3) ) telomerase-deficient ( mTERC(-/-) ) mice , which are characterized by severe telomere dysfunction due to the inability to elongate telomeres during cell division . We found that basal and forskolin-stimulated HCO(3)(-) secretion and short-circuit current ( I(sc) ) in isolated duodenal mucosa of G(3) mTERC(-/-) mice were markedly reduced compared with age-matched wild-type mice . In contrast , basal and forskolin-stimulated acid secretory rates in isolated G(3) mTERC(-/-) gastric mucosa were not significantly altered . Correspondingly , duodenal mucosa of G(3) mTERC(-/-) mice showed slimming and shortening of villi , whereas gastric mucosal histology was not significantly altered . However , the ratios of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( P13569 ) and solute-linked carrier 26 gene family ( Slc26a6 ) mRNA expression in relation to cytokeratin-18 were not altered in duodenal mucosa . The further knockout of P38936 , which is a downstream effector of telomere shortening-induced senescence , rescued villus atrophy of duodenal mucosa , and basal and forskolin-stimulated duodenal HCO(3)(-) secretion and I(sc) in mTERC(-/-) P38936 (-/-) double-knockout mice were not different from wild-type controls . In conclusion , genetic ablation of telomerase resulted in P38936 -dependent duodenal mucosal atrophy and reduced duodenal HCO(3)(-) secretory capacity , whereas gastric morphology and acid secretory function were preserved . This suggests that telomere shortening during aging may result in an imbalance between aggressive and protective secretions against duodenal mucosa and thus predispose to ulcer formation .