Similarities and differences in the phenotype of members of an Italian family with hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism associated with an activating DB00024 receptor germline mutation . Constitutively activating germline mutations of the DB00024 receptor ( P16473 ) are considered the cause of hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism . In this study , 10 members ( 8 affected and 2 unaffected ) of an Italian family with hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism were investigated for the presence of mutations in the P16473 gene . The clinical features of the disease were also analyzed . PCR-amplified fragments of the P16473 gene were obtained from genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of each family member and analyzed by direct nucleotide sequencing and restriction analysis . An identical germline P16473 mutation was detected in all the patients with hyperthyroidism but in none of the unaffected family members . The mutation was heterozygotic and determined the substitution of valine for methionine ( codon 463 ; ATG --> GTG ) in the second transmembrane domain of the P16473 . When expressed in chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells , the Val463 mutant P16473 induced constitutive activation of the DB00024 receptor . Analysis of the clinical features of our family and those of other families with hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism , including one with the same Val463 mutation , revealed wide variability in the phenotypical expression of the disease . Our findings indicate that an activating germline mutation in the P16473 gene plays a key role in hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism although the onset of clinical manifestations and the evolution of the disease seem to depend heavily on other factors , thus far unidentified . The absence of a clear correlation between mutant genotypes and phenotypic expression of the disease currently limits the prognostic value of genetic testing in families with hereditary non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism .