Antiaggregatory and proangiogenic effects of a novel recombinant human dual specificity anti-integrin antibody . BACKGROUND : beta(3)-Integrins are involved in platelet aggregation via alpha(IIb)beta(3) [ glycoprotein (GP)IIb- P05106 ] , and in angiogenesis via endothelial alpha(V)beta(3) . Cross-reactive ligands with antiaggregatory and proangiogenic effects , both desirable in peripheral vasculopathies , have not yet been described . OBJECTIVES : In vitro and in vivo characterization of antiaggregatory and proangiogenic effects of two recombinant human Fab fragments , with emphasis on beta(3)-integrins . METHODS : Recombinant Fab fragments were obtained by phage display technology . Specificity , affinity and IC(50) were determined by immunodot assays , enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) , and Scatchard plot analysis , and by means of human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) . Functional analyses included ELISA for interaction with fibrinogen binding to P08514 - P05106 , flow cytometry for measurement of activation parameters and competitive inhibition experiments , human platelet aggregometry , and proliferation , tube formation and the chorioallantoic membrane ( P62158 ) assay for measurement of angiogenic effects . RESULTS : We observed specific and high-affinity binding to an intact P08514 - P05106 receptor complex of two human Fab autoantibody fragments , with no platelet activation . Dose-dependent fibrinogen binding to P08514 - P05106 and platelet aggregation were completely inhibited . One Fab fragment was competitively inhibited by abciximab and its murine analog monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) DB00054 , whereas the other Fab fragment bound to cultured HUVECs , suggesting cross-reactivity with alpha(V)beta(3) , and also demonstrated proangiogenic effects in tube formation and P62158 assays . CONCLUSIONS : These Fab fragments are the first entirely human anti- P08514 - P05106 Fab fragments with full antiaggregatory properties ; furthermore , they do not activate platelets . The unique dual-specificity anti-beta(3)-integrin Fab fragment may represent a new tool for the study and management of peripheral arterial vasculopathies .