Randomised phase II study of siltuximab ( CNTO 328 ) , an anti- P05231 monoclonal antibody , in combination with mitoxantrone/prednisone versus mitoxantrone/prednisone alone in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer . PURPOSE : This open-label phase II trial assessed mitoxantrone/prednisone ( M/P ) with and without siltuximab ( CNTO 328 ) , an anti-interleukin-6 chimeric monoclonal antibody , for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer who received prior docetaxel-based chemotherapy . METHODS : Part 1 assessed the safety of biweekly siltuximab 6 mg/kg plus M 12 mg/m(2) every 3 weeks and P. Part 2 assessed efficacy and safety of siltuximab plus M/P versus M/P alone . The primary end-point was progression-free survival ( PFS ) . Progression was defined as progressive disease per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours ( RECIST ) , or ≥ 3 new skeletal lesions with clinical deterioration or without deterioration confirmed by repeated bone scan . Rising prostate-specific antigen was not considered progression . RESULTS : DB09036 plus M/P was well tolerated in Part 1 ( n=9 ) . In Part 2 , 48 and 49 patients received siltuximab plus M/P or M/P alone , respectively . Enrolment was prematurely terminated by the Independent Data Monitoring Committee since an apparent imbalance in patient baseline characteristics ( favoring the M/P only arm ) made it unlikely that the study could achieve its primary efficacy end-point . Median PFS was 97 days with siltuximab combination and 228 days with M/P alone ( hazard ratio , 1.72 ; P=0.043 ) . Use of a novel non-validated PFS definition may have contributed to this result . Abnormal laboratory assessments were more frequent with the combination . Infection and febrile neutropenia rates were similar between groups . Greater P02741 suppression was achieved during siltuximab combination treatment compared with M/P alone ( P=0.0003 ) . CONCLUSION : While siltuximab plus M/P appeared well tolerated , improvement in outcomes was not demonstrated .