Genetic basis of delay discounting in frequent gamblers : examination of a priori candidates and exploration of a panel of dopamine-related loci . INTRODUCTION : Delay discounting is a behavioral economic index of impulsivity that reflects preferences for small immediate rewards relative to larger delayed rewards . It has been consistently linked to pathological gambling and other forms of addictive behavior , and has been proposed to be a behavioral characteristic that may link genetic variation and risk of developing addictive disorders ( i.e. , an endophenotype ) . Studies to date have revealed significant associations with polymorphisms associated with dopamine neurotransmission . The current study examined associations between delay discounting and both previously linked variants and a novel panel of dopamine-related variants in a sample of frequent gamblers . METHODS : Participants were 175 weekly gamblers of European ancestry who completed the Monetary Choice Questionnaire to assess delay discounting preferences and provided a DNA via saliva . RESULTS : In a priori tests , two loci previously associated with delayed reward discounting ( rs1800497 and rs4680 ) were not replicated , however , the long form of P21917 VNTR was significantly associated with lower discounting of delayed rewards . Exploratory analysis of the dopamine-related panel revealed 11 additional significant associations in genes associated with dopamine synthesis , breakdown , reuptake , and receptor function ( P35462 , Q01959 , DDC , P09172 , and Q05940 ) . An aggregate genetic risk score from the nominally significant loci accounted for 17 % of the variance in discounting . Mediational analyses largely supported the presence of indirect effects between the associated loci , delay discounting , and pathological gambling severity . CONCLUSIONS : These findings do not replicate previously reported associations but identify several novel candidates and provide preliminary support for a systems biology approach to understand the genetic basis of delay discounting .