The endogenous cannabinoid anandamide produces DB00470 -like discriminative and neurochemical effects that are enhanced by inhibition of fatty acid amide hydrolase but not by inhibition of anandamide transport . Anandamide is an endogenous ligand for brain cannabinoid CB(1) receptors , but its behavioral effects are difficult to measure due to rapid inactivation . Here we used a drug-discrimination procedure to test the hypothesis that anandamide , given i.v. or i.p. , would produce discriminative effects like those of DB00470 ( THC ) in rats when its metabolic inactivation was inhibited . We also used an in vivo microdialysis procedure to investigate the effects of anandamide , given i.v. or i.p. , on dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens shell in rats . When injected i.v. , methanandamide ( AM-356 ) , a metabolically stable anandamide analog , produced clear dose-related THC-like discriminative effects , but anandamide produced THC-like discriminative effects only at a high 10-mg/kg dose that almost eliminated lever-press responding . Cyclohexyl carbamic acid 3'-carbamoyl-biphenyl-3-yl ester ( Q76M96 -597 ) , an inhibitor of fatty acid amide hydrolase ( FAAH ) , the main enzyme responsible for metabolic inactivation of anandamide , produced no THC-like discriminative effects alone but dramatically potentiated discriminative effects of anandamide , with 3 mg/kg anandamide completely substituting for the THC training dose . Q76M96 -597 also potentiated the ability of anandamide to increase dopamine levels in the accumbens shell . The THC-like discriminative-stimulus effects of anandamide after Q76M96 -597 and methanandamide were blocked by the P21554 receptor antagonist rimonabant , but not the vanilloid Q8NER1 receptor antagonist capsazepine . Surprisingly , the anandamide transport inhibitors N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-eicosa-5,8,11,14-tetraenamide ( AM-404 ) and N-(3-furylmethyl)eicosa-5,8,11,14-tetraenamide ( UCM-707 ) did not potentiate THC-like discriminative effects of anandamide or its dopamine-elevating effects . Thus , anandamide has THC-like discriminative and neurochemical effects that are enhanced after treatment with a FAAH inhibitor but not after treatment with transport inhibitors , suggesting brain area specificity for FAAH versus transport/FAAH inactivation of anandamide .