Downregulation of P19957 -K/Akt/ P60484 pathway and activation of mitochondrial intrinsic apoptosis by Diclofenac and Curcumin in colon cancer . Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( P19957 -K ) / P60484 /Akt signaling is over activated in various tumors including colon cancer . Activation of this pathway regulates multiple biological processes such as apoptosis , metabolism , cell proliferation , and cell growth that underlie the biology of a cancer cell . In the present study , the chemopreventive effects have been observed of Diclofenac , a preferential P35354 inhibitory non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , and Curcumin , a natural anti-inflammatory agent , in the early stage of colorectal carcinogenesis induced by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine dihydrochloride in rats . The tumor-promoting role of P19957 -K/Akt/ P60484 signal transduction pathway and its association with anti-apoptotic family of proteins are also observed . Both Diclofenac and Curcumin downregulated the P19957 -K and Akt expression while promoting the apoptotic mechanism . Diclofenac and Curcumin administration significantly increased the expression of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members ( Bad and Bax ) while decreasing the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein . An up-regulation of cysteine protease family apoptosis executioner , such as caspase-3 and -9 , is seen . Diclofenac and Curcumin inhibited the Bcl-2 protein by directly interacting at the active site by multiple hydrogen bonding , as also evident by negative glide score of Bcl-2 . These drugs stimulated apoptosis by increasing reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) generation and simultaneously decreasing the mitochondrial membrane potential ( ΔΨ M ) . Diclofenac and Curcumin showed anti-neoplastic effects by downregulating P19957 -K/Akt/ P60484 pathway , inducing apoptosis , increasing ROS generation , and decreasing ΔΨ M . The anti-neoplastic and apoptotic effects were found enhanced when both Diclofenac and Curcumin were administered together , rather than individually .