Antagonist properties of Conus parius peptides on N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and their effects on CREB signaling . Three members of a family of small neurotoxic peptides from the venom of Conus parius , conantokins ( Con ) Pr1 , Pr2 , and Pr3 , function as antagonists of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors ( NMDAR ) . We report structural characterizations of these synthetic peptides , and also demonstrate their antagonistic properties toward ion flow through NMDAR ion channels in primary neurons . ConPr1 and ConPr2 displayed moderate increases in α-helicity after addition of Mg(2+) . Native apo-ConPr3 possessed an α-helical conformation , and the helicity increased only slightly on addition of Mg(2+) . Additionally , these peptides diminished DB01221 / DB00145 -mediated currents and intracellular Ca(2+) ( iCa(2+) ) influx in mature rat primary hippocampal neurons . Electrophysiological data showed that these peptides displayed slower antagonistic properties toward the NMDAR than conantokins from other species of cone snails , e.g. , ConT and ConG . Furthermore , to demonstrate selectivity of the C. parius-derived conantokins towards specific NMDAR subunits , cortical neurons from Q12879 (-/-) and Q13224 (-/-) mice were utilized . Robust inhibition of NMDAR-mediated stimulation in Q12879 (-/-)-derived mouse neurons , as compared to those isolated from Q13224 (-/-)-mouse brains , was observed , suggesting a greater selectivity of these antagonists towards the Q13224 subunit . These C. parius conantokins mildly inhibited NMDAR-induced phosphorylation of CREB at DB00133 (133) , suggesting that the peptides modulated iCa(2+) entry and , thereby , activation of CREB , a transcription factor that is required for maintaining long-term synaptic activity . Our data mechanistically show that while these peptides effectively antagonize NMDAR-directed current and iCa(2+) influx , receptor-coupled CREB signaling is maintained . The consequence of sustained CREB signaling is improved neuronal plasticity and survival during neuropathologies .