A hierarchical approach employing metabolic and gene expression profiles to identify the pathways that confer cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells . BACKGROUND : Free fatty acids ( FFA ) and tumor necrosis factor alpha ( P01375 ) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of many obesity-related metabolic disorders . When human hepatoblastoma cells ( HepG2 ) were exposed to different types of FFA and P01375 , saturated fatty acid was found to be cytotoxic and its toxicity was exacerbated by P01375 . In order to identify the processes associated with the toxicity of saturated FFA and P01375 , the metabolic and gene expression profiles were measured to characterize the cellular states . A computational model was developed to integrate these disparate data to reveal the underlying pathways and mechanisms involved in saturated fatty acid toxicity . RESULTS : A hierarchical framework consisting of three stages was developed to identify the processes and genes that regulate the toxicity . First , discriminant analysis identified that fatty acid oxidation and intracellular triglyceride accumulation were the most relevant in differentiating the cytotoxic phenotype . Second , gene set enrichment analysis ( GSEA ) was applied to the cDNA microarray data to identify the transcriptionally altered pathways and processes . Finally , the genes and gene sets that regulate the metabolic responses identified in step 1 were identified by integrating the expression of the enriched gene sets and the metabolic profiles with a multi-block partial least squares ( MBPLS ) regression model . CONCLUSION : The hierarchical approach suggested potential mechanisms involved in mediating the cytotoxic and cytoprotective pathways , as well as identified novel targets , such as DB00157 dehydrogenases , aldehyde dehydrogenases 1A1 ( P00352 ) and endothelial membrane protein 3 ( P54852 ) as modulator of the toxic phenotypes . These predictions , as well as , some specific targets that were suggested by the analysis were experimentally validated .