Ras-driven transcriptome analysis identifies aurora kinase A as a potential malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor therapeutic target . PURPOSE : Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 ( P21359 ) develop malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors ( MPNST ) , which are often inoperable and do not respond well to current chemotherapies or radiation . The goal of this study was to use comprehensive gene expression analysis to identify novel therapeutic targets . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN : Nerve Schwann cells and/or their precursors are the tumorigenic cell types in MPNST because of the loss of the P21359 gene , which encodes the P20936 protein neurofibromin . Therefore , we created a transgenic mouse model , P09543 -HRas12V , expressing constitutively active HRas in Schwann cells and defined a Ras-induced gene expression signature to drive a Bayesian factor regression model analysis of differentially expressed genes in mouse and human neurofibromas and MPNSTs . We tested functional significance of Aurora kinase overexpression in MPNST in vitro and in vivo using Aurora kinase short hairpin RNAs ( shRNA ) and compounds that inhibit Aurora kinase . RESULTS : We identified 2,000 genes with probability of linkage to nerve Ras signaling of which 339 were significantly differentially expressed in mouse and human P21359 -related tumor samples relative to normal nerves , including O14965 ( O14965 ) . O14965 was dramatically overexpressed and genomically amplified in MPNSTs but not neurofibromas . Aurora kinase shRNAs and Aurora kinase inhibitors blocked MPNST cell growth in vitro . Furthermore , an O14965 selective inhibitor , DB05220 , stabilized tumor volume and significantly increased survival of mice with MPNST xenografts . CONCLUSION : Integrative cross-species transcriptome analyses combined with preclinical testing has provided an effective method for identifying candidates for molecular-targeted therapeutics . Blocking Aurora kinases may be a viable treatment platform for MPNST .