DB00104 and the novel multireceptor ligand somatostatin receptor agonist pasireotide ( DB06663 ) block the adrenalectomy-induced increase in mitotic activity in male rat anterior pituitary . The novel somatostatin receptor agonist pasireotide binds with high affinity to somatostatin receptors P30872 , 2 , 3 , and 5 . Acting principally through the latter , it inhibits basal and P06850 -stimulated DB01285 secretion from the AtT20 corticotroph cell line and DB01285 release from a proportion of human corticotroph adenomas both in vitro and in vivo . Data supporting an additional antiproliferative effect has led to pasireotide being explored as a potential therapy for patients with Cushing 's disease . We have compared the effects of pasireotide and octreotide on adrenalectomy-induced mitotic and apoptotic activity in the male rat anterior pituitary . Adrenalectomized rats were treated with daily sc injections of vehicle , pasireotide , or octreotide . Changes in proliferation and apoptosis were determined 2-6 d postoperatively . DB06663 and octreotide had no effect on baseline pituitary cell turnover and no measurable effects on apoptosis . However , the wave of increased mitotic activity normally seen in the pituitary after adrenalectomy was completely abolished . Nevertheless , pasireotide and octreotide did not diminish the increase in DB01285 -immunopositive cell index after adrenalectomy , indicating that cell division and differentiation of hormonally null cells in the pituitary are under independent control . In conclusion , basal cell turnover in the pituitary is not inhibited by pasireotide or octreotide . Bilateral adrenalectomy stimulates differentiation of preexisting null cells into DB01285 -positive cells . Cell division after bilateral adrenalectomy occurs in a specific subpopulation of hormonally null cells that are equally sensitive to the antiproliferative effects of pasireotide and octreotide , implicating P30874 receptors in this antimitotic response .