TTSS2-deficient hha mutant of Salmonella Typhimurium exhibits significant systemic attenuation in immunocompromised hosts . Non-typhoidal Salmonella ( P30990 ) infections are emerging as leading problem worldwide and the variations in host immune status append to the concern of P30990 . Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is one of the causative agents of P30990 infections and has been extensively studied . The inactivation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 ( SPI2 ) encoded type-III secretion system 2 ( TTSS2 ) has been reported rendering the strain incapable for systemic dissemination to host sites and has also been proposed as live-attenuated vaccine . However , infections from TTSS2-deficient Salmonella have also been reported . In this study , mutant strain MT15 was developed by inactivation of the hemolysin expression modulating protein ( hha ) in TTSS2-deficient S. Typhimurium background . The MT15 strain showed significant level of attenuation in immune-deprived murine colitis model when tested in iNos(-/-) , P22301 (-/-) , and P29965 (-/-) mice groups in C57BL/6 background . Further , the mutation in hha does not implicate any defect in bacterial colonization to the host gut . The long-term infection of developed mutant strain conferred protective immune responses to suitably immunized streptomycin pre-treated C57BL/6 mice . The immunization enhanced the P01730 (+) and CD8(+) cell types involved in bacterial clearance . The serum IgG and luminal secretory IgA ( sIgA ) was also found to be elevated after the due course of infection . Additionally , the immunized C57BL/6 mice were protected from the subsequent lethal infection of Salmonella Typhimurium . Collectively , these findings implicate the involvement of hemolysin expression modulating protein ( Hha ) in establishment of bacterial infection . In light of the observed attenuation of the developed mutant strain , this study proposes the possible significance of SPI2-deficient hha mutant as an alternative live-attenuated vaccine strain for use against lethal Salmonella infections .