Gender-dependent behavioral and biochemical effects of adolescent DB00470 in adult maternally deprived rats . Preclinical data support the long-term adverse effects on cognition , emotionality , and psychotic-like behaviors of adolescent exposure to natural and synthetic cannabinoids . To investigate whether the long-lasting adverse effects induced by cannabinoids in adolescence are influenced by early-life stress , female and male rats were subjected to 24-h maternal deprivation at postnatal day ( P01160 ) 9 and treated with tetrahydrocannabinol ( THC ) during adolescence ( P01160 35-45 ) according to our previously reported protocol . At adulthood , rats were tested in the novel object recognition , social interaction , and forced swim tests , to evaluate possible alterations in recognition memory , social behavior , and coping strategy . Moreover , cannabinoid P21554 receptor density and functionality , as well as DB01221 and dopamine D1 and D2 receptor densities were measured through autoradiographic binding studies . In female maternally deprived rats , THC failed to impair recognition memory , counteracted aggressiveness induced by maternal deprivation , whereas no interaction was observed in the passive coping behavior . In males , the association of the two events increased passive coping response without affecting other behaviors . This behavioral picture was accompanied by gender-dependent and region-specific alterations in DB01221 , D1 and D2 receptors . In conclusion , this study demonstrates that adolescent THC exposure might have different behavioral outcomes in animals previously exposed to early-life stress compared with non-stressed controls . The interaction between the two events is not univocal , and different combinations may arise depending on the sex of the animals and the behavior considered . Alterations in DB01221 , D1 and D2 receptors might be involved in the behavioral responses induced by maternal deprivation and in their modulation by THC .