Rare human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor α4 subunit ( P43681 ) variants affect expression and function of high-affinity nicotinic acetylcholine receptors . DB00184 , the primary psychoactive component in tobacco smoke , produces its behavioral effects through interactions with neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors ( nAChRs ) . α4β2 nAChRs are the most abundant in mammalian brain , and converging evidence shows that this subtype mediates the rewarding and reinforcing effects of nicotine . A number of rare variants in the P43681 gene that encode the α4 nAChR subunit have been identified in human subjects and appear to be underrepresented in a cohort of smokers . We compared three of these variants ( α4R336C , α4P451L , and α4R487Q ) to the common variant to determine their effects on α4β2 nAChR pharmacology . We examined [(3)H]epibatidine binding , interacting proteins , and phosphorylation of the α4 nAChR subunit with liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry ( LC-MS/MS ) in P29320 293 cells and voltage-clamp electrophysiology in Xenopus laevis oocytes . We observed significant effects of the α4 variants on nAChR expression , subcellular distribution , and sensitivity to nicotine-induced receptor upregulation . Proteomic analysis of immunopurified α4β2 nAChRs incorporating the rare variants identified considerable differences in the intracellular interactomes due to these single amino acid substitutions . Electrophysiological characterization in X. laevis oocytes revealed alterations in the functional parameters of activation by nAChR agonists conferred by these α4 rare variants , as well as shifts in receptor function after incubation with nicotine . Taken together , these experiments suggest that genetic variation at P43681 alters the assembly and expression of human α4β2 nAChRs , resulting in receptors that are more sensitive to nicotine exposure than those assembled with the common α4 variant . The changes in nAChR pharmacology could contribute to differences in responses to smoked nicotine in individuals harboring these rare variants .