Curcumin sensitizes acute promyelocytic leukemia cells to unfolded protein response-induced apoptosis by blocking the loss of misfolded O75376 protein . Acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) is characterized by accumulation of apoptosis-resistant immature promyelocytic cells in the bone marrow and peripheral blood . We have shown that endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) -associated degradation ( ERAD ) and protease-mediated degradation of misfolded nuclear receptor corepressor ( O75376 ) confer resistance to unfolded protein response ( UPR ) -induced apoptosis in APL . These findings suggest that therapeutic inhibition of O75376 misfolding or degradation may promote growth arrest in APL cells by sensitizing them to UPR-induced apoptosis . On the basis of this hypothesis , we tested the effects of several known protein conformation-modifying agents on the growth and survival of APL cells and identified curcumin , a natural component of turmeric , as a potent growth inhibitor of APL cells . Curcumin selectively inhibited the growth and promoted apoptosis in both primary and secondary leukemic cells derived from APL . The curcumin-induced apoptosis of APL cells was triggered by an amplification of ER stress , possibly from the accumulation of misfolded O75376 protein in the ER . Curcumin promoted this net accumulation of aberrantly phosphorylated misfolded O75376 protein by blocking its ERAD and protease-mediated degradation , which then led to the activation of UPR-induced apoptosis in APL cells . The activation of UPR by curcumin was manifested by phosphorylation of protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase ( Q9NZJ5 ) and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha ( eIF2α ) , and upregulation of C/EBP homologous protein ( P35638 ) and O75807 , the principal mediators of proapoptotic UPR . These findings identify the therapeutic potential of curcumin in APL and further establish the rationale of misfolded O75376 protein as an attractive molecular target in APL .