Metalloproteinases control brain inflammation induced by pertussis toxin in mice overexpressing the chemokine P13500 in the central nervous system . Inflammatory leukocytes infiltrate the CNS parenchyma in neuroinflammation . This involves cellular migration across various structures associated with the blood-brain barrier : the vascular endothelium , the glia limitans , and the perivascular space between them . Leukocytes accumulate spontaneously in the perivascular space in brains of transgenic ( Tg ) mice that overexpress P13500 under control of a CNS-specific promoter . The Tg mice show no clinical symptoms , even though leukocytes have crossed the endothelial basement membrane . Pertussis toxin ( PTx ) given i.p. induced encephalopathy and weight loss in Tg mice . We used flow cytometry , ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging , and immunofluorescent staining to show that encephalopathy involved leukocyte migration across the glia limitans into the brain parenchyma , identifying this as the critical step in inducing clinical symptoms . Metalloproteinase ( MPs ) enzymes are implicated in leukocyte infiltration in neuroinflammation . Unmanipulated Tg mice had elevated expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 , matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) -10 , and -12 mRNA in the brain . PTx further induced expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 , metalloproteinase disintegrins-12 , P22894 , and -10 in brains of Tg mice . Levels of the microglial-associated MP P51511 were not affected in control or PTx-treated Tg mice . PTx also up-regulated expression of proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and P01375 mRNA in Tg CNS . Weight loss and parenchymal infiltration , but not perivascular accumulation , were significantly inhibited by the broad-spectrum MP inhibitor BB-94/ DB03880 . Our finding that MPs mediate PTx-induced parenchymal infiltration to the chemokine-overexpressing CNS has relevance for the pathogenesis of human diseases involving CNS inflammation , such as multiple sclerosis .