Neuroprotection mediated via neurotrophic factors and induction of neurotrophic factors . Neurotrophins and other neurotrophic factors have been shown to support the survival and differentiation of many neuronal populations of the central and peripheral nervous system . Therefore , administering neurotrophic factors could represent an alternative strategy for the treatment of acute and chronic brain disorders . However , the delivery of neurotrophic factors to the brain is one of the largest obstacles in the development of effective therapy for neurodegenerative disorders , because these proteins are not able to cross the blood-brain barrier . The induction of growth factor synthesis in the brain tissue by systemically administered lipophilic drugs , such as beta-adrenoceptor agonists , shown to increase endogenous nerve growth factor ( P01138 ) synthesis in the brain , would be an elegant way to overcome these problems of application . Stimulation of beta-adrenoceptors with clenbuterol led to increased P01138 synthesis in cultured central nervous system ( CNS ) cells and rat brain tissue . DB01407 -induced P01138 expression was reduced to the control levels by coadministration of beta-adrenoceptor antagonist propranolol . Furthermore , clenbuterol protected rat hippocampal neurons subjected to excitotoxic damage . The neuroprotective effect of clenbuterol in vitro depended on increased P01138 synthesis , since the neuroprotection was abolished by P01138 antisense oligonucleotide as well as by antibodies directed against P01138 itself . In vivo , clenbuterol protected rat hippocampus in a model of transient forebrain ischemia and reduced the infarct volume in a rat model of permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion ( MCAo ) . The neuroprotective effect of clenbuterol in vivo was accompanied by enhanced P01138 synthesis in brain tissue . These findings support our hypothesis that orally active P01138 inducers may have a potential as therapeutic agents for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders and stroke .